LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/758100
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 0df1a7dc1efe316a8a0f7588521914fe8f861b2aaca09451c96a10ad6213857c
Source PDF pages: 116
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT

         Goose Farm Superfund Site

Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York

              September 2025


                                                *758100*
                                                  758100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DECLARATION FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT


SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Goose Farm Superfund Site
Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey
Operable Unit 1
EPA Superfund Site Identification Number: NJD980530109


STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This Record of Decision Amendment presents an amendment to the selected remedy for the
Goose Farm Superfund Site (Site) to address polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)-impacted soil. The
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) selected the remedy amendment in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
of 1980, as amended, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601-9675 (CERCLA), and to the extent practicable, the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. Part 300.
This decision document explains the factual and legal basis for selecting the remedy. The
administrative record for the Site, established pursuant to the NCP, 40 C.F.R. 300.800, contains
the documents that form the basis for EPA's selection of the remedial action (see Appendix III).

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) has been consulted on the
proposed amended remedy in accordance with CERCLA §121(f), 42 U.S.C. §9621(f), and it concurs
with the selected remedy amendment (see Appendix IV).

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances at or from the Site, if not addressed by
implementing the response action selected in this Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment, may
present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health, welfare, or the
environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

The remedial action described in this ROD Amendment modifies the soil remedy selected in the
1985 ROD to address PCB contamination in soil remaining on the Site that requires additional
remediation. The 1985 ROD selected groundwater extraction, treatment and reinjection resulting
in soil flushing as the remedy. The selected remedy also called for an extensive testing program
during and after soil flushing to determine the extent of contamination in the former drum pit
area (also described as waste pit area); based on this program, EPA was to determine the need,
if any, to remediate PCBs including the need to cap the Site. If such remediation was deemed

                                               ii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

necessary, the 1985 ROD indicated that a “supplementary” ROD would be prepared to select the
additional remedial actions required to address PCB contamination in soil. This ROD Amendment
provides the supplemental remedy selection process.

There is only one operable unit for the Goose Farm Site that addresses groundwater and soil
contamination. The groundwater remedy remains unchanged by this ROD Amendment except
that the pump and treat system will need to be rebuilt as part of the remedial action. It is
expected that the new groundwater treatment system will perform more efficiently than the
existing system.

As called for in the 1985 ROD, additional PCB testing has been performed to determine the need
for and extent of additional remediation. The strategy for further remediation at the Site will also
include addressing light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) co-located with PCBs in soil, which
acts as a source to groundwater and constitutes a principal threat waste. The response is
considered the final remedy for PCB-contaminated soil at the Site.

The major components of the action selected in this remedy amendment include the following:

   •   Excavation of soils containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 part per million (ppm),
   •   Excavation of co-located LNAPL impacted soil, and
   •   Off-Site disposal.

In addition, a pre-existing institutional control (IC) in the form of a deed restriction and an
engineering control in the form of a perimeter fence surrounding the Site will be maintained,
after being revised to reflect updated conditions, to limit access and prevent actions that would
be inconsistent with the remedy. The estimated present-worth cost of the selected remedy
amendment is $6,687,000.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

Part 1: Statutory Requirements

The selected remedy meets the requirements for remedial actions set forth in Section 121 of
CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621, because it meets the following requirements: 1) it is protective of
human health and the environment; 2) it meets a level or standard of control of the hazardous
substances, pollutants, and contaminants that at least attains the legally applicable or relevant
and appropriate requirements (ARARs) under federal and state laws; 3) it is cost-effective; and
4) it utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment or resource recovery technologies
to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, Section 121 of CERCLA includes a preference
for remedies that employ treatment that permanently and significantly reduces the volume,
toxicity, or mobility of hazardous substances as a principal element.



                                                iii

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Part 2: Statutory Preference for Treatment

CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment that permanently and
significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of hazardous substances as a principal
element. Two treatability studies were conducted in the past to evaluate treatment technology
utilization at the Site. A treatability study was performed from 1989 to 1990 to determine if in-
situ biodegradation was a viable option for enhancing the efficiency of the soil
flushing/groundwater treatment system. The results of the biodegradation treatability study
concluded that biodegradation was not an appropriate treatment technology for the Site. A
second treatability study was conducted in 2014, specifically, an In-Situ Chemical Oxidation Pilot
Study was conducted to determine if the injection of ozone into the high (former waste pit area)
and low total organic compounds (TOC) areas of the Site could reduce contaminant
concentrations. The results of the 2014 pilot study indicated that ozone injections to the high
TOC area, or former waste pit area, failed to reduce the levels of contamination. Further, the area
of high TOC is where LNAPL-impacted soil that is considered principal threat waste has been
identified and is co-located with PCB-contaminated soil that will be remediated. It is not within
the limited scope of this action to treat hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at the
Site, because the contamination will be removed and disposed of off-Site; however, the
groundwater remedy is treating contaminated groundwater and will continue to do so.
Additionally, PCB-impacted soil at concentrations greater than 50 ppm will be disposed of in
accordance with Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) requirements, which could include
treatment off-Site prior to disposal at an EPA-approved hazardous waste landfill, depending on
the requirements of the disposal facility.

Part 3: Five-Year Review Requirements

A review of the remedial action pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(c) is conducted every five years
after the commencement of remedial action to ensure that the remedy continues to provide
adequate protection to human health and the environment because this remedy results in
hazardous substances remaining on-site above health-based levels that allow for unlimited use
and unrestricted exposure. Five-year reviews are underway for the Site. The most recent one was
completed in 2023.

ROD AMENDMENT DATA CERTIFICATION CHECKLIST

The ROD Amendment contains the remedy selection information noted below. More details may
be found in the Administrative Record file for this Site.

   •   Chemicals of concern and their respective concentrations may be found in the “Summary
       of Site Characterization” section.

   •   Current and reasonably anticipated future land use assumptions and current and


                                                iv

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        potential future beneficial uses of groundwater used in the baseline risk assessment and
        are discussed in the “Current and Potential Future Land and Resource Uses” section.

    x   Baseline risk represented by the chemicals of concern may be found in the “Summary of
        Site Risks” section.

    x   Cleanup levels established for chemicals of concern and the basis for these levels maybe
        be found in the “Remedial Action Objectives” section.

    x   Estimated capital, annual operation and maintenance (O&M), and total present-worth
        costs are discussed in the “Description of Remedial Alternatives” section.

    x   A discussion of principal threat waste may be found in the “Principal Threat Waste”
        section.

    x   Key factors used in selecting the amended remedy (i.e., how the selected remedy
        provides the best balance of tradeoffs with respect to the balancing and modifying
        criteria, highlighting criteria key to the decision) may be found in the “Comparative
        Analysis of Alternatives” and “Statutory Determinations” sections.



AUTHORIZING SIGNATURE




Pat Evangelista Digitally signed by Pat Evangelista
                Date: 2025.09.23 16:10:50 -04'00'                  September 23, 2025
Pat Evangelista, Director                                         Date
Superfund & Emergency Management Division
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2




                                                      v

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     RECORD OF DECISION AMENDMENT
          DECISION SUMMARY


         Goose Farm Superfund Site
Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey




United States Environmental Protection Agency
                   Region 2
             New York, New York
               September 2025

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION.................................................................................... 1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ............................................................................. 1
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION ............................................................................. 3
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION ...................................................................................... 3
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS .......................................................................................... 4
   Geology and Hydrogeology ....................................................................................................... 4
   Results of PCB and Co-Located LNAPL Soil Investigations ......................................................... 4
CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES.................................................. 5
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS .............................................................................................................. 6
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES .................................................................................................... 7
SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES ..................................................................................... 8
   Alternative 1: No Further Action ............................................................................................... 9
   Alternative 2: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater
   than 1.1 ppm and Co-located LNAPL ......................................................................................... 9
   Alternative 3: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater
   than 5 ppm, and Co-located LNAPL, and Placement of an Exposure Barrier for PCBs between
   1.1 ppm and 5 ppm ................................................................................................................. 10
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES ....................................................... 11
PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE.......................................................................................................... 16
SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT ............................................................................................... 16
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS ................................................................................................... 17
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES ........................................................................... 20

LIST OF APPENDICES

APPENDIX I.       FIGURES
APPENDIX II.      TABLES
APPENDIX III.     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX
APPENDIX IV.      STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE
APPENDIX V.       RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
     Attachment A Proposed Plan
     Attachment B Public Notice
     Attachment C Public Meeting Transcript
     Attachment D Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

The Goose Farm Superfund (Site) is located on Block 58, Lots 1 and 12, and Block 46, Lot 1 in the
Township of Plumsted, Ocean County, New Jersey approximately two miles northeast of the town
of New Egypt (see Figure 1). The Site lies approximately one mile north of the intersection of
County Routes 528 and 539 adjacent to an intermittent stream which is a tributary of Lahaway
Creek (see Figure 2). The Site is approximately 6.6 acres, of which, 1.1 acres is undergoing
groundwater remediation.

The Site lies in a rural area characterized predominantly by agricultural land use and low-density
residential development. Residential homes lie within one-quarter mile of the Site and rely on
private wells for potable water. The most highly developed area near the Site is New Egypt, which
is approximately two miles southwest of the Site. Hornerstown is located approximately one-
mile northwest of the Site. Groundwater is used as drinking water supply throughout Plumsted
Township and the surrounding area. Hornerstown is served by private wells, while New Egypt is
served by the New Egypt Water Company. Regional groundwater at the Site flows to the north-
northwest.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

The Site is owned by potentially responsible party Morton International Inc., a wholly owned
subsidiary of Rohm & Haas which is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Dow Chemical Company.
Morton Thiokol Chemical Company, a manufacturer of polysulfide rubber and solid rocket fuel
propellant, used the Site to dispose of hazardous wastes from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s.
The majority of wastes were dumped into a pit dug through the fine sand.

Initial Response Actions

In January 1980, during an investigation of pesticide contamination of local drinking water wells,
the Ocean County Health Department informed NJDEP of the existence of the Site, as well as
several other disposal sites in the area. From February to June 1980, NJDEP investigated the Site.
The investigation included the installation and sampling of 17 groundwater monitoring wells, and
metal detection and resistivity surveys. The results of this work indicated that a contaminated
groundwater plume of organic and inorganic compounds, which originated from the waste pit
area, was migrating northward toward the nearby stream. During the next phase of the
investigation, NJDEP installed and sampled 34 additional monitoring wells. The data indicated
that the contaminated groundwater plume was less than 140 feet wide and approximately 35
feet deep.

In September 1980, NJDEP initiated remedial activities at the Site to prevent further migration of
the groundwater plume to the nearby stream. Approximately 5,000 containers of waste were
removed from the waste pit area as well as an estimated 9,000 gallons of bulk liquids. These
wastes were disposed of off-Site. In addition, NJDEP installed a well-point collection and spray
                                               1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

irrigation system downgradient of the waste pit area and upgradient of the stream. Following the
collection and treatment of the groundwater, the treated effluent was reinjected into the
aquifer. In March 1981, NJDEP terminated the operation of the treatment system. During its
operation, the system treated approximately 7,800,000 gallons of contaminated groundwater.

The final component of the NJDEP interim remedy included excavation and off-Site disposal of
contaminated soil from the waste pit area. Approximately 3,500 tons of soil and an additional 12
drums of PCB waste were transported to an off-Site facility for disposal.

Remedial Actions and Status of Implementation

The Site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. On September 27,
1985, EPA issued a ROD selecting a remedy to address groundwater and soil contamination at
the Site. The remedy consisted of the following components:

    1. Flush the contaminated soil and groundwater underlying the Site, recovering the
       groundwater and treating it on-Site prior to reinjection in the soil, with pilot studies to be
       conducted during design to optimize the treatment system components.
    2. Following soil flushing and groundwater recovery and treatment, conduct an extensive
       testing program to determine the need to cap the Site.
    3. During and after soil flushing and groundwater recovery and treatment, conduct an
       extensive testing program to determine the extent of PCB contamination in the former
       drum pit area. Based on this program, determine the need, if any, to remediate PCB-
       contaminated soil.

In 1988, the United States, on behalf of EPA, and NJDEP entered into a Consent Decree (CD) with
Morton Thiokol, Inc. and several other parties, under which Morton Thiokol, Inc. 1 agreed to
undertake the remedial design (RD)/remedial action (RA) for the Site. The RD was conducted in
conformance with the ROD and Scope of Work (SOW), which was included in the CD. The CD and
the SOW specified that prior to soil flushing, there would be excavation and treatment and/or
off-Site disposal of all soil with total PCB concentrations greater than, or equal to, 5 ppm, and
backfilling of the excavation with soil that contains less than 1 ppm of PCBs.

The Site cleanup was conducted in two phases. The excavation and disposal of all soils began in
November 1988 and concluded in July 1989. Approximately 9,000 cubic yards of soil were
removed and disposed of at an off-Site facility. The second phase of cleanup included the design,
construction, and operation of a groundwater extraction, treatment and soil flushing system, and
the evaluation of the use of in-situ biodegradation to enhance the efficiency of the soil
flushing/groundwater treatment system. Morton Thiokol, Inc. conducted pre-design field
investigations including groundwater, soil, and surface water sampling. A treatability study was


1
 Rohm & Haas Chemicals, LLC is performing the work under the CD as successor-in-interest to certain liabilities of
Morton Thiokol, Inc./Morton International, Inc.
                                                        2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

conducted to determine if in-situ biodegradation was a viable option for enhancing the efficiency
of the soil flushing/groundwater treatment system. The study indicated in-situ biodegradation
was not an appropriate technology for addressing groundwater contamination at the Site.

From September 1992 to April 1993, Morton Thiokol, Inc. constructed the groundwater
remediation system which included installation of the groundwater extraction and treatment
system and infiltration trenches to support soil flushing and installation of the slurry wall. During
this period, the installation of the slurry wall was completed. In June 1993, the Site achieved
construction completion status for the groundwater remedy upon EPA’s issuance of the
Preliminary Close-out Report and commencement of the operation of the groundwater
remediation system. EPA and NJDEP determined that the remedial action construction activities
were completed in accordance with design specifications.

During implementation of the selected remedy, additional soil testing was also performed to
determine the need for and extent of additional soil remediation. The results of that testing and
study were presented in the focused feasibility study completed by the performing party and
provide the basis for EPA’s selection of this remedy amendment.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION

The EPA released the Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) Report, dated June 2025 and the EPA’s
Proposed Plan to amend the 1985 ROD, as well as other documents consider by EPA to the public
for comment on July 11, 2025. EPA made these documents available to the public in the
administrative record file at the EPA Superfund Records Room in Region 2, New York and online
at: http://www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm. The notice of availability for these documents
was published in the Asbury Park Press on July 11, 2025. The public comment period on these
documents was held from July 11, 2025 to September 11, 2025.

On July 17, 2025, EPA conducted a virtual public meeting via Zoom, to inform local officials and
members of the public about the Superfund process, present the findings of the FFS and EPA’s
Proposed Plan to the community, review current and planned remedial activities at the Site, and
to respond to questions from area residents and other attendees. EPA responses to the
comments received at the public meeting and in writing during the public comment period are
included in the Responsiveness Summary (see Appendix V).

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION

The scope and role of the selected remedy amendment is to modify the remedy selected in the
1985 ROD to address PCB contamination in soil remaining on the Site that requires additional
remediation. Site remediation activities are sometimes separated into different or discrete
phases of work otherwise known as operable units (OUs) so that remediation of environmental
media or geographic areas of a site can proceed separately, whether sequentially or concurrently,
resulting in a more efficient or expeditious cleanup of the entire site. There is only one operable
unit for the Goose Farm Site. As discussed in more detail below, the groundwater remedy
                                                 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remains unchanged by this ROD Amendment except that the pump and treat system will need to
be rebuilt as part of the selected remedy. It is expected that the new groundwater treatment
system will perform more efficiently than the existing system.

As required in the 1985 ROD, additional PCB testing has been performed to determine the need
and extent of additional remediation. The strategy for further remediation at the Site will also
include addressing LNAPL co-located with PCBs in soil, which acts as a source to groundwater and
constitutes a principal threat waste. The response is considered the final remedy for PCB-
contaminated soil at the Site.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Geology and Hydrogeology

The Goose Farm Site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province. This province
is characterized by unconsolidated deposits consisting of alternating layers of clay, silt, sand, and
gravel that outcrop in parallel northeast-southwest striking lands and dip gently to the southeast.
Surficial deposits at the Site are of the Kirkwood formation. The Kirkwood, in turn, is underlain
by the Manasquan and Vincentown formations.

The Kirkwood formation is composed of a lower dark silty layer and upper sandy layer in the
outcrop area. The direction down the slope of the formation consists of thick clay and sand beds.
The Kirkwood is the most developed aquifer in Ocean County, primarily in the coastal area. The
Manasquan formation consists of upper fine sand to clay and a lower glauconitic clay. The
Manasquan formation is not considered an important aquifer in Ocean County. The Vincentown
formation consists of an upper calcite-clay and sand member and a lower glauconitic sand
member. It is utilized by typically low yielding domestic wells in its outcrop area.

Underlying the Vincentown are the Hornerstown sand, Red Bank sand, Navesink, Mount Laurel
sand, Marshalltown formation, Englishtown formation, Merchantville formation, Woodbury clay,
and the Raritan and Magothy formations.

Results of PCB and Co-Located LNAPL Soil Investigations

The 1985 ROD required that residual PCB soil testing be performed prior to, during, and after the
soil flushing, groundwater recovery and treatment operation. The results of PCB testing were to
be used to determine if any additional remediation would be required, including the need for a
final cap at the Site.

Consistent with the 1985 ROD, additional soil testing has been performed at the Site by the
performing party under EPA’s oversight, including an evaluation of the presence of LNAPL. During
a 2013 in-situ chemical oxidation pilot study, LNAPL was encountered in the vicinity of the
treatment plant building. Sample analysis of LNAPL collected indicated a petroleum product that
                                                 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

most closely resembled a mix of gasoline, motor oil and weathered kerosene. The LNAPL was
believed to be related to impacted soil within the former waste pit area that may not have been
completely removed in the 1980s. Further investigations to characterize the extent of LNAPL
contamination were conducted. LNAPL was observed in an area of high total organic compounds
(TOC) near the treatment plant building where an on-Site dissolved phase volatile organic
compound (VOC) and semi-volatile organic compound (SVOC) groundwater plume extends north
towards the slurry wall and in the general direction of groundwater flow. The extent of LNAPL in
soil is shown in Figure 3 and is generally distributed around the treatment plant building. The
LNAPL has the potential to act as an ongoing source of groundwater contamination.

During field investigations to delineate LNAPL, PCB-impacted soil above the Site-specific criterion
of 5 ppm specified in the SOW was found co-located with LNAPL. Thus, in addition to the soil
investigations for LNAPL, sampling and analysis for PCBs were also conducted. PCB
concentrations in soil above 5 ppm were found around the treatment building and are likely
underneath, as well as in shallow soils (i.e., depths less than 5 ft) to the west of infiltration trench
B and adjacent to the south-western portion of the slurry wall. Based on the results of these
investigations, the areas with PCB-impacted soil were found in areas extending beyond the
boundary of the former source removal area (i.e., waste pit area). In an effort to understand the
volume of soil containing PCB concentrations greater than the New Jersey Non-Residential Soil
Remediation Standards (NJNRSRS) of 1.1 ppm 2 and the Site-specific criterion of 5 ppm, multiple
soil investigations were conducted during 2023 and 2024. As a result of the supplemental
investigations, soil containing PCBs ranging from concentrations below 1.1 ppm to a maximum
of 80 ppm were detected. The locations of the sampling investigations and of PCB-impacted soil
are depicted in Figure 4. Some areas exhibited PCB concentrations greater than 50 ppm at depths
below 15 ft, which is the depth of former waste pit area excavation. Additional investigations will
be required prior to implementation of the remedial action to fully delineate the volume of PCB
contamination subject to remediation.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES

Land Uses: The Site is currently only used for the ongoing remediation activities. Historically, it
was owned by Morton Thiokol, Inc. and used as a hazardous waste disposal site from the mid-
1940s to the mid-1970s. Rohm & Haas Chemicals, LLC, the entity performing the remedial action,
acquired the stock of Morton International, Inc. in 1999 and is a successor-in-interest to certain
liabilities of Morton Thiokol, Inc./Morton International, Inc. In accordance with the CD, a deed
restriction has been recorded to prevent use of the property for residential purposes, prevent
installation of potable wells within the boundaries of the slurry wall and to prevent actions that




2
  The SOW identified less than 1 ppm as the concentration of PCBs allowed for imported clean soil to cover the
contaminated area. However, for purposes of delineating soil contamination, EPA concluded it would be
appropriate to use 1.1 ppm, which is the current NJDEP non-residential soil remediation cleanup standard for
ingestion-dermal contact.
                                                        5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

would be inconsistent with the remedy. The Site is zoned rural agricultural. EPA anticipates that
the future use of the Site will be consistent with the current land use and restrictions.

Groundwater Use: As required by the CD, institutional controls prevent uses of the Site that are
inconsistent with the remedy. A deed notice has been in place since 1993 and prevents exposure
to contaminated groundwater, as well as disturbance of ongoing remedial activities. The Site is
listed under the NJDEP Currently Known Extent (CKE) of groundwater contamination. The CKE
informs the public of groundwater contamination at the Site.

Remedy Resilience: As reported in the 2023 five-year review, the resilience of the remedy was
assessed by utilizing forecasting tools for sea level rise, flood risks, and drought conditions and is
not currently at risk due to these factors.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

NJDEP conducted the remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the nature and
extent of the groundwater and soil contamination. NJDEP completed the RI/FS in 1985 and based
on the results, EPA and NJDEP concluded that groundwater and soil at the Site were
contaminated with significant levels of organic and inorganic contaminants. Contaminants such
as PCBs, benzene, toluene, xylene, and cis-1,2-dichloroethene were identified as major sources
of soil and groundwater contamination.

A Health Assessment for the Site was completed in 1989 by the Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry (ATSDR) based on the findings of the RI/FS and ROD. While the ATSDR Health
Assessment primarily focused on potential risks associated with exposure to groundwater, PCBs
were identified as a concern in on-Site subsurface soil at depths ranging from two to twenty feet
below ground surface (ft bgs), with concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 160 ppm. Soil sampling at
that time in the former waste pit area showed total PCB concentrations ranging from 5 to 478
ppm. Subsequent sampling for PCBs in on-Site soils detected PCB concentrations up to 80 ppm.

The ATSDR Health Assessment concluded that there is potential on-Site exposure to Site related
contaminants (including PCBs) in soil via dermal, inhalation, and oral exposure (incidental
ingestion). The potentially exposed population would be unprotected workers engaged in
remedial cleanup activities at the Site. ATSDR concluded that the remedial action selected in the
ROD should be protective of public health if properly implemented.

Following implementation of the 1985 ROD remedy, PCBs in soil remain at concentrations that
exceed the remedial goals. Additionally, LNAPL in saturated soils, which constitutes principal
threat waste, is co-located with PCBs. PCBs and LNAPL would present a potentially significant risk
to human health and the environment should exposure occur. Based on the results of the
multiple investigations conducted at the Site described above, actual or threatened releases of
hazardous substances from the Site, if not addressed by implementing the response action


                                                  6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

selected in the ROD, may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to the public
health, welfare, or the environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific goals to protect human health and the
environment. These objectives are based on available information and standards such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-be-considered (TBC) advisories,
criteria and guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels and background (i.e., reference area)
concentrations.

The 1985 ROD identified RAOs for the Site. The RAOs for the Site include source control, as well
as prevention of contaminant migration.

The RAOs for source control established for the Site in the 1985 ROD are as follows:

   •   Remove, treat or contain contaminants;
   •   Control general migration pathways;
   •   Control release of volatile compounds in air;
   •   Control water infiltration;
   •   Control soil erosion; and
   •   Control direct contact.

The RAOs for the management of migration are as follows:

   •   Mitigate the potential contamination of potable water supplies, which is being addressed
       through the on-going operation of the groundwater treatment system; and
   •   Prevent the movement of contaminants to other areas where exposure to these
       compounds through direct contact may occur.

EPA has concluded that these RAOs are still appropriate. To achieve the RAOs for this action, EPA
has identified the NJNRSRS for PCBs of 1.1 ppm as the remediation goal (RG). Co-located LNAPL
will also be addressed by this action. Cleanup levels for the groundwater portion of the remedy
are unchanged by this action.

For purpose of evaluating alternatives to address PCB-impacted soil as described in the 1985
ROD, EPA established the following RAO:

   •   Address PCBs in soil to levels that are protective of site workers.




                                                7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

CERCLA Section 121(b)(1) requires that a remedial action be protective of human health and the
environment, cost effective, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable. Section
121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial actions which employ, as a principal element,
treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of the
hazardous substances, pollutants and contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section 121(d), 42 U.S.C.
§9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a level or standard of control of the
hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants, which at least attains ARARs under federal
and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C.
§9621(d)(4).

Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation were identified and screened using the
effectiveness, implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on effectiveness. Those
technologies that passed the initial screening were assembled into alternatives. Detailed
descriptions of the remedial alternatives for addressing the PCB-contaminated soil and LNAPL
can be found in the FFS Report, dated June 2025, which is in the administrative record. The FFS
Report presents three alternatives, including a no further action alternative.

This ROD Amendment evaluates in detail three remedial alternatives for addressing the
contamination associated with the Site. The time to implement a remedial alternative reflects
only the time required to construct or implement the remedy and does not include the time
required to negotiate with any responsible parties, design the remedy, procure contracts for
design and construction, or conduct operation and maintenance at the Site.

Note that there are no remedial action alternatives with treatment as a primary component.
Historically, there were two treatability studies performed to evaluate treatment technologies to
address soil and groundwater. One was for in-situ bio-degradation and the other was for in-situ
chemical oxidation. The main conclusion of the in-situ biodegradation treatability study was that
it was not an appropriate technology to treat the soil and groundwater contamination. The
conclusion of the in-situ chemical oxidation treatability study was that the technology would not
be effective in treating the contaminants in the waste pit area, which includes LNAPL considered
to be a principal threat waste at the Site. Therefore, the remedial action alternatives developed
and evaluated (with the exception of the No Further Action alternative) were limited to removal
of contaminated material.

Description of Common Elements of All Alternatives

With the exception of the No Action alternative (Alternative 1), the alternatives include the
following common components:



                                                 8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Pre-existing institutional and engineering controls: The Site has a pre-existing deed restriction
which prevents residential use and actions that would be inconsistent with the remedy. A
perimeter fence with a locked gate surrounds the Site which limits access. These controls will be
maintained by the property owner for all alternatives.

Five-Year Reviews: Five-year reviews would be conducted as a component of the alternatives that
would leave contamination in place above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted
exposure. A review of the remedial action pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(c) would be
conducted five years after the commencement of the remedial action to ensure that the remedy
continues to provide adequate protection to human health and the environment because this
remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining on-Site above health-based levels that
allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. Neither alternative would remove
contaminated soil to levels that would allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure
(consistent with the existing deed restriction). In addition, groundwater contamination
addressed through the operation of the groundwater treatment system requires maintenance of
restrictions on groundwater use. The last five-year review for the Site was completed on July 17,
2023. The next five-year review will be completed by July 17, 2028.

Description of Remedial Alternatives

Alternative 1: No Further Action

Capital Cost:                               $0
Annual O&M Costs:                           $0
Present-Worth Cost:                         $0
Construction Time:                          0 years
Estimated time to reach RAOs:               Not applicable

Alternative 1, the “No Action” alternative, is required by the NCP to provide an environmental
baseline against which impacts of the other remedial alternatives can be compared. No further
action would be initiated to remediate contaminated media or otherwise mitigate the migration
of contamination that poses unacceptable risks to human health and the environment.

Alternative 2: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater
than 1.1 ppm and Co-located LNAPL

Capital Cost:                               $6,687,000
Total Operation and Maintenance Cost:       $0
Present-Worth Cost:                         $6,687,000
Construction Time:                          10 months
Estimated time to reach RAOs:               10 months



                                               9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternative 2 consists of excavation of soil containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 ppm
in conjunction with excavation of co-located LNAPL and disposal at an off-Site EPA-approved
facility (see Figure 5). The estimated volume of PCB contaminated soils to be excavated is 5,939
cubic yards. This volume will be updated based on the results of additional sampling to be
performed during the design. Contaminated soil containing concentrations of PCBs 50 ppm or
greater will be disposed of in accordance with TSCA requirements at an EPA-approved hazardous
waste landfill.

Clean soils above the impacted zones would be stockpiled and designated for reuse as clean fill
once tested and confirmed to be suitable for reuse. The maximum estimated depth of excavation
to remove impacted soil in this alternative is 20 ft bgs. As such, dewatering would be necessary.
Temporary sheet piling installation, as well as shoring, is expected to be necessary for deeper
excavation areas extending below the water table. Liquids dewatered from the excavation(s)
would be treated by the existing on-Site groundwater treatment system, to the extent possible;
however, to reach PCB-impacted soil that is likely beneath the treatment building, the
groundwater treatment system and building would need to be demolished. 3 Therefore, any
liquids dewatered following the demolition of the groundwater treatment system would have to
be transported for off-Site disposal at an EPA-approved facility. Consistent with the migration
potential during previous periods of downtime of the groundwater treatment system, it is not
expected that off-Site migration of contamination would occur during reconstruction of the
groundwater treatment system. Increased groundwater monitoring during this period would be
performed to confirm this is the case. In the event off-Site migration of contamination occurs,
consideration would be given to measures such as installation of a temporary groundwater
treatment system. It is expected that the new groundwater treatment system will perform more
efficiently than the existing system. Post excavation samples would be collected as necessary to
verify that the cleanup goals are met. Following the removal of LNAPL impacted soil and soil with
concentrations exceeding 1.1 ppm of PCBs, excavations would be backfilled with clean backfill
material, stockpiled clean soil, and topsoil with vegetation to grade.

Alternative 3: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater
than 5 ppm, and Co-located LNAPL, and Placement of an Exposure Barrier for PCBs between
1.1 ppm and 5 ppm

Capital Cost:                                        $4,262,651
Total Operation and Maintenance Cost:                $3,360,186
Present-Worth Cost:                                  $7,623,000
Construction Time:                                   7 months
Estimated time to reach RAOs:                        7 months




3
 The treatment system is nearing the end of its useful life, but groundwater treatment is still needed to achieve
RAOs, so it will be reconstructed after the PCB and LNAPL contamination has been addressed.
                                                        10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Under this alternative, excavation would be conducted to a maximum depth of 18 ft bgs to
remove soil containing PCB concentrations exceeding 5 ppm (the clean-up value established in
the CD) and LNAPL impacted soil (see Figure 6). The estimated volume of PCB contaminated soils
to be excavated is approximately 1,022 cubic yards. As with Alternative 2, contaminated soil
containing concentrations of PCBs 50 ppm or greater would be disposed of in accordance with
TSCA requirements at an EPA-approved hazardous waste landfill.

EPA anticipates that dewatering would be required for deeper excavations, as well as sheet piling
and shoring similar to Alternative 2. Dewatered liquids would be managed as in Alternative 2,
which would include treatment via the existing on-Site groundwater treatment system, to the
extent possible. As with Alternative 2, this alternative would require demolition of the existing
groundwater treatment system. Any liquids dewatered following the demolition of the
groundwater treatment system would be transported for off-Site disposal at an EPA-approved
facility. Soil exceedances above 1.1 ppm and less than 5 ppm of PCBs would be left in place and
a permeable cover (e.g., geotextile) would be installed, followed by clean fill and topsoil with
vegetation to grade. Annual monitoring and reporting of the permeable cover would be
performed to ensure continued protection of human health from direct contact risks.

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES

In selecting a remedy, EPA considered the factors set out in CERCLA Section 121, 42 U.S.C. §9621,
conducting a detailed analysis of the viable remedial alternatives pursuant to the NCP, 40 C.F.R.
§300.430(e)(9), EPA’s Guidance for Conducting Remedial Investigations and Feasibility Studies
under CERCLA (OSWER Directive 9355.3-01) and EPA’s A Guide to Preparing Superfund Proposed
Plans, Records of Decision, and Other Remedy Selection Decision Documents, OSWER 9200.1-
23.P. The detailed analysis consisted of an assessment of the individual alternatives against each
of nine evaluation criteria and a comparative analysis focusing upon the relative performance of
each alternative against those criteria.

The first two criteria are known as “threshold criteria” because they are the minimum
requirements that each response measure must meet in order to be eligible for selection as a
remedy:

1.     Overall protection of human health and the environment addresses whether a remedy
       provides adequate protection and describes how risks posed through each exposure
       pathway (based on a reasonable maximum exposure scenario) are eliminated, reduced,
       or controlled through treatment, engineering controls, or institutional controls.

2.     Compliance with ARARs addresses whether a remedy would meet all of the applicable
       (legally enforceable), or relevant and appropriate (requirements that pertain to situations
       sufficiently similar to those encountered at a Superfund site such that their use is well
       suited to the site) requirements of federal and state environmental statutes and
       requirements or provide grounds for invoking a waiver. Other federal or state advisories,

                                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       criteria, or guidance may be identified by EPA as “to be considered”, or “TBCs.” While TBCs
       are not required to be adhered to under the NCP, they may be useful in determining what
       is protective or how to carry out certain actions or requirements.

The following "primary balancing" criteria are used to make comparisons and to identify the
major trade-offs between alternatives:

3.     Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the ability of a remedy to maintain
       reliable protection of human health and the environment over time, once cleanup goals
       have been met. It also addresses the magnitude, effectiveness and reliability of the
       measures that may be required to manage the risk posed by treatment residuals and/or
       untreated wastes.

4.     Reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume via treatment refers to a remedial technology's
       expected ability to reduce the toxicity, mobility, or volume of hazardous substances,
       pollutants or contaminants at the site through treatment.

5.     Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed to achieve protection and
       any adverse impacts on human health and the environment that may be posed to
       workers, the community and the environment during the construction and im-
       plementation periods until cleanup goals are achieved.

6.     Implementability refers to the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy, from
       design through construction and operation, including the availability of materials and
       services needed, administrative feasibility, and coordination with other governmental
       entities.

7.     Cost includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, and the net
       present-worth costs calculated using a 7% discount rate.

The following "modifying" criteria are considered fully after the formal public comment period
on the Proposed Plan is complete:

8.     State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of the RI/FS and the Proposed
       Plan, the State supports, opposes, and/or has identified any reservations with the
       preferred alternative.

9.     Community acceptance refers to the public's general response to the alternatives
       described in the Proposed Plan and the RI/FS reports. Factors of community acceptance
       to be discussed include support, reservation, and opposition by the community.

A comparative analysis of the remedial alternatives based upon the evaluation criteria noted
above follows.

                                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment

Alternative 1 would provide no additional protection of human health and the environment
compared to current levels of protection at the Site.

Alternative 2 provides protection by removing all soil with concentrations greater than 1.1 ppm
PCBs through excavation and off-Site disposal. Alternative 3 provides protection by removing PCB
impacted soil with concentrations greater than 5 ppm through excavation and off-Site disposal
with placement of a permeable soil cover in areas with soil containing PCB concentrations
between 1.1 ppm and 5 ppm to aid in restricting potential exposure via direct contact. Under
either Alternative 2 or Alternative 3, the existing deed restriction will provide notice of the PCB
and LNAPL contamination that remains at the Site, after being revised to reflect updated
conditions, and restrict future use to non-residential uses or uses that are consistent with the
remedy.

Both Alternatives 2 and 3 will result in excavation of LNAPL that acts as a source of contamination
to groundwater that is co-located with the PCB contamination being removed and will be
protective of human health and the environment.

Compliance with ARARs

Alternative 1 would not comply with ARARs because no further action would be taken to address
the PCB impacted soil or LNAPL.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would comply with ARARs. Alternative 2 would meet the NJNRSRS for the
Ingestion-Dermal Exposure Pathway, which is a chemical-specific ARAR for PCBs, through
excavation and off-Site disposal of soils with PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 ppm.
Alternative 3 would meet this ARAR by addressing the direct contact pathway with the placement
of a permeable soil cover in areas with soil containing PCB concentrations between 1.1 ppm and
5 ppm. Alternatives 2 and 3 would meet action-specific ARARs, such as the TSCA regulations for
the handling and disposal of soil containing PCBs.

Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

Alternative 1 would provide no long-term effectiveness or permanence as no further action
would be taken to address the PCB-impacted soil or co-located LNAPL.

Alternative 2 would provide a higher degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence than
Alternative 3, since impacted soil with PCB concentrations exceeding the NJNRSRS of 1.1 ppm
would be removed from the Site and transported to an EPA-approved disposal facility whereas
Alternative 3 would provide only for soils exceeding 5 ppm PCB concentration to be removed.
Soils containing concentrations of PCBs between the NJNRSRS of 1.1 ppm and 5 ppm would be

                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

covered with a cap, which would require long term maintenance to remain effective and
permanent.

Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume via Treatment

Alternative 1 would not contribute to the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through
treatment because no further action would be taken.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce the mobility and volume of PCBs in soil, and co-located LNAPL,
through excavation and off-Site disposal rather than through treatment. The volume of
contaminated soil removed and disposed of off-Site would be greater under Alternative 2 which
would remove approximately 5,939 cubic yards of soil containing PCB concentrations exceeding
1.1 ppm, while Alternative 3 would only remove approximately 1,022 cubic yards of soils with
concentrations exceeding 5 ppm. For Alternative 2, the PCB-contaminated soil at concentrations
greater than 1.1 ppm and less than 50 ppm would be transported off-Site and disposed at an
EPA-approved disposal facility and would not undergo treatment. For Alternative 3, the PCB
contaminated soil at concentrations greater than 5 ppm and less than 50 ppm would be
transported off-Site and disposed at an EPA-approved disposal facility and would not undergo
treatment. For both Alternatives 2 and 3, PCB-impacted soil identified at concentrations greater
than 50 ppm would be disposed in accordance with TSCA requirements, which could include
treatment off-Site prior to disposal at an EPA-approved hazardous waste landfill, depending on
the characteristics of the remediation waste and the requirements of the disposal facility.

Short-term Effectiveness

Alternative 1 would not have any short-term impacts to workers, the surrounding community, or
the environment because there would be no further action taken at the Site.

Alternatives 2 and 3 consist of the removal of soil exceeding the specified PCB concentration
criteria, and co-located LNAPL. Both include some potential for exposure to PCBs by workers,
surrounding communities, and the environment due to the handling and transportation of PCB
contaminated soil. The potential for exposure is greater for Alternative 2 because a larger volume
of PCB-contaminated soil would be excavated for off-Site disposal compared to Alternative 3.

For both Alternatives 2 and 3, Site-specific plans (e.g., health and safety, excavation and waste
handling, and traffic controls) can be implemented to address the short-term effectiveness
considerations and minimize the impacts to the workers, surrounding community, and the
environment.

Implementability

The means and methods for excavation and off-Site disposal involved in Alternatives 2 and 3, as
well as capping for Alternative 3, are typical and reliable remedial measures to address PCB-

                                               14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

impacted soils and LNAPL. Both Alternatives 2 and 3 are readily implementable. Additional
preparation, as well as engineering and safety controls, will be required for Alternatives 2 and 3
due to the depth of the proposed excavation area (18 to 20 ft bgs), including the use of sheet pile
and/or shoring, as well as the stockpiling and re-use of clean soil.

Cost

Cost includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs, as well as present worth
cost. Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative over time in terms of today’s dollar
value. Cost estimates are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30 percent. This is a
standard assumption in accordance with EPA guidance.

The estimated capital, operation and maintenance costs, and present worth costs assuming a 7%
discount rate over a period of 30 years are discussed in detail in the FFS Report. The cost
estimates are based on the best available information.

The total cost for Alternative 1 is $0 for no additional remedial actions. Alternative 2 has an
estimated present worth cost of $6,687,000 for excavation of LNAPL and soil containing PCBs
greater than 1.1 ppm. The total estimated present worth cost for Alternative 3 is $7,623,000 for
excavation of LNAPL and soil containing PCBs greater than 5 ppm and an exposure barrier for
PCBs between 1.1 ppm and 5 ppm.

State Acceptance

The State of New Jersey concurs with the EPA’s selected remedy amendment.

Community Acceptance

“Community Acceptance” considers whether the local community agrees with EPA’s analyses
and preferred alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are an important indicator
of community acceptance.

The EPA solicited input from the community on the remedial alternative that was proposed to
amend the 1985 ROD. EPA released the Proposed Plan for public comment on July 11, 2025 and
accepted comments through September 11, 2025. Oral comments were recorded from
attendees of the July 17, 2025 virtual public meeting. Comments received during the public
comment period indicate that the public generally supports the selected remedy. The
Responsiveness Summary located in Appendix V addresses all comments received during the
public comment period.




                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that the EPA will use treatment to address the principal
threats posed by a site whenever practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The “principal
threat” concept is applied to the characterization of “source materials” at a Superfund site. A
source material is material that includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants, or
contaminants that act as a reservoir for the migration of contamination to groundwater, surface
water, or air, or act as a source for direct exposure. Principal threat wastes are those source
materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably
contained or would present a significant risk to human health or the environment in the event
that exposure should occur. The decision to treat these wastes is made on a site-specific basis
through a detailed analysis of alternatives, using the remedy selection criteria described above.
The manner in which principal threat wastes are addressed provides a basis for making a
statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a principal element.

The presence of LNAPL that acts as a source to groundwater has been delineated in the vicinity
of the treatment plant building. Thus, this is considered a principal threat waste at the Site and
will be addressed to the extent it is co-located with the PCB-contaminated soil targeted by the
remedy.

SELECTED REMEDY AMENDMENT

Based upon evaluation of the results of the soil investigations conducted at the Site, the
requirements of CERCLA, the detailed analyses of the response measures and public comments,
EPA has determined that Alternative 2, Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB
Concentrations Greater than 1.1 ppm and Co-located LNAPL, is the appropriate remedy
amendment for the Site, because it best satisfies the requirements of CERCLA Section 121, 42
U.S.C. §9621, and the NCP's nine evaluation criteria for remedial alternatives, 40 C.F.R.
§300.430(e)(9).

Description of the Selected Remedy Amendment

The major components of the selected remedy are as follows:

   •   Excavation of soils containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 ppm,
   •   Excavation of co-located LNAPL impacted soil, and
   •   Off-Site disposal.

In addition, a pre-existing IC in the form of a deed restriction and an engineering control in the
form of a perimeter fence surrounding the Site will be maintained, after being revised to reflect
updated conditions, to limit access and prevent actions that would be inconsistent with the
remedy.


                                               16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Summary of the Rationale for the Selected Remedy Amendment

Alternative 2 was selected as the remedy amendment for addressing PCB contamination in soil
as it would result in the greatest amount of contaminated material being addressed at a lower
cost. LNAPL, considered a principal threat waste and co-located with PCB-contaminated soil, will
also be addressed. In addition, Alternative 2 would provide the highest degree of long-term
effectiveness and permanence since impacted soil with PCB concentrations exceeding the
NJNRSRS of 1.1 ppm will be removed from the Site and transported to an EPA-approved disposal
facility. Alternative 3 would also provide for overall protection of human health and the
environment, as well as long-term effectiveness and permanence. However, under Alternative 3
PCB impacted soil between 1.1 ppm and 5 ppm would be capped and remain on-Site and have
long-term maintenance requirements.

Based upon the information currently available, EPA believes that the selected remedy
amendment meets the threshold criteria and provides the best balance of tradeoffs compared
to the other alternatives with respect to the balancing criteria. EPA expects the remedy
amendment to satisfy the following statutory requirements of Section 121(b) of CERCLA: 1) it is
protective of human health and the environment; 2) it complies with ARARs; 3) it is cost effective;
4) it utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery
technologies to the maximum extent practicable; and 5) it satisfies the preference for treatment
as a principal element. The selected remedy amendment will be readily implementable using
technologies proven to be effective at this Site. The short-term effects of the remedy include
potential impacts to workers and the nearby community, but these will be mitigated using the
appropriate health and safety measures.

Expected Outcomes of the Selected Remedy Amendment

The selected remedy amendment will reduce the volume of PCBs in Site soil, as well as co-located
LNAPL impacted soil that acts as a source of VOC/SVOC contamination to groundwater. Soil
containing concentrations greater than 1.1 ppm will be excavated and disposed of off-Site at an
EPA-approved facility. Therefore, EPA expects that implementation of the remedy amendment
will address PCBs in soil to levels that are protective of site workers.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

As previously noted, CERCLA Section 121(b)(1), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(b)(1), mandates that a remedial
action must be protective of human health and the environment, cost effective, and utilize
permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies
to the maximum extent practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial
actions which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or
mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA Section
121(d), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d), further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of


                                                17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

cleanup that satisfies ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified
pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(d)(4), 42 U.S.C. § 9621(d)(4).

For the reasons discussed below, EPA has determined that the selected remedy amendment
meets the requirements of CERCLA Section 121, 42 U.S.C. §9621.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy amendment will be protective of human health and the environment once
implemented. The response action will address PCBs in soil to levels that are protective of site
workers, as well as remove co-located LNAPL-impacted soil that acts as a source of contamination
to groundwater. A pre-existing IC in the form of a deed restriction and an engineering control in
the form of a perimeter fence surrounding the Site will be maintained to limit access and prevent
actions that would be inconsistent with the remedy.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy amendment will comply with chemical, action, and location-specific ARARs
identified in Tables 2 through 4. Excavations will be performed to comply with the NJNRSRS for
the Ingestion-Dermal Exposure Pathway, which is a chemical-specific ARAR for PCBs in soil. The
amended remedy will also comply with action-specific ARARs such as 40 C.F.R. Part 761 as
applicable to on-Site activities relating to storage and disposal of materials containing PCBs. The
amended remedy will comply with location-specific ARARs including N.J.A.C. 7:13 which are state
standards that would apply to the extent of work that would be conducted within the state
regulated flood hazard area.

Cost-Effectiveness

A cost-effective remedy is one in which costs are proportional to its overall effectiveness (40
C.F.R. § 300.430(f)(1)(ii)(D)). Overall effectiveness is based on the evaluations of long-term
effectiveness and permanence, reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume through treatment,
and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing three of the five
balancing criteria in combination (long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity,
mobility, and volume through treatment; and short-term effectiveness). Overall effectiveness
was then compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness.

Each of the alternatives underwent a detailed cost analysis. In that analysis, capital and operation
and maintenance costs were estimated and used to develop present-worth costs. In the present-
worth cost analysis, operation and maintenance costs were calculated for the estimated life of
each alternative. The total estimated present worth cost for implementing the selected remedy
amendment is $6,687,000.



                                                18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on the comparison of overall effectiveness to cost, the selected remedy amendment meets
the statutory requirement that Superfund remedies be cost effective (40 C.F.R. §
300.430(f)(1)(ii)(D)) in that it represents reasonable value for the money to be spent.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the Maximum
Extent Practicable

The selected remedy amendment utilizes permanent solutions and treatment technologies to
the maximum extent practicable. The selected remedy amendment provides the best balance of
trade-offs among the alternatives with respect to the evaluation criteria with respect to the
balancing criteria set forth in the NCP at 40 C.F.R § 300.430(f)(1)(i)(B) and represents the
maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a
practicable manner at the Site. The selected remedy amendment satisfies the criteria for long-
term effectiveness and permanence by excavating soil with concentrations of PCBs exceeding
concentrations of 1.1 ppm and co-located LNAPL for off-Site disposal at an EPA-approved facility,
thereby reducing the toxicity, mobility, and volume of contamination. The selected remedy
amendment is readily implementable as the means and methods for excavation and off-Site
disposal of PCB-impacted soils and LNAPL are typical and reliable.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

CERCLA includes a preference for remedies that employ treatment that permanently and
significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of hazardous substances as a principal
element. Two treatability studies were conducted in the past to evaluate treatment technology
utilization at the Site. A treatability study was performed from 1989 to 1990 to determine if in-
situ biodegradation was a viable option for enhancing the efficiency of the soil
flushing/groundwater treatment system. The results of the biodegradation treatability study
concluded that biodegradation was not an appropriate treatment technology for the Site. A
second treatability study was conducted in 2014, specifically, an In-Situ Chemical Oxidation Pilot
Study was conducted to determine if the injection of ozone into the high (former waste pit area)
and low total organic compounds (TOC) areas of the Site could reduce contaminant
concentrations. The results of the 2014 pilot study indicated that ozone injections to the high
TOC area, or former waste pit area, failed to reduce the levels of contamination. Further, the area
of high TOC is where LNAPL-impacted soil that is considered principal threat waste has been
identified and is co-located with PCB-contaminated soil that will be remediated. It is not within
the limited scope of this action to treat hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at the
Site, because the contamination will be removed and disposed of off-site; however, the
groundwater remedy is treating contaminated groundwater and will continue to do so.
Additionally, PCB-impacted soil at concentrations greater than 50 ppm will be disposed of in
accordance with TSCA requirements, which could include treatment off-Site prior to disposal at
an EPA-approved hazardous waste landfill, depending on the requirements of the disposal
facility.


                                                19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Five-Year Review Requirements

A review of the remedial action pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(c) will be conducted five years
after the commencement of the remedial action to ensure that the remedy continues to provide
adequate protection of human health and the environment because this remedy will result in
hazardous substances remaining on-site above health-based levels that allow for unlimited use
and unrestricted exposure. Five-year reviews are already underway for the Site. The most recent
one was completed in 2023.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES

The Proposed Plan for the Site was released for public comment on July 11, 2025. The public
comment period closed on September 11, 2025.

The Proposed Plan identified Alternative 2, Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing
PCB Concentrations Greater than 1.1 ppm and Co-located LNAPL, as the preferred alternative.
EPA considered all comments received during the virtual public meeting on July 17, 2025, as well
as written and oral comments received during the public comment period. Based on review of
the comments, no changes to the remedy amendment, as presented in the Proposed Plan, are
warranted. The comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary in Appendix III.




                                              20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX I


 FIGURES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              LEGEND                     GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND S ITE
                                   SLURRY WALL         PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                         FOCUSED FEASABILITY STUDY
                              D    PROPERTY BOUNDARY
                                                           SITE LOCATION
                                                           & TOPOGRAPHY




Figure 1: Site Location Map

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           LEGEND

                                      ~           Monitoring Well - Deep Zone
                                      'r          Monitoring Well - Shallow Zone
                                      @           Recovery Well - Deep Zone
                                      'r          Recovery Well - Shallow Zone


                                - - Infiltration Trenches
                                ~ Structures
                                - - Tributary
                                -       -         Roads
                                ><----------l<-   Fence
                                 ~ ] Slurry Wall

                                (=i Former Waste Pit Area




                                                  0 2550   100 150 200
                                                  ■■
                                                           Feet


                                              GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                            PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                              FOCUSED FEASABILITY STUDY


                                                     Site Map

                                    ~ ARCADIS I 2

Figure 2: Goose Farm Site Map

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         I           ~ RW-22                                                                  ~ RW-23
                                                                                                                                             I                                           ~ RW-24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I
  I                                                                                                                                          I                                                                                             I
  I                                                                                                                                      I                                                                                                 I
I I                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I !
                                                                                                                                     I
loss)o, ~ Rw-2s
                                                                                              ~ RW-26/                               I                                                                                 I I
I I                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I I
I I                                                                                                                                  I                                                                               I I
                                                                                                                                     I
I I                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I I
  I                                                                                                                              I                                                                                 I I
I I              ~ RW-27
                                                                                                                                 I                                                         ~ RW-29 /                           /
\ sS-6s                                                                                                          I
I
 O
             I                                                                                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                                                    I I
I I                                                                                                          I                                                                                     I I
I I                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                                                                  I I
I I                   ~--11
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                 I I
 I I                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                                                                I I
  I I                ~ RW-30
                                                                                                             I                                                                                 I I
   I I                                                                                                                                                                                         I !
                                                                                                             I           I
    I\                                                                                                   I                   SS-731:?
                                                                                                                                                   le'f " -73A
                                                                                                                                                                                              I !
             \ \                                                                                     J_!.,                                                                                    I I
                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ RW-33    I
                 \ \                                                                                     l           ~           S-74
                                                                                                                                                                                       D      I        I
                  \                                                                                      I I
                                                                                     ~ RW-32
                                                                                                                                                                                              I I
                                                                                                         I I                                                                                  I I
                                                                                                         I I                                                                                  I I
                                                                                                         I           I                                                                        I I
                                                                                                     ~-\··                                                                                      I
                                                                                                         I \••-:-,.o- - - -                                                                                \
                                                                                          SS-75 6 1
                                                                                                                                                          UV-76A        ~--39
                                                                                                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                     j                                                  uv:0'1A - - e            - - UV-~O~A                           \
                                                                                              _,,/
                                                                                                                                                 UOV-08\ _                            UV-06
                                                                                                                             -.3     ~            :2::::::1
                                                                                                                                                          ~•   ~       :l::::!l:~~         . - - UV-04                     \
                                                                                                                                                                        UV-r 5A~              UV-05                            \
                                                                                                                                                                        ~ ,)J,3..-~        --3•1                                   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ~P-7
                                                                                              UV-10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UV-0~
                                                                                    RW-36 ~

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       J
                                                                                                UV-1



                                                                                                                                                  UV-1             ,                               -
                                                                                                         -                   -                   -MW:g-                 •    -             UV-01




                                                                                                                                                           ~P-18

     LEGEND

                 ~       MONITORING WELL (DEEP)
                 ~       MONITORING WELL (SHALLOW)
                 @       RECOVERY WELL (DEEP)
                 ~       RECOVERY WELL (SHALLOW)
                 O       SOIL BORING
                 •       UVOST BORING
                 o       UVOST VERIFICATION BORING
     RESIDUAL LNAPL PRESENCE

             -           ~~fi~nb ~r~nr~;=~~lts indicate residual
                                  0

             -           ~~fi~r~~:~? results indicate residual

             ....        !~ild~°:ineN~~~i~~t ~r:~~d~nce indicating
                                 1

             •           !~ild~°:inlgN;~hL l~~:s~n~vidence indicating
                                 1
     -                   INFILTRATION TRENCH
     -               -   ROAD
     :<---- FENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                       GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE

     D                   BUILDING FOOTPRINT
                                                                                                                                                                                     PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                        FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY
     NOTE:
     SITE-SPECIFIC UVOST LNAPL THRESHOLD= 1.5% RE
                                                                                                                                                                                      LNAPL DISTRIBUTION

         h                      ;;;J




                                                                        Figure 3: LNAPL Distribution

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            --   20          40             80




                                           /~~ ~~7 •
                                                       ~ RVi.L
                                                                 29
                                                                      • s 8.121
                                                                        se ••

                                                                 . SB-126 . ss.;

                                                          ss.415(RJ •
                                                          SB-101 •   •
                                                                          ss.1,s
                                                                                    - se..121

                                                                                  s.13 . ss.1 1 ◄
                                                                                                  .,.




                                                                                         . SB·11 5 .,,ss.1n

                                                                                      se-116    PSB-G
                                                                                                          ,,.
                                                                                                                GP·30
                                                                                                                              --
                                                                                                                              0   20   40

                                                                                                                                       Feet
                                                                                                                                              80



                                                                                                                                                   se..m   se..; 12 ~ 173 ' se~
                                                                                                                                                                                  s ~ !2XG~-'se..:0
                                                                                                                                                                                        ;:.224 .-se..221


                                                                                                                                                                            s :i62Ps : .13
                                                                                                                                                                                                          SB-226




                                                                                                                                                                                                   " sa.: se..221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          $
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 < NJDEP NRDCSRS (< 1.1 MG/KG)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 > NJOEP NROCSRS ( 1.1 - 5 MGJKG)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 > NJDEP NROCSRS AND CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CRITERIA(S MG/KG)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MONITORING lfll£LL- DEEP ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MONITORING vv£LL- SHALLOW ZONE



                                                          ...
                                                    . . . . .sa.102S8-11
                                                                                                                                                                          165 .                    s'
            h-=""TIC,O,CT"""..--
                              ,:<, , -s:~~~:'~
                                 .,=i        : r', ;"'-1''°"-',,,-,/-                                                                                                                                                     $      RECOVERY 'lvELL, SHALLOW ZONE


                   •
                                                      •
                                                    PSB·•3ss.
                                                       7
                                                                                                                                                                                  Pse- , ~
                                                                                                                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                                                                                                               SB-223
                                                                                                                                                                                             _. 58-228_. ,,.
                                                                                                                                                                                              sa., e1
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GF'-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INFILTRATION TRENCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TRIBUTARY
                 _ s·                -          ·                                                                                                                                                                                ROADS
                                                                                                                                                                              _, SB-204          ~ , W.l~V;.30   ~
              SB-99S8-92: 40. . ...                                                                                                                                                                                              FENCE
                     SB·O O ~•                                                                                                                                                                                                   CONCRETE
              RW.268-91 • - - -
                              R'v\lJ '                                                                                                                                                                                           SLURRY WALL
             se.i.se se.910:':-s ,,• s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (=1 STRUCTURE
                  SB.923- •              j) SS-9
                                           58
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLANNED EXCAVATION ZONE
                              SB-97             58.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ LNAPL
                                                                                                                   '-l';V.~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ PCB
                             GP-24
                                          ""'                     ~i.oo                         sl/b92o                                                                                                                ~ ,ow
                       ,,.                                              58-917           SB·919
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ~ ~~g~~i~~~~~~~RAl~V~~GATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Multi-Depth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Interval
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PCB Samples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Shallow Depth

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '"""''
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Intermed iate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Depth Interval
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Deep Depth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Interval

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NOTES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1. EPA- Environmental Protection Agency
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2. NJOEP - New Jersey Department of Environmental
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Protection
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3. CO - Consent Decree
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4. LNAPL-light non-aqueous phase liquid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5. mg/kg - milligrams per kilogram
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6. PCB - polychlorinated bi phenyl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7. IDW- lnvestigation-DerivedWaste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8. NRDCSRS - Non-Residential direct contact soil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           remediation standard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9                                         0 I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7n\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         - ~n~:';;0 1~~~~n.,,~~~iti~~~t1i:!tt'r:S ~~ g~~~production.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10. (R)- Soil boring locatronwas rednlled to collect deeper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            or shallower sample interval. Ex. SB-310(R)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0 45 90

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feet

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GOOSE FARM SUPERFUNO SITE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLUMSTED TOVYNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           180




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PCB INVESTIGATION




        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LOCATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (FULL SITE)

                                                                                     IN FI LTRAT ION TR ENCH C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ~ ARCADIS                                         SA
         ~========================================================================:.L..__ _ _                                                                                                                                                                           ---1.,.___J




Figure 4: PCB Sampling Locations

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                             40

                                                                                                           ..J
                                                                                                        SCALE IN FEET



                                                                                                   GOOSE FARM SUPERFUNO SITE
                                                                                                 PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP. NEW JERSEY



                                                                                            EXCAVATION AREAS ABOVE 1.1 mg/kg



                                                                                                                                 7



Figure 5: Excavation Areas Containing PCBs Greater than 1.1 ppm and LNAPL Excavation Area

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                    SCALE IN FEET




                                                                                                GOOSE FARM SUPERFUNO SITE
                                                                                              PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP. NEW JERSEY



                                                                                          EXCAVATION AREAS ABOVE 5 mg/kg



                                                                                                                              8


Figure 6: Excavation Areas Containing PCBs Greater than 5 ppm and LNAPL Excavation Area

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

APPENDIX II


  TABLES

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     Table 1
                                            MAXIMUM PCB CONCENTRATIONS AND APPLICABLE STANDARDS
                                                         GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                       PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY

                  Matrix                  Units           Site Maximum Values                  CD   NJDEP NRSRS    NJDEP   NJDEP GWQC
                                                               (Total PCBs)                                       MGWSRS     Class II-A
           Soil                           mg/kg                     80                         5        1.1         1.6         NA

Notes:
Maximum soil PCBs identified at SB-916 15 to 16 feet below ground surface.
Total PCBs are the sum of detected PCBs.
CD – Consent Decree
GWQC – Ground Water Quality Criteria
MGWSRS – Migration to Groundwater Soil Remediation Standard
NA – Not applicable standard for matrix
NJDEP – New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
NRSRS – Non-Residential Soil Remediation Standards for the Ingestion-Dermal Exposure Pathway
PCB – Polychlorinated Biphenyl (1336-36-3)
mg/kg – Milligrams per kilogram

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                    TABLE 2
                                                                          CHEMICAL-SPECIFIC ARARs/TBCs
                                                                           GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                         PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY

                   ARAR                                     Citation                      Summary of Requirements                            Relation to Remedy                  ARAR or TBC
                                                                            Establishes standards for soil cleanups under New Jersey ARAR – The soil remediation standard
New Jersey Non-Residential Soil Remediation                                 cleanup authorities.                                     for PCBs of 1.1 mg/kg
Standards for the Ingestion- Dermal Exposure            N.J.A.C. 7:26D                                                                                                      Relevant and Appropriate
                   Pathway


Notes:
ARAR - Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirement
mg/kg – milligrams per kilogram
N.J.A.C. - New Jersey Administrative Code

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 3
                                                                                 ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS/TBCs
                                                                                 GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                               PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY

                  ARAR                                   Citation                              Summary of Requirements                              Relation to Remedy                   ARAR or TBC
                                               40 CFR Parts 264.30 - 264.37     These regulations outline requirements for safety            ARAR - applies in relation to active
   RCRA - Preparedness and Prevention                                           equipment and spill control.                                 cleanup.                                Relevant and Appropriate
 RCRA - Contingency Plan and Emergency                                          Provides requirements for outlining emergency                ARAR - applies in relation to active
                                               40 CFR Parts 265.50 - 265.56                                                                                                          Relevant and Appropriate
               Procedures                                                       procedures to be used following explosions, fires, etc.      cleanup.
                                                                                Establishes site-specific pollutant limitations and          ARAR - applies for potential
                                                                                performance standards which are designated to protect        management of dewatering effluent.
                                             40 CFR Parts 122, 125, 403, 230,
 Clean Water Act (CWA) - Discharge to                                           surface water quality. Types of discharges regulated
                                                  402 CWA Section 401                                                                                                                 Relevant and Appropriate
        Water of United States                                                  under CWA include: discharge to surface water or
                                                                                ocean, indirect discharge to a POTW, and discharge of
                                                                                dredged or fill material into waters of the United States.
                                                                                These regulations detail the specific permit requirements ARAR - applies for potential
  National Pollution Discharge Elimination
                                                     40 CFR Part 122            for the discharge of pollutants to the waters of the United management of dewatering effluent.       Relevant and Appropriate
             System (NPDES)
                                                                                States.
                                                      N.J.A.C. 7:26E            This regulation provides the minimal technical               ARAR
New Jersey Technical Requirements for Site
                                                                                requirements to investigate and remediate contaminated
               Remediation                                                      sites in New Jersey. Substantive provisions are potentially                                          Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                relevant and appropriate.
                                                                                This regulation provides administrative procedures and       ARAR
    Administrative Requirements for the
                                                     N.J.A.C. 7:26C-7           requirements, and potentially relevant and appropriate
    Remediation of Contaminated Sites                                                                                                                                                Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                institutional controls for the remediation of a contaminated
                                                                                site in New Jersey.
                                                                                                                                             ARAR - applies to potential
                                                                                This regulation sets the requirements for
New Jersey Stormwater Management Rule                  N.J.A.C. 7:8                                                                          stormwater management.                 Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                stormwater management during construction.
                                                                                                                                            ARAR - applies to potential erosion
  New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment                                           Requirements for soil erosion and sediment control
                                              N.J.A.C. 2:90, N.J.S.A. 16:52A                                                                control.                                Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                 measures.
                Control Act
                                                                                                                                            ARAR - applies to noise control
                                                                                 This standard provides the requirements for noise
         New Jersey Noise Control                     N.J.A.C. 7:29                                                                         during excavation and disposal          Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                 control.
                                                                                                                                            activities.
                                                                                                                                            ARAR - applies to on-site activities
  Department of Transportation Rules for                                         Requirements for the packaging, labeling, manifesting,
                                                                                                                                            relating to disposal following                 Applicable
  Transportation of Hazardous Materials       49 CFR 107, 171, 172, 177-179      and transporting of hazardous materials.
                                                                                                                                            remediation.
                                                                                                                                            ARAR - applies to on-site activities
                                                                                These regulations establish the responsibility of
                                                                                                                                            relating to disposal to the extent
Toxic Substances Control Act - PCB Waste     40 CFR 761.202, 205, 207 to 211,   generators, transporters, and disposers of PCB waste in
                                                                                                                                            remediation waste with PCB                     Applicable
      Disposal Records and Reports                    215, and 218              the handling, transportation, and management of the
                                                                                                                                            concentrations above 50 ppm is
                                                                                waste. Requires a manifest and record-keeping.
                                                                                                                                            encountered during remediation.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 3
                                                                              ACTION-SPECIFIC ARARS/TBCs
                                                                              GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                            PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY

                   ARAR                                  Citation                              Summary of Requirements                             Relation to Remedy                  ARAR or TBC
                                                                                 This regulation establishes recordkeeping                 ARAR - applies to on-site activities
  New Jersey Transportation of Hazardous
                                                      N.J.A.C. 16:49             requirements and standards related to the manifest        relating to disposal following         Relevant and Appropriate
                Materials
                                                                                 system for hazardous materials.                           remediation.
                                                                                 This regulation describes requirements and                ARAR - applies to potential dust
                                                                                 procedures for obtaining air permits and certificates     control.
      New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act             N.J.A.C. 7:27             and rules that govern the emission of contaminants                                               Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                 into the ambient atmosphere. Substantive
                                                                                 requirements are potential ARARs.
 New Jersey Ambient Air Quality Standards            N.J.A.C. 7:27-13            This standard provides the requirements for ambient air   ARAR - applies to potential dust
                                                                                 quality control.                                          control.                               Relevant and Appropriate

                                                                                 Outlines criteria for determining if a solid waste is a   ARAR - applies to on-site storage
   Identification and Listing of Hazardous                                       hazardous waste and is subject to regulation under 40     and disposal during remediation
                                             40 CFR Part 261, N.J.A.C. 7:26G-5   CFR Parts 260-266; N.J.A.C. 7:26G-5 incorporates          activities.                                   Applicable
                    Wastes
                                                                                 by reference 40 C.F.R. Part 261.


Notes:
ARAR - Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
CWA - Clean Water Act NA - Not Applicable
N.J.A.C. - New Jersey Administrative Code
N.J.S.A. - New Jersey Statutes Annotated
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
PCB - Polychlorinated Biphenyl
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
ppm - parts per million
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
TSCA - Toxic Substances Control Act

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            TABLE 4
                                                                                  LOCATION-SPECIFIC ARARs/TBCs
                                                                                   GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                 PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                   ARAR                                   Citation                              Summary of Requirements                                  Relation to Remedy                       ARAR or TBC
                                                                                 Sets forth EPA policy and guidance for carrying out the
 Statement of Procedures on Floodplains                                                                                                  TBC - for work done in proximity to
                                                                                 provisions of Executive Order (EO) 11988 and EO 11990
  Management and Wetlands Protection            40 CFR Appendix A to Part 6                                                              unnamed tributary and wetlands.                       To Be Considered
                                                                                 for floodplain management and wetlands protection.
                                                                                 This act establishes permitting requirements for              ARAR - applies to work done in proximity
          New Jersey Freshwater                N.J.A.C. 7:7A, N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1                                                                                                              Relevant and Appropriate
                                                                                 regulated activity disturbing wetlands. Under CERCLA,         to unnamed tributary and wetlands.
           Protection Act Rules
                                                                                 permits are not required for on-site work, but substantive
                                                                                 requirements are potential ARARs.
                                                                                 This act establishes state standards for activities within ARAR - applies to the extent work will be
New Jersey Flood Hazard Control Act Rules              N.J.A.C. 7:13                                                                        conducted within the regulated flood                   Applicable
                                                                                 floodplains.
                                                                                                                                            hazard area.
                                                                                                                                            ARAR - applies if scientific, historic or
     National Historic Preservation Act               36 CFR Part 800            Requirements for preservation of historic properties.      archeological artifacts are identified during          Applicable
                                                                                                                                            excavation.
                                                                                 Requirements for preservation of historical/ archeological ARAR - applies if scientific, historic or
 Preservation of Area Containing Artifacts             36 CFR Part 65                                                                       archeological artifacts are identified during          Applicable
                                                                                 artifacts.
                                                                                                                                            excavation.
  Discharge of Dredge or Fill Material into                                      Requirements for discharge of fill material or dredge      ARAR - applies to work done in proximity
                                              40 CFR Part 230, CWA Section 404                                                                                                                     Applicable
       Waters of the United States                                               material into waters of the United States.                 to unnamed tributary and wetlands.
                                                                                 Requires federal agencies to ensure that the continued        ARAR - applies if any species of concern
                                              16 USC 1531 et seq. 50 CFR Part
         Endangered Species Act                                                  existence of any endangered or threatened species and         or threatened habitat is identified during          Applicable
                                                   200 50 CFR Part 402
                                                                                 their habitat will not be jeopardized by a site action.       remedy implementation.
                                                                                 Discusses situations under Section 104 or 106 of
                                                                                                                                               TBC - for work done in proximity to
    Policy on Floodplains and Wetland                                            CERCLA that require preparation of floodplains and/or
                                                OSWER Directive 9280.0-02                                                                      unnamed tributary and wetlands.                 To Be Considered
    Assessments for CERCLA Actions                                               wetlands assessments, and factors to consider when
                                                                                 preparing such an assessment.
                                                                                 This act protects and conserves nongame fish and
                                                                                                                                               ARAR - applies to work done in proximity
    Fish and Wildlife Conservation Act                                           wildlife.                                                                                                        Applicable
                                                    16 USC 2901 et seq.                                                                        to wetlands and potential threatened
                                                                                                                                               species habitat.
                                                                                 This act maintains and coordinates wildlife
                                                                                                                                               ARAR - applies to work done in proximity
    Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act                                           conservation.                                                                                                    Applicable
                                                        16 USC 661                                                                             to wetlands and potential threatened
                                                                                                                                               species habitat.
                                                                                 The selected remedial action(s) must be carried out in a
                                                                                                                                               ARAR – applies to work done in
                                                                                 manner that avoids the taking or killing of protected
                                                                                                                                               proximity to wetlands and potential                Applicable
         Migratory Bird Treaty Act                                               migratory bird species, including individual birds or their
                                                    16 USC 703 et seq.                                                                         threatened species habitat.
                                                                                 nests or eggs.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     TABLE 4
                                                                           LOCATION-SPECIFIC ARARs/TBCs
                                                                            GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                          PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY

              ARAR                                  Citation                            Summary of Requirements                             Relation to Remedy           ARAR or TBC


                                                                         This Executive Order prohibits any federally- funded
                                                                                                                                  TBC - for work done in proximity to
                                                                         construction projects in wetlands unless there are no
                                                                                                                                  unnamed tributary and wetlands.
                                                                         practicable alternatives to such construction, and the
      Protection of Wetlands                 Executive Order 11990                                                                                                      To Be Considered
                                                                         proposed action includes all practicable measures to
                                                                         minimize harm to wetlands which may result from
                                                                         such use.
                                                                         Federal agencies are required to reduce the risk of
                                                                                                                                  TBC - for work done in proximity to
      Floodplain Management            Executive Order 11988, as amended flood loss, to minimize the impact of floods, and to     unnamed tributary and wetlands.       To Be Considered
                                           by Executive Order 13690.     restore and preserve the natural and beneficial values
                                                                         of floodplains.

Notes:
ARAR – Applicalable or Relevant and Appropriate Requirements
CERCLA – Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act
CFR – Code of Federal Regulations
CWA – Clean Water Act
EO – Executive Order
N.J.A.C. – New Jersey Administrative Code
OSWER – Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response
USC – United States Code

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX III


ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      07/11/2025                                               REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                         Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                             Count:        Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
319893   07/11/2025   COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX              6    Administrative Record                                        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE                                            Index                                                 AGENCY)

38885    09/17/1987   ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX AND DOCUMENTS             19         List/Index                                              (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      WITH DECLARATION OF SALVATORE BADALAMENTI -                                                                              AGENCY)
                      CIVIL ACTION NO. 83-4787 FOR THE GOOSE FARM
                      SITE

410335   06/25/1980   Potential Uncontrolled Hazardous Waste                 1           Letter           DEBONIS,MICHAEL (US ENVIRONMENTAL    RUBEL,FRED,H (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Storage/Disposal Site                                                               PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410336   06/11/1980   Oil and Hazardous Substances Telephone Pollution       1           Report           RUBEL,FRED,H (US ENVIRONMENTAL       HENDERSON,DAVID (NEW JERSEY
                      Report                                                                              PROTECTION AGENCY)                   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                               PROTECTION)

410337   09/12/1980   Letter concerning USEPA assistance                     1           Letter           RUBEL,FRED,H (US ENVIRONMENTAL       BIRNS,KARL,F (NJ DEPT OF
                                                                                                          PROTECTION AGENCY)                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)

410338   07/01/1981   Hazardous Waste Site Analysis                         30           Report                                                ABBOTT,LINDA (ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                               MONITORING SYSTEMS LABORATORY)

410339   07/17/1981   Request for Information of Waste Disposal              2           Letter           DAVIS,ROBERT (THIOKOL CORPORATION)   MORALES-SANCHEZ,JULIO (US
                                                                                                                                               ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410340   03/02/1982   Response to Notification of Hazardous Site with        7           Letter           FRISCO,JOHN (US ENVIRONMENTAL        MUCCIFORI,THOMAS,J (DAYTON HOPKINS)
                      Attached Notices                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)

410341   03/18/1982   Thiokol Request for Informal Meeting                   2           Letter           DAVIS,ROBERT (THIOKOL CORPORATION)   SULLIVAN, Jr,WILLIAM A. (US
                                                                                                                                               ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410342   04/01/1982   Thiokol Request for Informal Meeting                   2           Letter           SOMMERLEE,KATHY (US ENVIRONMENTAL    STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                                                                                                          PROTECTION AGENCY)                   CORPORATION)

410410   08/10/1982   Hazardous Ranking System Worksheet                    21           Report           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY) PUTNAM,EDWARD (NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                               DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                               PROTECTION)



                                                                                       Page 1 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                            FINAL
                                                                                         07/11/2025                                         REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                                Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                                    Count:    Doc Type:          Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
410343   08/17/1982   Authorization to Proceed with Remedial Activities             4      Letter      LAVELLE,RITA (US ENVIRONMENTAL       HEDEMAN,WILLIAM,N (US
                                                                                                       PROTECTION AGENCY)                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410344   08/01/1982   Decision Memorandum Regarding Cooperative                     4      Letter      LAVELLE,RITA (US ENVIRONMENTAL       SCHAFER,JACQUELINE,E (US
                      Agreement                                                                        PROTECTION AGENCY)                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410345   06/18/1985   Transmittal of Draft Remedial Investigation/Feasibility       1      Letter      KIMMEL,GRANT (US ENVIRONMENTAL       LYNCH,DONALD (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Study Report on the Goose Farm Site                                              PROTECTION AGENCY)|PETERSEN,CAROLE   PROTECTION AGENCY)
                                                                                                       (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)
410346   03/08/1985   Goose Farm Agreement Amendment                                1      Letter      VELEZ,JO-ANN (US ENVIRONMENTAL       LYNCH,DONALD (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                       PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410347   04/04/1983   Goose Farm Data Review                                        1      Letter      OGG,ROBERT (US ENVIRONMENTAL         SULLIVAN,DANIEL (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                       PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410348   03/03/1983   Quality Assurance/Quality Control Review of Goose             1      Letter      SULLIVAN,DANIEL (US ENVIRONMENTAL    OGG,ROBERT (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Farm Data                                                                        PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410349    Undated     Immediate Action and Remedial Goose Farm Site                 2      Letter      SMITH,JOAN (NJ DEPARTMENT OF         STANTON,JACK (NJ DEPT OF
                      Investigations - A95 Review                                                      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)            ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)

410350   05/05/1983   Transmittal of Draft Request for Proposal for Review          1    Memorandum    KASABACH,HAIG (NJ DEPT OF            HENDERSON,DAVID (NEW JERSEY
                      and Comment                                                                      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)            DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                            PROTECTION)
410351   03/19/1985   Transmittal Sheet for Two Draft Remedial                      1      Letter      LYNCH,DONALD (US ENVIRONMENTAL       SHIRK,JAMES,E (ELSON T KILLAM
                      Investigation Reports                                                            PROTECTION AGENCY)                   ASSOCIATES INCORPORATED)

410352   08/19/1982   Statement of Work for Four Sites Forwarded for                3      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US
                      Thiokol Review                                                                   CORPORATION)                         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410353   08/24/1982   Statement of Thiokol's Interest in Obtaining Bids for         2      Letter      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US         STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      Private Clean-up Operation                                                       ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)     CORPORATION)




                                                                                         Page 2 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      07/11/2025                                         REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                             Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                                 Count:    Doc Type:          Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
410354   09/08/1982   Request for Access to Wastes Disposal Sites in Order       1      Letter      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US         STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      to Obtain Bids for Clean-up Operation                                         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)     CORPORATION)

410355   09/14/1982   Confirmation of Bid Solicitation from Private              1      Letter      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US         STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      Contractors                                                                   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)     CORPORATION)

410356   10/07/1982   Request for Information Regarding Bids for Clean-Up        3      Letter      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US         STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      Operation                                                                     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)     CORPORATION)

410357   11/19/1982   USEPA Would Welcome Thiokol Financial                      2      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US
                      Responsibility for Feasibility Study                                          CORPORATION)                         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410358   12/20/1982   Request for Meeting to Discuss Private Clean-Up            3      Letter      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US         STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      Operations                                                                    ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)     CORPORATION)

410359   01/14/1983   Praschak Replacement of Billingsley                        1      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL      BILLINGSLEY,ANN VOORHEES (US
                                                                                                    CORPORATION)                         ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY)

410360   01/19/1983   Request for Meeting                                        1      Letter      PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL    STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                                                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)                   CORPORATION)

410361   01/26/1983   Enclosure of Two Proposals from Private Contractors        1      Letter      PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL    WEINGARTEN,J. (THIOKOL CORPORATION)
                      for Remedial Action                                                           PROTECTION AGENCY)

410362   01/25/1983   Attachment I to Above Letter (Techlaw No. 517)           109      Report      (THIOKOL CORPORATION)                (WOODWARD-CLYDE CONSULTANTS)



410363   10/01/1982   Attachment II to Above Letter (Techlaw No. 517)          122      Report      (MORTON THIOKOL CORPORATION)         (WEHRAN ENGINEERING CORPORATION)



410364   02/07/1983   Wehran and Woodward-Clyde Proposals to be                  1      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL      PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      appraised by USEPA                                                            CORPORATION)                         PROTECTION AGENCY)




                                                                                      Page 3 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                        FINAL
                                                                                     07/11/2025                                          REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                            Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                                Count:    Doc Type:         Addressee Name/Organization:           Author Name/Organization:
410365   02/15/1983   Summary of Contacts with USEPA and Expression of          5      Letter      PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL     STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                      Interest in Settlement                                                       PROTECTION AGENCY)                    CORPORATION)

410366   02/18/1983   Suggestion for Meeting                                    1      Letter      MUGDAN,WALTER (US ENVIRONMENTAL       STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL
                                                                                                   PROTECTION AGENCY)                    CORPORATION)

410367   03/09/1983   Suggestion that USEPA and Thiokol Negotiate Thiokol       3      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL       PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Acceptance of Clean-Up Responsibility                                        CORPORATION)                          PROTECTION AGENCY)

410368   03/18/1983   Transmittal of Two Reports Submitted by Thiokol to        1      Letter      STANLEY,JAMES,R (MORTON THIOKOL       PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      USEPA for Review                                                             CORPORATION)                          PROTECTION AGENCY)

410369   04/18/1983   Request for Copies of Wehran and Woodward-Clyde           1      Letter      PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL     REGER,DAVID (STATE OF NEW JERSEY,
                      Proposals                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)                    DEPARTMENT OF LAW AND PUBLIC
                                                                                                                                         SAFETY)
410370   12/21/1983   Demand Letter                                             2      Letter      MUCCIFORI,THOMAS,J (DAYTON HOPKINS)   PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)

410371   12/21/1983   Demand Letter                                             2      Letter                                            PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)

410372   12/21/1983   Demand Letter                                             2      Letter                                            PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)

410373   12/21/1983   Demand Letter                                             2      Letter      PARKER,FRANK (MORTON THIOCOL          PRASCHAK,ANDREW (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                   INCORPORATED)                         PROTECTION AGENCY)

410374   07/26/1983   Advertised Bid Proposal                                 109      Report                                            (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF THE
                                                                                                                                         TREASURY)

410375   08/01/1983   Proposal for Hazardous Waste Investigation and          296      Report      (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF THE         (ELSON T KILLAM ASSOCIATES
                      Remedial Action Feasibility Study                                            TREASURY)                             INCORPORATED)




                                                                                     Page 4 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                            FINAL
                                                                                         07/11/2025                                             REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                              Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                                  Count:     Doc Type:               Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
410376   11/17/1983   Award Recommendation for Goose Farm Feasibility            15     Memorandum         (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF THE        (COMMITTEE FOR THE EVALUATION OF
                      Study (Bid Registration X-082)                                                       TREASURY)|KAEMPFER,RICHARD,C (NEW    BIDS PROPOSED FOR THE CLEANUP,
                                                                                                           JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY)   REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL)

410377   08/31/1983   Purchase Bureau Contract                                    6 Contract Documentation (ELSON T KILLAM ASSOCIATES           (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF
                                                                                                           INCORPORATED)                        ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)

410378   01/01/1984   Refer to Site File No. 2.3 (Refer to Doc ID 410375)         1         Report         (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF            (ELSON T KILLAM ASSOCIATES
                                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)            INCORPORATED)

410379   01/01/1984   Sampling and Analysis Data - Goose Farm                  1260         Report         (NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF            (ELSON T KILLAM ASSOCIATES
                                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION)            INCORPORATED)

410380   01/01/1984   Chain of Custody Documents for Sampling and               205         Report         (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Analysis Data                                                                        PROTECTION)

410381   02/07/1984   Health and Safety Manual for Goose Farm Hazardous         117         Report         (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Waste Investigations and Remedial Action Feasibility                                 PROTECTION)
                      Study
410382   02/07/1984   Draft Quality Assurance Program Plan for Goose Farm       308         Report         (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Hazardous Waste Investigation and Remedial Action                                    PROTECTION)
                      Feasibility Study with Attachment I
410383   08/01/1983   Refer to Site File No. 2.3 for Additional Work Plan         1         Report         (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Information (Refer to Doc ID 410375)                                                 PROTECTION)

410384   07/12/1985   Draft II Task 2 - Remedial Investigations Volume I -      251         Report
                      Main Report

410385   08/02/1985   Task 2- Remedial Investigation Volume II - Appendix A     181         Report         (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                           PROTECTION)

410386   04/11/1984   Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Progress           5         Report                                              (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Reports                                                                                                                   PROTECTION)




                                                                                          Page 5 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                         FINAL
                                                                                      07/11/2025                                           REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                           Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                               Count:      Doc Type:            Addressee Name/Organization:          Author Name/Organization:
410387   06/25/1984   Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Progress        6        Report                                             (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Reports                                                                                                              PROTECTION)

410388   08/26/1985   Transmittal of Comments on the Goose Farm                2         Letter        BERKOWITZ,JORGE,H (NEW JERSEY       LAIRD,EDWARD,C (ARCHER & GREINER)
                      Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study as                                  DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Prepared by AWARE Incorporated                                                   PROTECTION)


410389   08/21/1985   Initial Comments on Goose Farm Remedial                 37         Letter        LAIRD,EDWARD,C (ARCHER & GREINER)   MUTCH,ROBERT,D (AWARE
                      Investigation and Feasibility Study as Prepared by                                                                   INCORPORATED)
                      AWARE Incorporated

410390   09/01/1985   Response to Morton Thiokol, Inc. Comments to the         3         Letter        LAIRD,EDWARD,C (ARCHER & GREINER)   SADAT,MARWAN,M (NEW JERSEY
                      Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study                                                                         DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION)

410391   07/12/1985   Draft - II - Feasibility Study                          42         Report        (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                       PROTECTION)

410392   05/01/1983   Community Relation Plan                                  5         Report                                            (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION)

410393   09/01/1985   Responsiveness Summary                                  83         Report                                            (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION)

410394   06/26/1985   Public Meeting Notice                                    1    Meeting Document   HORNER,CHARLES (PINELANDS COMMISSION SINGER,GRACE,L (NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                       NJ)                                  DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                            PROTECTION)

410395   06/27/1985   Public Meeting Notice                                    1    Meeting Document                                       (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION)

410397   01/01/1981   Weston Report                                           97         Report                                            (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                                                           PROTECTION)




                                                                                       Page 6 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                            FINAL
                                                                                         07/11/2025                                           REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                              Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                                  Count:      Doc Type:            Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
410398   08/12/1982   Application for Assistance - Goose Farm Proposed           30        Report        (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      General Provisions                                                                 PROTECTION)                          AGENCY)

410399   09/03/1982   USEPA Assistance Agreement/Cooperative                      4 Contract Documentation (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      Agreement                                                                            PROTECTION)                        AGENCY)

410400   12/01/1983   Request for Extension for Cooperative Agreement             2         Letter       QUINN,ROBERT,D (US ENVIRONMENTAL     PFORTNER,RAY (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410401   12/21/1983   Request for Extension for Grant for Cooperative             1     Memorandum       CLARK,JOAN (U.S ENVIRONMENTAL        QUINN,ROBERT,D (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      Agreement                                                                          PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410402   01/16/1984   Assistance Amendment Authorization                          1 Contract Documentation (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                           PROTECTION)                        AGENCY)

410403   12/21/1984   Request for Cooperative Agreement Amendment                 1         Letter       BARRACK,HERBERT (US ENVIRONMENTAL    LIBRIZZI,WILLIAM (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410404   03/08/1985   Request for Cooperative Agreement Amendment                 1         Letter       VELEZ,JO-ANN (US ENVIRONMENTAL       LYNCH,DONALD (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                                                                                                         PROTECTION AGENCY)                   PROTECTION AGENCY)

410405   03/27/1985   USEPA Assistance Agreement/Agreement                        3 Contract Documentation (NJ DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL    (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                           PROTECTION)                        AGENCY)

410406   07/02/1985   Transmittal Letter for FMC Aquifer Remediation Study        1         Letter       HENDERSON,DAVID (NEW JERSEY          SLESINGER,ARTHUR,E (MORTON THIOCOL
                                                                                                         DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL          INCORPORATED)
                                                                                                         PROTECTION)


410407   06/27/1985   Site Assessment Report by FMC                              28        Report        (MORTON THIOKOL CORPORATION)         (FMC AQUIFER REMEDIATION SYSTEMS)



410408   05/01/1985   Transmittal Letter for Supplemental Investigations by       1         Letter       SLESINGER,ARTHUR,E (MORTON THIOCOL   BROWN,KENNETH,A (WEHRAN
                      Wehran                                                                             INCORPORATED)                        ENGINEERING CORPORATION)




                                                                                         Page 7 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                   FINAL
                                                                                07/11/2025                                         REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                       Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                           Count:    Doc Type:         Addressee Name/Organization:         Author Name/Organization:
410409   05/01/1985   Supplemental Investigation by Wehran                49      Report      (MORTON THIOCOL INCORPORATED)        (WEHRAN ENGINEERING CORPORATION)



99982    09/27/1985   RECORD OF DECISION, REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE           107      Report                                           (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                      SELECTION, GOOSE FARM, PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP,                                                                    AGENCY)
                      NEW JERSEY, (WITH ATTACHMENTS).


755360   04/10/1989   HEALTH ASSESSMENT APRIL 1989 FOR THE GOOSE          10      Report                                           (ATSDR)
                      FARM SITE

274726   12/24/2014   LIGHT NON-AQUEOUS PHASE LIQUID DELINEATION        1063     Work Plan                                         (PARSONS)
                      WORK PLAN FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE

626446   07/01/2016   REVISED LIGHT NON-AQUEOUS PHASE LIQUID           15241      Report      (Rohm & Haas Company)                (PARSONS)
                      DELINEATION REPORT FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE

643611   10/17/2019   SOIL AND LNAPL DELINEATION FIELD SAMPLING PLAN    1362      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY) (ARCADIS)|(ROHM & HAAS CHEMICALS
                      FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE                                                                                      LLC)

626390   08/12/2020   SOIL AND LNAPL DELINEATION SUMMARY REPORT         3848      Report      (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY) (ARCADIS)|(ROHM & HAAS CHEMICALS
                      FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE                                                                                      LLC)

655037   05/19/2023   POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYL (PCB) PRE-                195     Work Plan    (ROHM & HAAS CHEMICALS LLC)          (ARCADIS)
                      EXCAVATION SAMPLING WORK PLAN FOR THE
                      GOOSE FARM SITE


755356   10/01/2023   SUPPLEMENTAL POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYL (PCB)         42     Work Plan                                         (ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY)
                      PRE-EXCAVATION SAMPLING WORK PLAN FOR THE
                      GOOSE FARM SITE


755357   04/04/2024   SECOND SUPPLEMENTAL POLYCHLORINATED                 49     Work Plan                                         (ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY)
                      BIPHENYL (PCB) PRE-EXCAVATION SAMPLING WORK
                      PLAN FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE




                                                                                Page 8 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             COMPREHENSIVE ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX OF DOCUMENTS
                                                                                   FINAL
                                                                                07/11/2025                                        REGION ID: 02
           Site Name: GOOSE FARM
           CERCLIS ID: NJD980530109
                OUID: 01
                 SSID: 0203
               Action: ROD Amendment


                                                                       Image
DocID:    Doc Date:   Title:                                           Count:    Doc Type:         Addressee Name/Organization:        Author Name/Organization:
755358   06/27/2024   THIRD SUPPLEMENTAL POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYL         52     Work Plan                                        (ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY)
                      (PCB) PRE-EXCAVATION SAMPLING WORK PLAN FOR
                      THE GOOSE FARM SITE


755359   09/01/2024   FOURTH SUPPLEMENTAL POLYCHLORINATED                 57     Work Plan                                        (ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY)
                      BIPHENYL (PCB) PRE-EXCAVATION SAMPLING WORK
                      PLAN FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE


731471   07/09/2025   FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY FOR PCBS IN SOIL FOR     136     Work Plan    (ROHM AND HAAS COMPANY)             (ARCADIS US INCORPORATED)
                      THE GOOSE FARM SITE

731472   7/10/2025    US EPA APPROVES THE FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY        2     Work Plan    LEE, AMY (DOW CHEMICAL COMPANY)     HARDEN, TIFFANY (US ENVIRONMENTAL
                      FOR PCBS IN SOIL FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE                                                                    PROTECTION AGENCY)

731464   07/10/2025   PROPOSED PLAN FOR THE GOOSE FARM SITE               19     Work Plan                                        (US ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                                                  AGENCY)




                                                                                Page 9 of 9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX IV


STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                  CONTAMINATED SITE REMEDIATION & REDEVELOPMENT
                                                      401 East State Street
                                                P.O. Box 420, Mail Code 401-06                            SHAWN M. LATOURETTE
PHILIP D. MURPHY
    Governor                                    Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0420                                 Commissioner
                                               Tel. (609) 292-1250 ⬧ Fax (609) 777-1914
                                                            www.nj.gov/dep
TAHESHA L. WAY
   Lt. Governor

                                                                                                   September 22, 2025
       Pat Evangelista, Director
       Superfund and Emergency Management Division
       USEPA Region II
       290 Broadway
        New York, NY 10007-1866

       Re:        Record of Decision Amendment
                  Goose Farm Superfund Site, Operable Unit 1
                  Plumsted Township, Ocean County

       Dear Mr. Evangelista:

       The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (Department) has completed its review of the
       Record of Decision (ROD) Amendment for the Goose Farm Superfund Site. The ROD Amendment was
       prepared by the United States Environmental Protection Agency to amend the 1985 Record of Decision to
       address remaining contamination of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in soil and co-located light non-
       aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) at the site.

       The Department concurs with the proposed remedy, Alternative 2, which includes:

             •    Excavation of soils containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg
             •    Excavation of co-located LNAPL impacted soil, and
             •    Off-site disposal.

       The proposed remedy is consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
       Liability Act (CERCLA), as amended, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and Hazardous
       Substances Pollution Contingency Plan and is protective of public health and the environment.

       The Department appreciates the opportunity to participate in the decision-making process to select an
       appropriate remedy. If you have any questions regarding this matter, contact Gwen Zervas at (609) 940-
       4515, or via e-mail at Gwen.Zervas@dep.nj.gov.

                                                                                 Sincerely,



                                                                                 David E. Haymes
                                                                                 Assistant Commissioner

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      APPENDIX V


RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           APPENDIX V

                                 RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY


INTRODUCTION

A responsiveness summary is required by the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP) at 40 C.F.R. 300.435(c)(2)(ii)(F). It provides a summary of comments and
concerns received during the public comment period, and the United States Environmental
Protection Agency's (EPA's) responses to those comments and concerns. All significant comments
summarized in this document have been considered in EPA's final decision for selection of a
remedial alternative for the ROD Amendment.

OVERVIEW

Public reaction to the preferred alternative was minimal. Several questions were received during
the virtual public meeting that was held on July 17, 2025. Questions received during the virtual
public meeting came from two nearby residents and a representative from the Ocean County
Health Department. During the public comment period, email comments supporting the
preferred alternative were received from two nearby residents, as well as a letter sent
electronically from a New Jersey-based non-profit organization called Save Barnegat Bay.

This Responsiveness Summary is divided into the following sections:

   I.      BACKGROUND OF COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

This section provides a brief introduction and the history of community involvement and interest
regarding the Site.

   II.     SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS AVTIVITIES

This section contains summaries of comments received by EPA during the public comment
period, as well as EPA’s responses to these comments.

This Responsiveness Summary also includes attachments that document public participation in
the remedy selection process. They are as follows:

Attachment A – Proposed Plan
Attachment B – Public Notice
Attachment C – Public Meeting Transcript
Attachment D – Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT

EPA developed a community relations plan in 1983 that was designed to inform public officials
and interested citizens of Site-related Superfund activities. Since the implementation of remedial
action at the Site, EPA has provided information to the public by conducting public meetings and
distributing fact sheets. EPA intends to maintain community engagement to keep the public
informed of the ongoing cleanup efforts at the Site.

SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

The EPA released the Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) Report and the EPA’s Proposed Plan to
amend the 1985 Record of Decision (ROD), as well as other documents considered by EPA to the
public for comment on July 11, 2025. EPA made these documents available to the public in the
administrative record file at the EPA Superfund Records Room in Region 2, New York and online
at: http://www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm. The notice of availability for these documents
was published in the Asbury Park Press on July 11, 2025, announcing the start of a 30-day public
comment period on these documents. In response to a request, EPA extended the end of the
comment period to September 11, 2025.

On July 17, 2025, EPA conducted a virtual public meeting via Zoom, to inform members of the
public and local officials about the alternatives presented in the Proposed Plan, to review current
and planned remedial activities at the Site, and to respond to any questions from area residents
and other attendees.

SUMMARY OF COMMENTS AND RESPONSES

A summary of the comments provided by the public during the virtual public meeting, as well as
EPA’s responses to those comments, follows:

Comment #1: A member of the public asked if any residential wells in Plumsted Township have
been affected by the Site, as well as if EPA plans to perform residential well sampling.

EPA Response: EPA does not plan to perform residential well sampling as part of the work
performed as a result of the remedy amendment, which is limited to addressing on-site soil
contamination. Potable wells near the Site were sampled during field investigations in 1984 for
the Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). Results from potable well sampling did not
suggest migration of groundwater contamination from the Site to potable wells. Following
sampling of the potable wells, remediation conducted at the Site consists of source removal,
groundwater treatment, as well as installation of a slurry wall surrounding the contaminated
groundwater plume. Monitoring wells located downgradient of the Site treatment area are
sampled routinely to monitor groundwater quality. Additionally, EPA conducts remedy reviews
every five years to evaluate whether the implementation and performance of the remedy remain
protective of human health and the environment. The last five-year review conducted for the
Site was completed in 2023 and it was determined that the performance of the groundwater

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remedy continues to be protective. This was based in part, on the existence of institutional
controls in the form of a deed notice which restricts groundwater use, as well as the fact that the
extent of groundwater contamination remains contained within the Site boundary.

Comment #2: A member of the public asked if EPA plans to collect soil samples at nearby
properties.

EPA Response: Soil borings were collected for the 1985 RI/FS to determine the extent of soil
contamination. The results of the 1985 RI/FS helped develop cleanup options that were
evaluated and ultimately led to the selected remedy outlined in the 1985 ROD. The preferred
remedial alternative presented in the virtual public meeting is focused on amending the 1985
ROD to address soil contamination on-Site, so EPA does not expect to collect soil samples at
properties that are not part of the Site.

Comment #3: A member of the public asked how many days a week will cleanup work occur and
if EPA would be on-site until the cleanup is complete.

EPA Response: EPA has an interagency agreement with the United States Army Corps of
Engineers (USACE) to perform oversight of construction for the environmental cleanup. During
construction, representatives of USACE and EPA will be on-site routinely. The timeline and
schedule for construction have not been established yet, as there are planning documents that
need to be developed before construction can begin. However, typically EPA’s environmental
clean-up projects are performed five days a week (Monday to Friday) absent extenuating
circumstances that would require the construction contractor to work over a weekend. If that
were the case, EPA would provide advance notification through its community engagement
process.

Comment #4: A member of the public asked if the Site is near Russo’s farm as they are concerned
about residential wells.

EPA Response: The Goose Farm Superfund Site is located near the property referenced by the
community member as Russo’s Farm. However, Goose Farm is not related to the Russo Farm
property. The Goose Farm property is used only for environmental cleanup purposes. It is EPA’s
understanding that the nearby property referenced in the question as Russo’s Farm is involved
in ongoing litigation with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP),
which is the lead environmental regulatory agency. Concerns regarding the Russo Farm property
should be brought to the attention of either the Ocean County Health Department and/or NJDEP.

A summary of the written comments submitted during the public comment period, as well as
EPA’s responses to those comments, follows:

Comment #5: Two nearby residents submitted written comments through email to state their
support for the selection of the preferred remedy.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA’s Response: EPA acknowledges the residents’ support for the preferred remedy. The
residents’ comments are included in Attachment D of this Responsiveness Summary.

Comment #6: A comment letter was submitted by a New Jersey-based, non-profit organization
called Save Barnegat Bay. The comment letter states the organization’s support for the selection
of EPA’s preferred remedy and maintenance of monitoring and institutional controls, as well as
a request for an increase in EPA’s community engagement.

EPA’s Response: EPA acknowledges Save Barnegat Bay’s support for the preferred remedy. EPA
will maintain monitoring and institutional controls at the Goose Farm Superfund Site.
Additionally, EPA will work to expand public engagement to further communicate the status of
the environmental clean-up to nearby residents and others who are interested. The comment
letter submitted by Save Barnegat Bay is included in Attachment D of this Responsiveness
Summary.

Comment #7: A comment letter was submitted electronically by the Plumsted Township
Environmental Commission. The comment letter expresses concern about groundwater
contamination, the condition of the existing groundwater treatment facility and a request to
continue long-term monitoring of surface and groundwater. The Commission stated that
Alternative 2 (EPA’s preferred remedy for PCB impacted soil) “…..appears to be the best option
for the clean-up with the removal of soils above 1.1 ppm of PCBs and associated LNAPL.”

EPA’s Response: EPA appreciates the comments submitted by the Plumsted Township
Environmental Commission and its support of EPA’s preferred remedy for PCB-impacted soil and
associated LNAPL.

Regarding the Commission’s comments on groundwater contamination, EPA’s last Five-Year
Review performed in 2023 noted that the extent of extent of elevated contamination outside of
the slurry wall is still contained within the Site boundary and not impacting potable wells, thus
achieving EPA’s remedial action objective. The extent of contamination is also bound by
downgradient wells across the stream. Benzene above human health-based screening levels has
been detected in surface water from the stream; however, the concentrations observed are not
likely to cause adverse impacts to ecological receptors, which is more representative of current
use especially considering the stream has observed to be dry at times during the review period
and is not used as a drinking water source. The implemented actions taken at the Site protect
human health and the environment because there is no exposure to soils onsite, institutional
controls prevent groundwater use and the groundwater plume remains contained within the Site
boundary.

Regarding the condition of the groundwater treatment facility, note that the groundwater
treatment system is nearing the end of its useful life; however, groundwater treatment is still
needed to achieve EPA’s remedial action objectives, so it will be reconstructed after the PCB and
LNAPL contamination has been addressed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

With respect to long-term surface water and groundwater monitoring, this monitoring will be
continued as part of the on-going implementation of the environmental clean-up of the Site.
The performance of the remedy for groundwater, surface water and soil will continue to be
assessed through EPA’s five-year review process.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT A


PROPOSED PLAN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Superfund Proposed Plan                                                     U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2

                                               Goose Farm Superfund Site                            *731464*
                                      Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey                         731464

                                                                                                                July 2025



EPA ANNOUNCES PROPOSED PLAN FOR REMEDY MODIFICATION
                                                                                          MARK YOUR CALENDAR
This Proposed Plan describes the remedial alternatives considered          PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD:
to address polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contaminated soil at the
                                                                           July 11, 2025 to August 11, 2025
Goose Farm Superfund Site (Site) and identifies the preferred
                                                                           EPA will accept written comments on the Proposed Plan
remedial alternative to amend the 1985 Record of Decision (1985            during the public comment period. Written comments
ROD) with the rationale for this preference. The Site is located at        must be postmarked no later than August 11, 2025. To
492 County Route 539, Plumsted Township, New Jersey (see Figure            request an extension, send a request in writing to Tiffany
1).                                                                        Harden by 5:00 PM on August 11, 2025.

This Proposed Plan was developed by the U.S. Environmental               VIRTUAL PUBLIC MEETING:
Protection Agency (EPA), the lead agency for the Site, in consultation   July 17, 2025 at 6:00 PM 8:00 PM
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection               EPA will hold a virtual public meeting to explain the
(NJDEP), the support agency. EPA is issuing this Proposed Plan as part   Proposed Plan and the alternatives presented in the
of its public participation responsibilities under Section 117(a) of the Focused Feasibility Study. Oral and written comments
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and                  will also be accepted at the meeting. The meeting will be
Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA, also known as                 held via Zoom. To register for the meeting, please visit:
Superfund), and Sections 300.430(f) and 300.435(c) of the National       https://usepa.zoomgov.com/meeting/register/FxdUS59
                                                                         FTw-P3YIHvn3YpA
Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). The
nature and extent of contamination at the Site and the remedial
                                                                         In addition, documents from the administrative record
alternatives summarized in this Proposed Plan are more fully             are available online at        website for the Goose Farm
described in the Focused Feasibility Study (FFS) Report, dated July Site: http://www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm
2025, as well as other documents in the administrative record file for
this Site. EPA encourages the public to review these documents to
gain a more comprehensive understanding of the Site, the Superfund activities that have been conducted, and the remedial
alternative that is being proposed.

                                                                                      ial alternative and to solicit public
comments pertaining to all of the remedial alternatives evaluated, including the preferred alternative.

The 1985 ROD selected groundwater extraction, treatment and reinjection resulting in soil flushing as the remedy. The
selected remedy also called for an extensive testing program during and after soil flushing to determine the extent of
contamination in the former drum pit area (also described as a waste pit area); based on this program, EPA was to
determine the need, if any, to remediate PCBs including the need to cap the Site. If such remediation was deemed
                                                                                                     additional remedial
actions required to address PCB contamination in soil. This Proposed Plan provides the anticipated supplemental remedy
selection process.

As early as 2003, additional soil investigations were completed at the Site to characterize residual PCB soil contamination.
As a result of these soil investigations conducted concurrently with the ongoing groundwater treatment operation, PCBs
in soil were detected at concentrations exceeding the Site-specific cleanup value described in the sections below.

This plan evaluates alternatives for addressing PCB contamination in soil identified at the Site. The preferred alternative
for amending the 1985 ROD is Alternative 2, removal and off-site disposal at an EPA-approved facility of all soils containing
PCB concentrations greater than the New Jersey Non-Residential Soil Remediation Standard for the Ingestion-Dermal
Exposure Pathway (NJNRSRS) of 1.1 milligrams/kilogram (mg/kg), as well as light non-aqueous phase liquid (LNAPL) that

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

is co-located with PCB contaminated soil. This alternative would remove source material remaining on the Site, specifically,
PCB-impacted soil above the current NJNRSRS, and LNAPL that acts as a source of contamination to groundwater. Apart
from the changes to the remedy to address PCB contamination in soil and LNAPL, no other aspects of the 1985 ROD
remedy are being changed.

This Proposed Plan describes the preferred remedy for PCB contamination in soil at the Site. Changes to the preferred
alternative, or a change from the preferred remedy to another remedial alternative described in this Proposed Plan may
be made by EPA in consultation with NJDEP. If public comments or additional data indicate that such a change will result
in a more appropriate remedial action. EPA will make the final decision regarding the selected remedy after EPA has taken
into consideration all public comments. For this reason, EPA is soliciting public comments on all of the alternatives
considered in the Proposed Plan and on the detailed analysis section of the FFS Report because EPA may select an
alternative other than the preferred alternative.

COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION PROCESS

EPA provides an opportunity for the public to participate in selection of the remedy for each Superfund site. To this end,
EPA has made this Proposed Plan available to the public for a public comment period which begins on July 11, 2025 and
concludes on August 11, 2025.

EPA will hold a virtual public meeting on July 17, 2025 to present the conclusions of the FFS, to elaborate further on the
reasons for recommending the preferred alternative, and to receive public comments. To register for the meeting, please
visit: https://usepa.zoomgov.com/meeting/register/FxdUS59FTw-P3YIHvn3YpA.

Comments received at the virtual public meeting as well as written comments received during the public comment
period, together with EPA’s responses, will be documented in the Responsiveness Summary section of the ROD
Amendment, the document that formalizes the selection of the amended remedy.

Written comments on the Proposed Plan should be addressed to:

                                                      Tiffany Harden
                                                 Remedial Project Manger
                                          U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                                 290 Broadway, 19th Floor
                                            New York, New York 10007-1866
                                                Telephone: (212) 637-4425
                                             Email: Harden.Tiffany@epa.gov

SCOPE AND ROLE OF ACTION

The scope and role of the preferred alternative is to modify the remedy selected in the 1985 ROD to address PCB
contamination in soil remaining on the Site that requires additional remediation. Site remediation activities are sometimes
separated into different or discrete phases of work otherwise known as operable units (OUs) so that remediation of
environmental media or geographic areas of a site can proceed separately, whether sequentially or concurrently, resulting
in a more efficient or expeditious cleanup of the entire site. There is only one operable unit for the Goose Farm Site. As
discussed in more detail below, the groundwater remedy remains unchanged by this proposed ROD Amendment except
that the pump and treat system will need to be rebuilt as part of the preferred alternative. It is expected that the new
groundwater treatment system will perform more efficiently than the existing system.

As required in the 1985 ROD, additional PCB testing has been performed to determine the need and extent of additional
remediation. The strategy for further remediation at the Site will also include addressing LNAPL co-located with PCBs in
                                                             2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

soil, which acts as a source to groundwater and constitutes a principal threat waste. The response is considered the final
remedy for PCB-contaminated soil at the Site.

SITE BACKGROUND

Site Description

The Site is located on Block 58, Lots 1 and 12, and Block 46, Lot 1 in the Township of Plumsted, Ocean County, New Jersey
approximately two miles northeast of the town of New Egypt. The Site lies approximately one mile north of the
intersection of County Routes 528 and 539 adjacent to an intermittent stream which is a tributary of Lahaway Creek (see
Figure 2). The Site is approximately 6.6 acres, of which, 1.1 acres is undergoing groundwater remediation.

The Site lies in a rural area characterized predominantly by agricultural land use and low-density residential development.
Residential homes lie within one-quarter mile of the Site and rely on private wells for potable water. The most highly
developed area near the Site is New Egypt, which is approximately two miles southwest of the Site. Hornerstown is located
approximately one-mile northwest of the Site. Groundwater is used as drinking water supply throughout Plumsted
Township and the surrounding area. Hornerstown is served by private wells, while New Egypt is served by the New Egypt
Water Company. Regional groundwater at the Site flows to the north-northwest.

Site Geology/Hydrogeology

The Goose Farm Site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic province. This province is characterized by
unconsolidated deposits consisting of alternating layers of clay, silt, sand, and gravel that outcrop in parallel northeast-
southwest striking lands and dip gently to the southeast. Surficial deposits at the Site are of the Kirkwood formation. The
Kirkwood, in turn, is underlain by the Manasquan and Vincentown formations.

The Kirkwood formation is composed of a lower dark silty layer and upper sandy layer in the outcrop area. The direction
down the slope of the formation consists of thick clay and sand beds. The Kirkwood is the most developed aquifer in Ocean
County, primarily in the coastal area. The Manasquan formation consists of upper fine sand to clay and a lower glauconitic
clay. The Manasquan formation is not considered an important aquifer in Ocean County. The Vincentown formation
consists of an upper calcite-clay and sand member and a lower glauconitic sand member. It is utilized by typically low
yielding domestic wells in its outcrop area.

Underlying the Vincentown are the Hornerstown sand, Red Bank sand, Navesink, Mount Laurel sand, Marshalltown
formation, Englishtown formation, Merchantville formation, Woodbury clay, and the Raritan and Magothy formations.

Site History

The Site is owned by the potentially responsible party, Morton International Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Rohm &
Haas which is a wholly owned subsidiary of The Dow Chemical Company. Morton Thiokol Chemical Company, a
manufacturer of polysulfide rubber and solid rocket fuel propellant, used the Site to dispose of hazardous wastes from
the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s. The majority of wastes were dumped into a pit dug through the fine sand.

Initial Response Actions

In January 1980, during an investigation of pesticide contamination of local drinking water wells, the Ocean County Health
Department informed NJDEP of the existence of the Site, as well as several other disposal sites in the area. From February
to June 1980, NJDEP investigated the Site. The investigation included the installation and sampling of 17 groundwater
monitoring wells, and metal detection and resistivity surveys. The results of this work indicated that a contaminated
groundwater plume of organic and inorganic compounds, which originated from the waste pit area, was migrating
                                                             3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

northward toward the nearby stream. During the next phase of the investigation, NJDEP installed and sampled 34
additional monitoring wells. The data indicated that the contaminated groundwater plume was less than 140 feet wide
and approximately 35 feet deep.

In September 1980, NJDEP initiated remedial activities at the Site to prevent further migration of the groundwater plume
to the nearby stream. Approximately 5,000 containers of waste were removed from the waste pit area as well as an
estimated 9,000 gallons of bulk liquids. These wastes were disposed of off-Site. In addition, NJDEP installed a well-point
collection and spray irrigation system downgradient of the waste pit area and upgradient of the stream. Following the
collection and treatment of the groundwater, the treated effluent was reinjected into the aquifer. In March 1981, NJDEP
terminated the operation of the treatment system. During its operation, the system treated approximately 7,800,000
gallons of contaminated groundwater.

The final component of the NJDEP interim remedy included excavation and off-Site disposal of contaminated soil from the
waste pit area. Approximately 3,500 tons of soil and an additional 12 drums of PCB waste were transported to an off-Site
facility for disposal.

Remedial Actions and Status of Implementation

The Site was placed on the National Priorities List (NPL) in September 1983. On September 27, 1985, EPA issued a ROD
selecting a remedy to address groundwater and soil contamination at the Site. The remedy consisted of the following
components:

    1. Flush the contaminated soil and groundwater underlying the Site, recovering the groundwater and treating it on-
       Site prior to reinjection in the soil, with pilot studies to be conducted during design to optimize the treatment
       system components.
    2. Following soil flushing and groundwater recovery and treatment, conduct an extensive testing program to
       determine the need to cap the Site.
    3. During and after soil flushing and groundwater recovery and treatment, conduct an extensive testing program to
       determine the extent of PCB contamination in the former drum pit area. Based on this program, determine the
       need, if any, to remediate PCB-contaminated soil.

In 1988, the United States, on behalf of EPA, and NJDEP entered into a Consent Decree (CD) with Morton Thiokol, Inc. and
several other parties, under which Morton Thiokol, Inc.1 agreed to undertake the remedial design (RD)/remedial action
(RA) for the Site. The RD was conducted in conformance with the ROD and Scope of Work (SOW), which was included in
the CD. The CD and the SOW specified that prior to soil flushing, there would be excavation and treatment and/or off-Site
disposal of all soil with total PCB concentrations greater than, or equal to, 5 parts per million (ppm), and backfilling of the
excavation with soil that contains less than 1 ppm of PCBs.

The Site cleanup was conducted in two phases. The excavation and disposal of all soils began in November 1988 and
concluded in July 1989. Approximately 9,000 cubic yards of soil were removed and disposed of at an off-Site facility. The
second phase of cleanup included the design, construction, and operation of a groundwater extraction, treatment and soil
flushing system, and the evaluation of the use of in-situ biodegradation to enhance the efficiency of the soil
flushing/groundwater treatment system. Morton Thiokol, Inc. conducted pre-design field investigations including
groundwater, soil, and surface water sampling. A treatability study was conducted to determine if in-situ biodegradation
was a viable option for enhancing the efficiency of the soil flushing/groundwater treatment system. The study indicated
in-situ biodegradation was not an appropriate technology for addressing groundwater contamination at the Site.


1
  Rohm & Haas Chemicals, LLC is performing the work under the CD as successor-in-interest to certain liabilities of Morton Thiokol,
Inc./Morton International, Inc.
                                                               4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

From September 1992 to April 1993, Morton Thiokol, Inc. constructed the groundwater remediation system which
included installation of the groundwater extraction and treatment system and infiltration trenches to support soil flushing
and installation of the slurry wall. During this period, the installation of the slurry wall was completed. In June 1993, the
Site achieved construction completion status upon EPA’s issuance of the Preliminary Close-out Report and
commencement of the operation of the groundwater remediation system. EPA and NJDEP determined that the remedial
action construction activities were completed in accordance with design specifications.

Site Characteristics

The 1985 ROD required that residual PCB soil testing be performed prior to, during, and after the soil flushing, groundwater
recovery and treatment operations. The results of PCB testing were to be used to determine if any additional remediation
would be required, including the need for a final cap at the Site.

Consistent with the 1985 ROD, additional PCB soil testing has been performed at the Site by the performing party under
EPA’s oversight, including an evaluation of the presence of LNAPL. During a 2013 in-situ chemical oxidation pilot study,
LNAPL was encountered in the vicinity of the treatment plant building. Sample analysis of LNAPL collected indicated a
petroleum product that most closely resembled a mix of gasoline, motor oil and weathered kerosene. The LNAPL was
believed to be related to impacted soil within the former waste pit area that may not have been completely removed in
the 1980s. Further investigations to characterize the extent of LNAPL contamination were conducted. LNAPL was observed
in an area of high total organic compounds (TOC) near the treatment plant building where an on-site dissolved phase
volatile organic compound (VOC) and semi-volatile organic compound (SVOC) groundwater plume extends north towards
the slurry wall and in the general direction of groundwater flow. The extent of LNAPL in soil is shown in Figure 3 and is
generally distributed around the treatment plant building. The LNAPL has the potential to act as an ongoing source of
groundwater contamination.

During field investigations to delineate LNAPL, PCB-impacted soil above the Site-specific criterion of 5 ppm specified in
the SOW were found co-located with LNAPL. Thus, in addition to the soil investigations for LNAPL, sampling and analysis
for PCBs were also conducted. PCB concentrations in soil above 5 ppm (or 5 mg/kg) were found around the treatment
building and are likely underneath, as well as in shallow soils (i.e., depths less than 5 ft) to the west of infiltration trench
B and adjacent to the south-western portion of the slurry wall. Based on the results of these investigations, the areas with
PCB-impacted soil were found to be located in areas extending beyond the boundary of the former source removal area
(i.e., waste pit area). In an effort to understand the volume of soil containing PCB concentrations greater than the NJNRSRS
of 1.1 mg/kg2 and the Site-specific criterion of 5 mg/kg, multiple soil investigations were conducted during 2023 and 2024.
As a result of the supplemental investigations, soil containing PCBs ranging from concentrations below 1.1 mg/kg to a
maximum of 80 mg/kg were detected. The locations of the sampling investigations and of PCB-impacted soil are depicted
in Figure 4. Some areas exhibited PCB concentrations greater than 50 mg/kg at depths below 15 ft, which is the depth of
former waste pit area excavation. Additional investigations will be required prior to remedial action to fully delineate the
volume of PCB contamination subject to remediation.

Current and Potential Future Land and Resource Uses

The Site is currently only used for the ongoing remediation activities. Historically, it was owned by Morton Thiokol, Inc.
and used as a hazardous waste disposal site from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s. Rohm & Haas Chemicals, LLC, the entity
performing the remedial action, acquired the stock of Morton International, Inc. in 1999 and is a successor-in-interest to
certain liabilities of Morton Thiokol, Inc./Morton International, Inc. In accordance with the CD, a deed restriction has been
recorded to prevent use of the property for residential purposes, prevent installation of potable wells within the

2
 The SOW identified less than 1 ppm as the concentration of PCBs allowed for imported clean soil to cover the contaminated area.
However, for purposes of delineating soil contamination, EPA concluded it would be appropriate to use 1.1 mg/kg, which is the
current NJDEP non-residential soil remediation cleanup standard for dermal contact.
                                                                 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

boundaries of the slurry wall and to prevent actions that would be inconsistent with the remedy. The Site is zoned rural
agricultural. EPA anticipates that the future use of the Site will be consistent with the current land use and restrictions.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTE

The NCP establishes an expectation that EPA will use treatment to address the principal threats posed by a site wherever
practicable (NCP Section 300.430(a)(1)(iii)(A)). The "principal threat" concept is applied to the characterization of "source
materials" at a Superfund site. A source material is material that includes or contains hazardous substances, pollutants or
contaminants that act as a reservoir for migration of contamination to ground water, surface water or air, or acts as a
source for direct exposure. Contaminated groundwater generally is not considered to be a source material; however, Non-
Aqueous Phase Liquids (NAPLs) in groundwater may be viewed as source material. Principal threat wastes are those source
materials considered to be highly toxic or highly mobile that generally cannot be reliably contained or would present a
significant risk to human health or the environment should exposure occur. The decision to treat these wastes is made on
a site-specific basis through a detailed analysis of the alternatives using EPA’s nine remedy selection criteria. This analysis
provides a basis for making a statutory finding that the remedy employs treatment as a principal element.

The presence of LNAPL that acts as a source to groundwater has been delineated in the vicinity of the treatment plant
building. Thus, this is considered a principal threat waste at the Site.

RISK SUMMARY

NJDEP conducted the remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) to determine the nature and extent of the
groundwater and soil contamination. NJDEP completed the RI/FS in 1985 and based on the results, EPA and NJDEP
concluded that groundwater and soil at the Site were contaminated with significant levels of organic and inorganic
contaminants. Contaminants such as PCBs, benzene, toluene, xylene, and cis-1,2-dichloroethene were identified as major
sources of soil and groundwater contamination.

A Health Assessment for the Site was completed in 1989 by the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR)
based on the findings of the RI/FS and ROD. While the ATSDR Health Assessment primarily focused on potential risks
associated with exposure to groundwater, PCBs were identified as a concern in on-Site subsurface soil at depths ranging
from two to twenty feet below ground surface (ft bgs), with concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 160 ppm. Soil sampling at
that time in the former waste pit area showed total PCB concentrations ranging from 5 to 478 ppm. Subsequent sampling
for PCBs in on-Site soils detected PCB concentrations up to 80 ppm.

The ATSDR Health Assessment concluded that there is potential on-site exposure to Site related contaminants (including
PCBs) in soil via dermal, inhalation, and oral exposure (incidental ingestion). The potentially exposed population would be
unprotected workers engaged in remedial cleanup activities at the Site. ATSDR concluded that the remedial action selected
in the ROD should be protective of public health if properly implemented.

Following implementation of the 1985 ROD remedy, PCBs in soil remain at concentrations that exceed the remedial goals.
Additionally, LNAPL in saturated soils, which constitutes principal threat waste, is co-located with PCBs. PCBs and LNAPL
would present a potentially significant risk to human health and the environment should exposure occur. Based on the
results of the multiple investigations conducted at the Site described above, EPA has determined that the actual or
threatened releases of hazardous substances at and from the Site, if not addressed by the preferred remedy or one of the
other active measures considered, may present a threat to human health or welfare or the environment.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES

Remedial Action Objectives (RAOs) are specific goals to protect human health and the environment. These objectives are
based on available information and standards such as applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs), to-
                                                              6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

be-considered (TBC) advisories, criteria and guidance, and site-specific risk-based levels and background (i.e., reference
area) concentrations.

The 1985 ROD identified RAOs for the Site. The RAOs for the Site include source control, as well as prevention of
contaminant migration.

The RAOs for source control established for the Site in the 1985 ROD are as follows:

    •   Remove, treat or contain contaminants,
    •   Control general migration pathways,
    •   Control release of volatile compounds in air,
    •   Control water infiltration,
    •   Control soil erosion; and
    •   Control direct contact.

The RAOs for the management of migration are as follows:

    •   Mitigate the potential contamination of potable water supplies, which is being addressed through the on-going
        operation of the groundwater treatment system; and
    •   Prevent the movement of contaminants to other areas where exposure to these compounds through direct
        contact may occur.

EPA has concluded that these RAOs are still appropriate. To achieve the RAOs for this action, EPA has identified the
NJNRSRS for PCBs of 1.1 mg/kg as the preliminary remediation goal (PRG). Co-located LNAPL will also be addressed by this
action. Cleanup levels for the groundwater portion of the remedy are unchanged by this action.

For purpose of evaluating alternatives to address PCB-impacted soil as described in the 1985 ROD, EPA established the
following RAO:

    •   Address PCBs in soil to levels that are protective of site workers.

SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

Section 121(b)(1) of CERCLA requires that remedial actions must be protective of human health and the environment, be
cost-effective, comply with ARARs, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies and resource
recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practicable. Section 121(b)(1) also establishes a preference for remedial
actions that employ, as a principal element, treatment to reduce permanently and significantly the volume, toxicity, or
mobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants at a site. Section 121(d) further specifies that a
remedial action must attain a level or standard of control of the hazardous substances, pollutants, and contaminants that
at least attains ARARs under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA §121(d)(4).

Potential technologies applicable to soil remediation were identified and screened using the effectiveness,
implementability, and cost criteria, with emphasis on effectiveness. Those technologies that passed the initial screening
were assembled into alternatives. Detailed descriptions of the remedial alternatives for addressing the PCB-contaminated
soil and LNAPL can be found in the FFS Report, dated July 2025, which is in the administrative record file. The FFS Report
presents three alternatives, including a no further action alternative.

Note that there are no remedial action alternatives developed with treatment as a primary component. Historically, there
were two treatability studies performed to evaluate treatment technologies to address soil and groundwater. One was
                                                              7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for in-situ biodegradation and the other was for in-situ chemical oxidation. The main conclusion of the in-situ
biodegradation treatability study was that it was not an appropriate technology to treat the soil and groundwater
contamination. The conclusion of the in-situ chemical oxidation treatability study was that the technology would not be
effective in treating the contaminants in the waste pit area, that includes LNAPL considered to be a principal threat waste
at the Site. Therefore, the remedial action alternatives developed and evaluated (with the exception of the No Further
Action alternative) were limited to removal of contaminated material.

The duration for each alternative reflects only the time required to construct or implement the remedy and does not
include the time required to negotiate with any responsible parties, design the remedy, procure contracts for design and
construction, or conduct operation and maintenance at the Site.

Common Elements

With the exception of the No Further Action alternative (Alternative 1), all of the alternatives include the following
common components:

Pre-existing institutional and engineering controls: The Site has a pre-existing deed restriction which prevents residential
use and actions that would be inconsistent with the remedy. A perimeter fence with a locked gate surrounds the Site
which limits access. These controls will be maintained by the property owner for all alternatives.

Five-Year Reviews: Five-year reviews would be conducted as a component of the alternatives that would leave
contamination in place above levels that allow for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. A review of the remedial
action pursuant to CERCLA Section 121(c) would be conducted five years after the commencement of the remedial action
to ensure that the remedy continues to provide adequate protection to human health and the environment because this
remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining on-Site above health-based levels that allow for unlimited use and
unrestricted exposure. The proposed remedy will remove contaminated soil with PCB concentrations greater than the
NJNRSRS of 1.1 mg/kg, which means that future use cannot be unlimited (consistent with the existing deed restriction).
In addition, groundwater contamination addressed through the operation of the groundwater treatment system requires
maintenance of restrictions on groundwater use. The last five-year review for the Site was completed on July 17, 2023.
The next five-year review will be completed by July 17, 2028.

Alternative 1: No Further Action

Capital Cost:                                            $0
Annual O&M Costs:                                        $0
Present-Worth Cost:                                      $0
Construction Time:                                       Not Applicable
Estimated time to reach RAOs:                            Not Applicable

The NCP requires that a “No Action” alternative be developed as a baseline for comparing other remedial alternatives.
Under this alternative, there would be no further remedial actions conducted at the Site to remediate contaminated media
or otherwise mitigate the migration of contamination that poses unacceptable risks to human health and the
environment. This alternative does not include monitoring or institutional controls or five-year reviews.

Alternative 2: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater than 1.1 mg/kg and Co-
located LNAPL

Capital Cost: $6,687,000
Annual O&M Costs: $0
Present-Worth Cost: $6,687,000
                                                             8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Construction Time: 10 months
Estimated time to reach RAOs: 10 months

Alternative 2 consists of excavation of soil containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg in conjunction with
excavation of co-located LNAPL and disposal at an off-site EPA-approved facility (see Figure 5). The estimated volume of
PCB contaminated soils to be excavated is 5,939 cubic yards. This volume will be updated based on the results of additional
sampling to be performed during the design. Contaminated soil containing concentrations of PCBs 50 ppm or greater will
be disposed of in accordance with Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) requirements at an EPA-approved hazardous waste
landfill.

Clean soils above the impacted zones would be stockpiled and designated for reuse as clean fill once tested and confirmed
to be suitable for re-use. The maximum estimated depth of excavation to remove impacted soil in this proposed
alternative is 20 ft bgs. As such, EPA expects dewatering would be necessary. Temporary sheet piling installation, as well
as shoring, is expected to be necessary for deeper excavation areas extending below the water table. Liquids de-watered
from the excavation(s) will be treated by the existing on-Site groundwater treatment system to the extent possible;
however, to reach PCB-impacted soil that is likely beneath the treatment building, the groundwater treatment system and
building would need to be demolished and reconstructed.3 Therefore, any liquids de-watered following the demolition of
the groundwater treatment system would have to be transported for off-site disposal at an EPA-approved facility.
Consistent with the migration potential during previous periods of downtime of the groundwater treatment system, it is
not expected that off-site migration of contamination would occur during reconstruction of the groundwater treatment
system. Increased groundwater monitoring during this period would be performed to confirm this is the case. In the event
off-site migration of contamination occurs, consideration would be given to measures such as installation of a temporary
groundwater treatment system. Post excavation samples would be collected as necessary to verify that the cleanup goals
are met. Following the removal of LNAPL impacted soil and soil with concentrations exceeding 1.1 mg/kg of PCBs,
excavations would be backfilled with clean backfill material, stockpiled clean soil, and topsoil with vegetation to grade.

Alternative 3: Excavation and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater than 5 mg/kg, and Co-
located LNAPL, and Placement of an Exposure Barrier for PCBs between 1.1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg

Capital Cost: $4,262,651
Total O&M Costs: $3,360,186
Present-Worth Cost: $7,623,000
Construction Time: 7 months
Estimated time to reach RAOs: 7 months

Under this alternative, excavation would be conducted to a maximum depth of 18 ft bgs to remove soil containing PCB
concentrations exceeding 5 mg/kg (the clean-up value established in the CD) and LNAPL impacted soil (see Figure 6). The
estimated volume of PCB contaminated soils to be excavated is approximately 1,022 cubic yards. As with Alternative 2,
contaminated soil containing concentrations of PCBs 50 mg/kg or greater would be disposed of in accordance with TSCA
requirements at an EPA-approved hazardous waste landfill.

EPA anticipates that dewatering would be required for deeper excavations as well as sheet piling and shoring similar to
Alternative 2. Dewatered liquids would be managed as in Alternative 2 (i.e., via the existing on-site groundwater treatment
system). Soil exceedances above 1.1 mg/kg and less than 5 mg/kg of PCBs would be left in place and a permeable cover
(e.g., geotextile) would be installed, followed by clean fill and topsoil with vegetation to grade. Annual monitoring and
reporting of the permeable cover would be performed to ensure continued protection of human health from direct
contact risks.

3
 The treatment system is nearing the end of its useful life, but groundwater treatment is still needed to achieve RAOs, so it will be
reconstructed after the PCB and LNAPL contamination has been addressed.
                                                                    9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES

                                                                            EVALUATION CRITERIA FOR SUPERFUND REMEDIAL
During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives, each               ALTERNATIVES
alternative is assessed against nine evaluation criteria, namely, overall
                                                                            Threshold Criteria
protection of human health and the environment, compliance with
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements, long-term              Overall Protectiveness of Human Health and the
                                                                            Environment evaluates whether and how an alternative
effectiveness and permanence, reduction of toxicity, mobility, or           eliminates, reduces, or controls threats to public health
volume through treatment, short-term effectiveness, implementability,       and the environment through institutional controls,
cost, and state and community acceptance. Refer to the text box for a       engineering controls, or treatment.
description of the evaluation criteria.                                     Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and
                                                                            Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) evaluates whether
                                                                            the alternative meets federal and state environmental
This section of the Proposed Plan profiles the relative performance of      statutes, regulations, and other requirements that
each alternative against the nine criteria, noting how each compare to      pertain to the Site, or whether a waiver is justified.
the other options under consideration. A detailed analysis of               Primary Balancing Criteria
alternatives can be found in the FFS Report.
                                                                            Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence considers the
                                                                            ability of an alternative to maintain protection of human
Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment                      health and the environment over time.
                                                                            Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume (TMV) of
Alternative 1 would provide no additional protection of human health        Contaminants through Treatment evaluates an
and the environment compared to current levels of protection at the         alternative's use of treatment to reduce the harmful
                                                                            effects of principal contaminants, their ability to move
Site.                                                                       in the environment, and the amount of contamination
                                                                            present.
Alternative 2 provides protection by removing all soil with                 Short-term Effectiveness considers the length of time
concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg PCBs through excavation and           needed to implement an alternative and the risks the
off-site disposal. Alternative 3 provides protection by removing PCB        alternative poses to workers, the community, and the
impacted soil with concentrations greater than 5 mg/kg through              environment during implementation.

excavation and off-site disposal with placement of a permeable soil         Implementability considers the technical and
cover in areas with soil containing PCB concentrations between 1.1          administrative feasibility of implementing the alternative,
                                                                            including factors such as the relative availability of goods
mg/kg and 5 mg/kg to aid in restricting potential exposure via direct       and services.
contact. Under either Alternative 2 or Alternative 3, the existing deed
                                                                            Cost includes estimated capital and annual operations and
restriction will provide notice of the PCB contamination that remains at    maintenance costs, as well as present worth cost.
the Site and restrict future use to non-residential uses or uses that are   Present worth cost is the total cost of an alternative
consistent with the remedy.                                                 over time in terms of today's dollar value. Cost estimates
                                                                            are expected to be accurate within a range of +50 to -30
                                                                            percent.
Both Alternatives 2 and 3 will result in excavation of LNAPL that acts as
                                                                            Modifying Criteria
a source of contamination to groundwater that is co-located with the
PCB contamination being removed and will be protective of human             State/Support Agency Acceptance considers whether the
                                                                            State agrees with EPA's analyses and recommendations, as
health and the environment.                                                 described in the RI/FS and Proposed Plan.
                                                                            Community Acceptance considers whether the local
Compliance with Applicable          or   Relevant    and    Appropriate     community agrees with EPA's analyses and preferred
Requirements (ARARs)                                                        alternative. Comments received on the Proposed Plan are
                                                                            an important indicator of community acceptance.
Alternative 1 would not comply with ARARs because no further action
would be taken to address the PCB impacted soil or LNAPL.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would comply with ARARs. Alternative 2 would meet the NJNRSRS for the Ingestion-Dermal Exposure
Pathway, which is a chemical-specific ARAR for PCBs, through excavation and off-site disposal of soils with PCB
concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg. Alternative 3 would meet this ARAR by addressing the direct contact pathway with
the placement of a permeable soil cover in areas with soil containing PCB concentrations between 1.1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg.

                                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Alternatives 2 and 3 would meet action-specific ARARs, such as the TSCA regulations for the handling and disposal of soil
containing PCBs.

Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

Alternative 1 would provide no long-term effectiveness or permanence as no further action would be taken to address
the PCB-impacted soil or co-located LNAPL.

Alternative 2 would provide a higher degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence than Alternative 3, since
impacted soil with PCB concentrations exceeding the NJNRSRS of 1.1 mg/kg would be removed from the Site and
transported to an EPA-approved disposal facility whereas Alternative 3 would provide only for soils exceeding 5 mg/kg
PCB concentration to be removed. Soils containing concentrations of PCBs between the NJNRSRS of 1.1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg
would be covered with a cap, which would require long term maintenance to remain effective and permanent.

Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment

Alternative 1 would not contribute to the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment because no further
action would be taken.

Alternatives 2 and 3 would reduce the mobility and volume of PCBs in soil, and co-located LNAPL, through excavation and
off-site disposal rather than through treatment. The volume of contaminated soil removed and disposed of off-site would
be greater under Alternative 2 which would remove approximately 5,939 cubic yards of soil containing PCB concentrations
exceeding 1.1 mg/kg, while Alternative 3 would only remove approximately 1,022 cubic yards of soils with concentrations
exceeding 5 mg/kg. For Alternative 2, the PCB-contaminated soil at concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg and less than
50 mg/kg would be transported off-site and disposed at an EPA-approved disposal facility and would not undergo
treatment. For Alternative 3, the PCB contaminated soil at concentrations greater than 5 mg/kg and less than 50 mg/kg
would be transported off-site and disposed at an EPA-approved disposal facility and would not undergo treatment. For
both Alternatives 2 and 3, PCB impacted soil identified at concentrations greater than 50 mg/kg would be disposed in
accordance with TSCA requirements, which could include treatment off-site prior to disposal at an EPA-approved
hazardous waste landfill, depending on the characteristics of the remediation waste and the requirements of the disposal
facility.

Short-Term Effectiveness

Alternative 1 would not have any short-term impacts to workers, the surrounding community, or the environment because
there would be no further action taken at the Site.

Alternatives 2 and 3 consist of the removal of soil exceeding the specified PCB concentration criteria, and co-located
LNAPL. Both include some potential for exposure to PCBs by workers, surrounding communities, and the environment due
to the handling and transportation of PCB contaminated soil. The potential for exposure is greater for Alternative 2
because a larger volume of PCB-contaminated soil would be excavated for off-site disposal compared to Alternative 3.

For both Alternatives 2 and 3, Site-specific plans (e.g., health and safety, excavation and waste handling, and traffic
controls) can be implemented to address the short-term effectiveness considerations and minimize the impacts to the
workers, surrounding community, and the environment.

Implementability

The means and methods for excavation and off-site disposal involved in Alternatives 2 and 3, as well as capping for
Alternative 3, are typical and reliable remedial measures to address PCB-impacted soils and LNAPL. Both Alternatives 2
                                                           11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and 3 are readily implementable. Additional preparation, as well as engineering and safety controls, will be required for
Alternatives 2 and 3 due to the depth of the proposed excavation area (18 to 20 ft bgs), including the use of sheet pile
and/or shoring, as well as the stockpiling and re-use of clean soil.

Cost

The total estimated present worth cost was calculated for each alternative using a 7% discount rate. The total cost for
Alternative 1 is $0 for no additional remedial actions. Alternative 2 has an estimated present worth cost of $6,687,000 for
excavation of LNAPL and soil containing PCBs greater than 1.1 mg/kg. The total estimated present worth cost for
Alternative 3 is $7,623,000 for excavation of LNAPL and soil containing PCBs greater than 5 mg/kg and an exposure barrier
for PCBs between 1.1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg.

State/Support Agency Acceptance

The State of New Jersey concurs with the EPA’s preferred alternative as presented in this Proposed Plan.

Community Acceptance

Community acceptance will be evaluated after the public comment period ends and will be described in the
Responsiveness Summary section of the ROD Amendment for the Site. Based on public comment, the preferred alternative
could be modified from the version presented in this Proposed Plan, or another alternative selected.

PREFERRED REMEDY

Based upon an evaluation of the remedial alternatives, EPA, in consultation with NJDEP, proposes Alternative 2, Excavation
and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater than 1.1 mg/kg and Co-located LNAPL, as the preferred
remedial alternative for the soil contamination at the Site.

The Preferred Alternative has the following key components:

    •   Excavation of soils containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 mg/kg,
    •   Excavation of co-located LNAPL impacted soil, and
    •   Off-Site disposal.

In addition, a pre-existing IC in the form of a deed restriction and an engineering control in the form of a perimeter fence
surrounding the Site will be maintained to limit access.

Five-year reviews would be conducted since contamination would remain above levels that allow for unlimited use and
unrestricted exposure.

The total estimated present-worth cost for the Preferred Alternative is $6,687,000. This is an engineering cost estimate
that is expected to be within the range of plus 50 percent to minus 30 percent of the actual project cost. Further detail on
the cost is presented the FFS Report.

Basis for the Remedy Preference

Alternative 2 was selected as the Preferred Alternative for addressing PCB contamination in soil as it would result in the
greatest amount of contaminated material being addressed at a lower cost. LNAPL, considered a principal threat waste
and co-located with PCB-contaminated soil, will also be addressed. In addition, Alternative 2 would provide the highest
degree of long-term effectiveness and permanence since impacted soil with PCB concentrations exceeding the NJNRSRS
                                                            12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of 1.1 mg/kg would be removed from the Site and transported to an EPA-approved disposal facility. Alternative 3 would
also provide for overall protection of human health and the environment, as well as long-term effectiveness and
permanence. However, under Alternative 3 PCB impacted soil between 1.1 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg would be capped and
remain on-Site and have long-term maintenance requirements.

Based upon the information currently available, EPA, in conjunction with NJDEP believes that Alternative 2, Excavation
and Off-Site Disposal of Soil Containing PCB Concentrations Greater than 1.1 mg/kg and Co-located LNAPL, would meet
the threshold criteria and would provide the best balance of tradeoffs among the alternatives with respect to the balancing
criteria. The preferred alternative would satisfy the statutory requirements of CERCLA Section 121: (1) be protective of
human health and the environment; (2) comply with ARARs; (3) be cost-effective; and (4) utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies or resource recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable. However, given
the preferred remedy involves excavation and off-Site disposal of PCB contaminated soil, it would not meet the statutory
preference for the use of treatment as a principal element, although treatment may be required prior to disposal. With
respect to the two modifying criteria, state acceptance and community acceptance, NJDEP does concur with the preferred
alternative, and community acceptance will be evaluated upon the close of the public comment period.


 For further information on the Goose Farm Superfund Site, please contact:

 Tiffany Harden                              Shereen Kandil
 Remedial Project Manager                    Community Involvement Coordinator
 (212) 637-4425                              (212) 637-4333
 Harden.Tiffany@epa.gov                      Kandil.Shereen@epa.gov


 The administrative record file, which contains copies of the Proposed Plan and support documentation, is available online at
 http://www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm and at the following location:

 USEPA – Region 2
 Superfund Records Center
 290 Broadway, 18th Floor
 New York, New York 10007
 (212) 637-4308
 Hours: Monday – Friday: 9AM – 5PM (by appointment)

 Written comments on this Proposed Plan should be mailed to Tiffany Harden by August 11, 2025 at the address below or sent
 via email.

 Tiffany Harden
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
 290 Broadway, 19th Floor
 New York, New York 10007-1866
 Telephone: (212) 637-4425
 Email: Harden.Tiffany@epa.gov


 EPA’s website for the Goose Farm Superfund Site
 http://www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm




                                                                13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                               . ,,,    ,

                                                                                           -. ..::.'"
                                                                                                    '

                                                                                                 .
                                                                                              ·-~?'




    g_
    "<
    g:
    5
    en
    u:
     ,.!
    -g
    t
    I
   ;,"
    "
    u..

    ~
    ~
    N
    0

    1J5
    ~
    u:I                                                      GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
    ~
    a..                           SLURRY WALL              PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                             FOCUSED FEASABILITY STUDY
    i"                        D   PROPERTY BOUNDARY
    u..
                                                               SITE LOCATION
     I                                                         & TOPOGRAPHY
    l~                                                                                     FIGURE

                                  ~ ARCADIS
   ~·_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _...J...._ _          1
                                    _ _ _ _ _..:.......J


Figure 1: Site Location Map

                                                      14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           LEGEND

                                         @       Monitoring Well - Deep Zone
                                         ,.      Monitoring Well - Shallow Zone
                                         @       Recovery Well - Deep Zone
                                         <1>     Recovery Well - Shallow Zone


                                     - - Infiltration Trenches
                                     D           Structures
                                     - - Tributary
                                                 Roads
                                     -           Fence
                                     I         Ii Slurry Wall
                                     C] Former Waste Pit Area




                                                0 2550     100 150 200
                                                ■■
                                                          Feet


                                                 GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                               PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                 FOCUSED FEASABILITY STUDY


                                                    Site Map
                                                                               FIGURE

                                         ~ ARCADIS I 2
Figure 2: Goose Farm Site Map

                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I                      $ RW•22

I
I
I                                                                                                              I
I           I                                                                                                  I
lo ss,01 ..., Rw.2s                                                                      $ Rw.2e j             /

I I                                                                                                                                             i
   I                                                                                                       I                                   I
   I                                                                                                       I                                  i
   I                                                                                             , I                                          I
I I ', RW-27                                                                              .... RW-~B       I                            I ;
I .,_.,                                                                                                                    'f RW-21 /
                                                                                                                                    . I
                                                                                                                                          /


1° I                                                                                            I
    I
                                                                                                I
                           ~ MW-1 1
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I                                                        SS·72 ()
                \          "i, RW-30                                                            I      I




                                                                                                                                                        SS·71 0




                                           $- MN-G




            ~                MONITOR ING WELL (DEEP)
                $,           MONITORING WELL (SHA LLOW)
                ~            RECOVERY WELL (DEEP)
                1',,         RECOVERY WELL (SHALLOW)
                O            SOIL BORING

                e            UVOST BORING
                e            UVOST VERIFICATION BO~ING
        RESIDUA L LNAPL PRESENCE

            •                ~~:L\i:;~;:~1s indicele residual

            •                ~~::r~~~ results indicale residual

            .6,              ::/o~n~N~~Lli~~ ::;e~~ce iniicating

            A                ;;:/d~~~:~ 1~       ~~vidence indca ting
                                                 5
        - - INFILTRATION TRENCH
        -              -     ROA D
        (----- FENCE
        - - SLURRY WALL                                                                                                   GOOSE FARM S UPER FUND SITE
                                                                                                                       P LUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
        ~ BUILDING FOOTPRINT                                                                                               FOCUSED FEASIBILITY STUDY
        NOTE:
        SITE-SPEC IFIC WOST LNAPL THRESH:JLO • 1.5% RE

                                          40               80                                                           LNAPL DISTRIBUTION
                                       ;;;;l
                                  SCALE IN FEET
                                                                                                                   ~ ARCADIS l=:'?"'"'I                  3


                                                                        Figure 3: LNAPL Distribution


                                                                                    16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           20
         1 1■
            -=•
              ■
                40
               ID--■
                     80   <\
                               RW-2'
                                       •
                                       S8 127   ► SD- 121   .,SB 122




                                                                                       --
                                                                                   02040




                                                                               r--- -...;;.~
                                                                                             Feet
                                                                                                          80




                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                 SB-171 s\112
                                                                                               SB--422 SB-42 1 SB.106

                                                                                                       ,;......:"~ so H.o
                                                                                                                              581 ;:;
                                                                                                                                  lj
                                                                                                                                       •



                                                                                                                                           ._ ~
                                                                                                                            S~-i 66(~); S8-4Hl

                                                                                                                             sd6si; •
                                                                                                                                                :
                                                                                                                                               5 224
                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                            se~!~~ s~2:
                                                                                                                                                     .,
                                                                                                                                                       SB-22 1

                                                                                                                                             s□~162 PstJ • ss ;;/~227
                                                                                                                                                                     SS.-2:M
                                                                                                                                                                                LEGEND




                                                                                                                                                                                  @
                                                                                                                                                                                  -$-
                                                                                                                                                                                         < NJDEP NRDCSRS ( < 1. 1 MG/KG)
                                                                                                                                                                                         > NJDEP NRDCSRS ( 1.1 - 5 MG/KG)
                                                                                                                                                                                         > NJDEP NRDCSRSANO CD
                                                                                                                                                                                         CRITERIA (5 MG/KG)
                                                                                                                                                                                         MONITORING \Mell- DEEP ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                         MONITORING V\IELL- SHALLOW ZONE
                                                                                                                                           165 .           _,
                                                                                                                                                                                  -$-    RECOVERY V\IELL, SHALLOW ZONE
                                                                                                                                            SB 163     SS.22.:?       GP-3
                                                                                                                                               •     ff' 58225..... ,,,                  INFILTRATION TRENCHE
                                                                                                                                                                                         TRIBUTARY
                                                                                                                                                                                         ROADS
                                                                                                                                                                                         FENCE
                                                                                                                                                                                         CONCRETE
                                                                                                                                                                                         SLURRY WALL
                                                                                   -    ss,3_,_                ss-,,~ss. , , ~sa-2H                                            D     STRUCTURE
                                                                                                                                                                               PLANNED EXCAVATION ZONE
                                                                                                                      . .58-215
                                                                                                                                                                               ~ UNAPL
                                                                                                                   SS-84    .... ss.216
                                                                                       SS-83
                                                                                                                                                                               !22s3 PCB
                                                                                                                                                                               ~ IDW
                                                                                                                                                                                 GEOPHYSICAL ANOMALY AREA
                                                                                                                                                                               ~ REQUIRING FURTHER INVESTIGATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Multi-Depth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interval
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PC BSamples
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Shallow Depth
                                                                          MW-513                                                                                                                                                    lnter,al
                                                                                   ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Intermediate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Depth Interval
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Deep Depth
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Interval
    !
    £
    j                                                                                                                                                                          NOTES·
                                                                                                                                                                               1. EPA - Environmental Protection Agency
    ]                                                                                                                                                                          2. NJDEP - New Jersey Department of Environmental
                                                                                                                                                                                  Protection
    j                                                                                                                                                                          3. CD- Consent Decree
    !,                                                                                                                                                                         4. LNAPL - light non-aqueous phase liquid
                                                                                                                                                                               5. mg/kg - milligrams per kilogram
                                                                                                                                                                               6. PCB - polychlori nated biphenyl
                                                                                                                                                                               7. IDW - Inv estigation-Derived Waste

    I                                                                                                                                                                          8. NRDCSRS - Non-Residential direct cont act soil
                                                                                                                                                                                  remediation stan dard
                                                                                                                                                                               9. Init ial, first, seco nd a nd third supplemental data

    i                                                                                                                                                                             undergoing data validation at the time of figure production.
                                                                                                                                                                               10 (R) - Soil boring location was redrilled to collect deeper
                                                                                                                                                                                    or shallower saml)e interval. Ex. SB-310(R)
    i
    i
    I~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0 45 90



                                                                                                                                                                                               GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Feet

                                                                                                                                                                                             PLUMSTED TO\NNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     180




    ~·                                                                                                                                                                                             PCB INVESTIGATION
    ~·                                                                                                                                                                                                LOCATIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                       (FULL SITE)
    I~                                           INFILTRATION TREN CH C                                                                                                                                                                    FIGURE

    ~I                                                                                                                                                                                   ~ ARCADIS                                             SA
     , l...:::::::==================================================::=:...L-_ _ _ ______L__J
Figure 4: PCB Sampling Locations

                                                                                                                                                                          17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                               40

                                                                                                    h        ..J
                                                                                                          SCALE IN FEET




                                                                                                     GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                                   PLUMSTED TOWNSH IP, NEW JERSEY



                                                                                              EXCAVATION AREAS ABOVE 1.1 mg/kg

                                                                                                                                    flGURE


                                                                                                                                      7


Figure 5: Excavation Areas Containing PCBs Greater than 1.1 mg/kg and LNAPL Excavation Area

                                                                            18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                       SCALE IN FEET




                                                                                                  GOOSE FARM SUPERFUND SITE
                                                                                                PLUMSTED TOWNSH IP, NEW JERSEY



                                                                                            EXCAVATION AREAS ABOVE 5 mg/kg

                                                                                                                                 flGURE




Figure 6: Excavation Areas Containing PCBs Greater than 5 mg/kg and LNAPL Excavation Area

                                                                            19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATTACHMENT B


PUBLIC NOTICE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The EPA Invites the Public to Comment on the Proposed
  Cleanup Plan to Address Soil Contamination at the
  Goose Farm Superfund Site in Plumsted Township,
              Ocean County, New Jersey
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency issued a proposed cleanup plan to
address soil contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs, that remain
at the Goose Farm Superfund site, located at Rt. 539 between Routes 537 & 528
in Plumsted Township, New Jersey.
Since 1985, the EPA has been overseeing the work to address groundwater
and soil contamination. During this work, the responsible party found PCBs in
the soil that were not discovered or addressed during the original cleanup. In
addition, they found light non-aqueous phase liquid, or LNAPL, in a portion of
the contaminated soil.
The EPA’s proposed plan includes digging up soil contaminated by PCBs and
LNAPL and disposing of the contaminated soil at an off-site, EPA-approved
facility. The responsible party would add clean soil to the dug-up areas before
adding topsoil with vegetation. In addition to the EPA’s preferred cleanup
approach, the EPA considered a similar approach that would dig up and dispose
of most of the contaminated soil and would leave a portion of the impacted
soil behind. The remaining soil would be covered by a cap followed by clean
fill material and topsoil with vegetation. In either case, the pre-existing deed
restriction, and perimeter fence surrounding the site would be maintained. The
EPA will review the cleanup every five years to ensure the cleanup implemented
is protective of people’s health and the environment.
The EPA will make a final decision on the cleanup approach for the remaining
contaminated soil after considering public comments. The EPA is accepting
public comment from July 11, 2025, to August 11, 2025.
The EPA will hold a virtual public meeting at 6:00 p.m. on July 17, 2025, on
Zoom. To see the proposed plan and register for the meeting, visit:
www.epa.gov/superfund/goose-farm.
The public can submit written comments to Tiffany Harden, Remedial Project
Manager, at Harden.Tiffany@epa.gov, or mailed to 290 Broadway, 19th floor,
New York, New York 10007-1866 no later than August 11, 2025.         AP-42221866

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   The EPA Extends Public Comment on the
    Proposed Cleanup Plan to Address Soil
 Contamination at the Goose Farm Superfund
  Site in Plumsted Township, Ocean County,
                 New Jersey
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is asking the
public for input on its proposed cleanup plan to address soil
contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs, that
remain at the Goose Farm Superfund site, located at Rt. 539
between Routes 537 & 528 in Plumsted Township,
New Jersey.
The EPA has extended the public comment period and is
now accepting comments from the public on the proposed
cleanup plan for this site until Thursday, September 11,
2025.
The EPA will make a final decision on the cleanup approach
for the remaining contaminated soil after considering public
comments. To review the proposed cleanup plan and other
information about the site, please visit: www.epa.gov/
superfund/goose-farm.
The public can submit written comments to Tiffany Harden,
Remedial Project Manager, at Harden.Tiffany@epa.gov, or
mailed to 290 Broadway, 19th floor, New York, New York
10007-1866 no later than September 11, 2025.           AP-42456925

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     ATTACHMENT C


PUBLIC MEETING TRANSCRIPT

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:02:19
Good day I know if I chat you won't be able to see it because you're sharing your screen but you may wanna put it in
presentation mode.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:02:26
Okay.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:02:28
Thank you.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:04:01
Yeah.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:04:27
If you're just joining us, we will start the presentation in just one or 2 minutes. We just wanna make sure that everybody
who signed up has time to get in.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:04:41
And get ready to listen. Thank you again for coming.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:05:26
Okay, it's now 6:05. We've waited a few minutes. I believe we can get started.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:05:27
Yeah.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:05:32
Again, thank you for coming to tonight's meeting regarding the Goose Farm Superfund site.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:05:39
And the EPA's public meeting. We're discussing the proposed plan for cleaning up the site.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:05:47
My name is Daniel Schoolenberg and I will be facilitating this meeting. Joining me tonight is the Remedial Project
Manager for the Goose Farm Superfund site, Tiffany Harden, as well as Perry Katz, EPA's New Jersey Project and State
Coordination Section Supervisor.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:06:06
And also, Shereen Kandil, the community involvement coordinator for the site. It's a pleasure to be here and, just
reiterate the purpose of this meeting, it is to provide an opportunity for the public to learn more about this site and our
proposed cleanup plan.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:06:25
And it's also important as a venue to provide an opportunity for community members like yourself to provide comments
on this plan.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:06:38

                                                             1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Tonight, in just a minute, Ms. Tiffany Harden will give a presentation about this site, the Superfund process, and the
EPA's proposed plan.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:06:51
Followed by a question and answer session. Tiffany, can you go to the next slide, please?

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:06:56
Here is the, it's okay -- Here's the agenda for that. During the question and answer session.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:06:57
Thank you.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:07:05
The questions and concerns you provide will be recorded and addressed in what we call a Responsiveness Summary. The
Responsiveness Summary is an official document that we will include in the final Record of Decision.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:07:20
Detailing the final propose the final plan for cleaning up this site. So it's very important that you understand and are
given an opportunity to provide these comments.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:07:30
Please note that additional comments can be sent to either Tiffany Harden or Shereen Kandil directly by email.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:07:39
Or, you can also submit comments by mail directly to the EPA region to office. But you can find all this information at the
end of the presentation.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:07:53
However, please know, we will only accept comments during the 30 day comment period. This comment period began
on July 11th

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:08:04
And it will continue until August 11th. After August 11th, we will not accept any additional comments. And finally, if you
have any questions you need to ask before the end of the presentation, please feel free to use the chat function here on
Zoom.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:08:23
I myself and Shereen will do our best to answer the questions, clarify any confusion or logistical issues that may arise.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:08:35
But, otherwise, please feel free to wait till the question answer session. And without further ado, I will now go ahead
and hand it off to Tiffany Harden to begin this presentation.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:08:49
Please go ahead Tiffany.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:08:50

                                                              2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Thanks, Daniel. So hello everyone. I'm Tiffany Harden, the remedial project manager for Goose Farm.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:08:58
Hi, Daniel had already introduced Shereen Kandil and Perry Katz who are here with us tonight.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:04
But there's also Jinnie Hanlee, the EPA risk assessor, and John Mason, the EPA Hydrogeologist who helped support the
clean up of goose farm.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:15
So I'll begin this evening's presentation with an overview of the Superfund remedial process.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:24
The Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation Liability Act or CERCLA is commonly known as Superfund
and was enacted by Congress in 1980.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:37
The Superfund clean up process begins by a site being discovered. And this can be initiated by a concerned citizen or
local authority.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:47
EPA will then assess if there's a problem by conducting a preliminary assessment and site investigation.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:09:55
Based on currently available data. EPA would then evaluate risk by using the hazard ranking system. If a problem is
found and the evaluation of the potential risk scores above a level to qualify for cleanup, then the site can be proposed
to be added to the national priorities list or NPL for cleanup under Superfund.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:10:20
After a site is identified and listed for cleanup, the next step is to characterize the site by conducting a remedial
investigation.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:10:29
And risk assessment. This phase of the process determines the nature and extent of the contamination on site by
collecting additional environmental data.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:10:42
The next phase of the process is to complete a feasibility study. To develop and evaluate cleanup options for how the
site can be cleaned up.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:10:52
Based on the results of the feasibility study, EPA will then move on to the next step of the process.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:10:58
By preparing a proposed plan. The proposed plan identifies EPA's preferred cleanup plan. During this portion of the
process EPA issues a public notice to notify the community of the proposed plan and give notice for the public comment
period, where EPA accepts comments on the proposed plan.

                                                              3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:11:20
And the next phase of the Superfund process, EPA takes into consideration the comments received during the comment
period.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:11:27
To select a remedy and memorialize it in a record of decision. So this process of identifying a site, investigating, and
evaluating environmental data.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:11:39
And coming up with cleanup options to select a cleanup plan was followed for Goose Farm and resulted in a cleanup
plan in 1985.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:11:48
Since then, the responsible party has collected additional environmental data which has led to the need to update the
original cleanup plan, and in order to amend or update the cleanup plan, the Superfund process needed to be followed.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:12:08
And so a feasibility study was prepared to identify and evaluate the cleanup options and EPA prepared a proposed plan
identifying the preferred cleanup option and released it to the public for comment on July 11th, which was last week.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:12:26
In the upcoming slides, I will present the cleanup options we evaluated and also present EPA's preferred remedy for
updating the original cleanup plan.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:12:40
So the Goose Farm Superfund site is located in Plumsted Township, New Jersey.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:12:46
It is located off of County road 539, which you can see outlined in the image on the right.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:12:54
The site was historically used as a waste disposal site by a manufacturer of polysulfide rubber and rocket fuel propellant.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:05
EPA added Goose Farm to the National Priorities List in 1983. And EPA issued the first cleanup plan in 1985.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:14
In a record of decision. So this site clean up is currently being performed by responsible party, the Dow Chemical
Company.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:26
And as I said, EPA issued the first cleanup plan in 1985. To address polychlorinated biphenyl, or PCB, contamination in
the soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:37
And volatile and semi volatile organic compounds, or VOC/SVOCs, in the groundwater.

                                                              4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:46
The major components of the remedy include a groundwater part and a soil part. The groundwater component of the
remedy includes extraction and treatment of contaminated groundwater.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:13:58
Then re-injection of the treated water into the aquifer. The soil component called for extensive testing to determine the
need to remediate PCPs in soil, including whether to cap the site.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:14:14
If additional PCB remediation is determined to be required, then an amendment would be prepared. So this is the part
of the remedy.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:14:24
That is the focus of this presentation. Because the soil component of the remedy is what we're addressing in the
proposed plan and the rod amendment.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:14:33
It is the part of the cleanup plan that needs to be updated.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:14:39
Since the 1985 ROD, a Consent Decree or CD was issued in 1988 which is a legal instrument.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:14:49
With agreement for the responsible party performing the cleanup work with EPA oversight. The CD contains a scope of
work which lays out specifications for the remedy such as the site specific cleanup value of 5 parts per million for PCBs in
the soil. Under the 1985 ROD and the Consent Decree, the responsible party performed the cleanup of soil in 1989
which approximately 9,000 cubic yards of PCB contaminated soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:15:23
Was removed from the area, highlighted in yellow on the right. And also constructed a groundwater treatment system in
1993.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:15:32
Since it's construction, the groundwater treatment system has pumped and treated over 416 million gallons of
contaminated groundwater.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:15:43
Deed restriction limits the property from being used for residential purposes. And a fence rounding the site is in place to
limit access.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:15:53
The groundwater treatment system is still operating to treat contaminated groundwater. And the responsible party has
completed many rounds of sampling.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:02


                                                               5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

For PCBs and soil. So on the image in the right, it's an aerial photo. The pink outline shows where a slurry wall is in place
surrounding the active.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:15
Remediation area. You can also see where the groundwater treatment system building is located. The blue area is the
former waste pit area.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:25
And the yellow is where the 1989 soil excavation took place.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:33
So next I'll talk about the current status of this site, including new site information and a summary of the risk.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:43
I need a drink of water.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:16:55
So since the clean up in 1989, the responsible party has conducted additional soil investigations, as called for in the
original cleanup plan.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:07
In 2003, the responsible party collected sonar data to characterize the soil on site. And the testing revealed that PCBs
were present.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:16
In concentrations greater than the site-specific cleanup value of 5 parts per million.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:23
Additionally, the responsible party discovered light non-aqueous phase liquids, in an area that also has PCB
contamination.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:35
LNAPL is a mixture of chemicals that act as a source of VOC and SVOC contamination to groundwater.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:44
To evaluate whether the contaminated soil would require additional remediation, the responsible party conducted
multiple soil investigations.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:17:53
And determined the extent of contamination. Evaluation of the soil data collected show that PCBs and soil were present
on site.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:04
In locations outside and deeper than the original excavation area that took place in 1989.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:12


                                                              6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

And at concentrations greater than the site cleanup value, which was 5 parts per million. And that, LNAPL contamination
in soil was present in the same location as some PCB impacted soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:25
Generally located around the treatment system building.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:31
The area of LNAPL contamination also has PCB contamination. And since the responsible party is addressing PCBs and
soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:41
And because LNAPL acts as a source of contamination groundwater, the LNAPL will be addressed as well.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:18:49
On the right side of the screen, there's an image depicting the areas where PCB contamination and LNAPL has been
identified. In comparison to the image on the left, you can see that some areas are outside of the yellow excavation
area.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:19:06
But there is also areas with contamination that are deeper than their original area that was remediated.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:19:17
Around the treatment system building there's an outlined area showing the approximate area where there is LNAPL
found in soil, which also has PCB contamination.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:19:29
To address soil contamination, the updated approach contemplated during the development of the feasibility study
included some level of excavation and offside disposal.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:19:42
Of PCB contaminated soil as well as soil contaminated with LNAPL.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:19:49
The remedial approach contemplated would also maintain the pre existing deed restriction surrounding the site and also
maintain the groundwater treatment system remedy to continue addressing groundwater contamination.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:20:03
And maintain periodic reviews of the site remedy to make sure it remains protective of human health and environment.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:20:12
The image on this slide shows the large number of soil sampling locations that the responsible party investigated to
evaluate the extent of soil contamination.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:20:26
So to ensure that the new remedial approach would be protective, we referred to the 1989 site health assessment
report, which identified PCBs in onsite soil as a concern. At the time of the report, PCB concentrations ranged from less
than 5 parts per million.

                                                            7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:20:48
To 478 parts per million. The exposure pathways of concern for the site are dermal.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:20:56
Inhalation and oral exposure. The potentially exposed population are mainly on-site workers and trespassers.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:21:06
The report concluded that the remedial action selected and the ROD should be protective of public health if properly
implemented.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:21:19
Since the implementation of the 1985 cleanup plan and the ATSDR health assessment. PCBs in soil remain on site at
concentrations up to 80 parts per million.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:21:32
And, LNAPL discovered in soil acts as an ongoing source of contamination to groundwater.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:21:40
Based on multiple investigations conducted at the site, EPA determined that the preferred remedial alternative
identified in the proposed plan is necessary to protect public health and the environment from actual.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:21:54
Or threatened releases of hazardous substances into the environment.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:03
Next, I will discuss the feasibility study, which the purpose of the study is to identify and evaluate.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:12
Cleanup options, the evaluation of the remedial alternative serves as a technical basis for EPA's selection of the
proposed remedy.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:23
And supports the development of the Record of Decision amendment, which updates the 1985 ROD.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:32
One of the first steps in the Feasibility study is to establish RAOs. RAOs were established in the 1985 ROD.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:46
We reviewed the RAOs and determined that they're still appropriate as they pertain to the source control and
management of migration.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:22:56
For the purpose of evaluating alternatives to address the PCB impacted soil, as described in the 1985 rod,

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:05
EPA established the following RAO: Address PCBs to levels that are protective of site workers.

                                                               8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:16
The contaminants of concern also remain the same as the 1985 ROD, specifically PCBs in the soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:24
In addition to the site-specific cleanup value established in the CD, EPA identified the New Jersey Non-Residential Soil
Remediation Standards for the ingestion-dermal.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:37
Exposure pathway for PCBs of 1.1 parts per million as the preliminary remediation goal.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:46
The contaminants of concern and cleanup goals for the groundwater portion of the site the remedy remains the same.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:23:55
As we're only addressing the soil contamination for this remedy modification.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:02
So the focus feasibility study. For that, we had three remedial alternatives that were identified and evaluated.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:12
The 1st is no further action, meaning that no further action would be taken to address the PCB contamination onsite.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:21
The no further action alternative is required under superfund law to establish a baseline for comparison with the other
cleanup options.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:33
The second alternative is excavation and offsite disposal of soil containing PCB concentrations.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:42
Greater than a measurement of one part 1.1 parts per million and removing soil that contains LNAPL. So under this
alternative, we would dig up and remove soil that has a measurement of PCB.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:24:58
One parts per million, which is the New Jersey non-residential soil remediation standard for the ingestion-dermal
exposure pathway. We would also remove soil that contains LNAPL.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:25:15
For the 3rd alternative, we would dig up and remove soil containing concentrations of more than 5 parts per million of
PCBs.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:25:24
Which is the site specific cleanup value from the consent decree and also remove soil containing LNAPL.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:25:31
Under this alternative, soil containing PCB concentrations between 1.1 and 5 parts per million.

                                                             9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:25:40
Will stay in place and be covered by a cap. The cap is a physical cover that helps prevent direct contact and helps in
preventing the soil underneath the cover from spreading.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:25:55
Okay, so the second remedial alternative is EPA's preferred alternative. For modifying the original remedy to address
PCBs in soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:07
For alternative #2, excavations would go down to a depth of 20 feet below ground surface to remove PCB contaminated
soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:16
Exceeding concentrations of a measurement of one parts per million and LNAPL-contaminated soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:23
And so the excavated soil would be disposed of at an EPA approved facility. The excavated areas would be back filled
with clean fill and top soil with vegetation.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:37
The estimated total cost for this cleanup is $6,687,000. And it's estimated take about 10 months to complete.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:47
So in the image on the left, the areas outlined by red, are the areas where there will be digging up soil containing PCBs
above 1.1 parts per million.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:26:58
And the area in blue contains both PCBs and LNAPL that will be dug up.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:03
The dug-up contaminated soil will be removed for offsite disposal.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:11
Under alternative 3, soil containing PCBs above concentrations of 5 parts per million and the LNAPL-contaminated soil
would be removed.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:23
The maximum depth of excavation is expected to be 18 feet below ground surface. Soil containing concentrations
between 1.1 and 5 parts per 1 million of PCBs would be left in place and capped.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:41
The excavated soil would be disposed of at an EPA approved facility. Excavated areas will be back filled with clean fill and
topsoil with vegetation.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:52
An estimated total cost for this clean up plan is $7,623,000.

                                                            10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:27:59
This is estimated to take about 7 months to complete.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:28:04
Let me go back to this. So in this image, similar to the last one, the red and blue outline show where there will be a
removal of PCB and LNAPL contaminated soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:28:20
For all the alternatives, the pre-existing deed restriction would be maintained and the groundwater treatment system.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:28:29
Would also be maintained to address the remaining groundwater contamination. Periodic remedy reviews would be
conducted with the groundwater remedy reviews.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:28:41
To confirm that the remedy remains protective of human health and the environment.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:28:51
So after we've established remedial action objectives and developed alternatives. We compared and contrasted the
remedial alternatives with respect to 9 criteria.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:04
That are shown on this slide. So the first 2 are threshold criteria, which must be met for the alternative to move forward.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:15
The alternative must be protective of human health and the environment. As well as be in compliance with
environmental regulations.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:24
The next set of criteria are primary balancing criteria. For each alternative, we evaluated the long term effectiveness and
permanence of the remedy.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:36
The associated reduction of toxicity, mobility, or volume through treatment; the short term effectiveness; its
implementability; and cost.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:48
By comparing and contrasting based on these criteria. We can identify the strengths and weaknesses of each alternative,
which helps us determine.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:29:58
Which remedial alternative or cleanup approach is best for the site.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:30:04
Finally, there is a set of modifying criteria, which is an evaluation of the technical and administrative feedback that we
might get from the state.

                                                             11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:30:15
Once they've had a chance to review the proposed plan, the state of New Jersey has reviewed the proposed plan.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:30:22
And concurs with the proposed, the remedial alternative. For the second modifying criteria, EPA will evaluate the
feedback from the public during the public comment period.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:30:36
That includes the comments and questions we receive in tonight's meeting. The preferred alternative could be modified
or a different alternative could be selected.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:30:48
Based on the comments we received during the 30 day comment period, which began July 11th and will end on August
11th.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:00
So once we've completed this evaluation process, we selected a preferred alternative. The preferred alternative we
identified is excavation.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:12
And offside disposal of soil containing PCB concentrations greater than 1.1 parts per million.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:19
And co-located LNAPL. Alternative 2 would provide the highest degree of long term effectiveness and permanence since
impacted soil with PCB concentrations exceeding the New Jersey Nonresidential Soil Remediation Standard of 1.1 parts
per million.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:38
Would be removed from the site and transported to an EPA approved disposal facility. Whereas under alternative 3.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:47
PCB impacted soil would be between, sorry -- under alternative 3, PCB impacted soil.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:31:56
With concentrations between 1.1 and 5 parts per 1 million would be capped and remain on site and have a long-term
maintenance requirement for the cap.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:32:11
So both of the alternatives 2 and 3 would be protective of human health and the environment, and be in compliance
with environmental regulations.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:32:22
However, alternative 2, or the preferred alternative, provides the best balance of trade-offs with respect to the
balancing criteria.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:32:32

                                                            12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

And that concludes my presentation. So I'll hand it back to Daniel so he can guide us through the questions and answers
portions.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:32:44
Thank you very much, Tiffany. That was a great presentation. I want to reiterate that now we have questions and
answers and this is a really important part of the overall Superfund process in which we want to hear directly from the
community.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:01
Feedback on the site, the work that we've done, and the proposed plan. Both the alternatives that we've selected and
the preferred alternative.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:13
That Tiffany has described here tonight. I haven't seen any questions or comments in the chat box.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:23
But we are here to hear directly from you. If you don't mind, if you could use the raise hand function.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:35
Then I can go ahead and call on you. And a member of my team. Maybe Tiffany or Perry or Shereen can all help out in
answering your question.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:47
And again, all questions and concerns will be eventually included in that responsive summary document that I
mentioned before.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:33:55
So, please go ahead.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:34:03
Daniel, we have a question in the chat. And just before we could get to that question, just for anyone who's not familiar
with Zoom, if you hover over your Zoom screen, you'll see a toolbar pop up.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:34:16
That's where you can see those icons where you can raise your hand if you so choose. And of course there's that chat
icon where you can open up a dialogue box and write your questions in.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:34:28
So the question comes from John. Have any residential wells in Plumsted Township been affected by the site?

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:34:40
I wanna say. Well, I'm a pretty new RPM, so I don't --

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:34:49
Yeah, that I think, to answer the individuals question, there's, a slurry wall, Tiffany mentioned it earlier, that prevents
the migration of any contamination off the site.


                                                              13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:01
So currently, any contaminations controlled for moving off the site. And we do.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:10
Reviews every 5 years to evaluate whether the remedy is functioning as it was originally designed. And, the last one was
done in.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:22
I wanna say, 2020. For. Like Tiffany is it 2024, 2025?

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:35:30
I think it was 2023.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:30
Yeah. Sorry, sorry. So, we do them every 5 years and to help evaluate whether any migration is controlled.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:42
So, we don't have any reason to think at this point that, any off site residential walls would be impacted from the site.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:50
I hope that answers your question.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:35:54
Okay. Very good.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:35:54
Okay. Very good. And thank you again for going ahead and just putting your questions in the chat. These are great so far.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:36:03
The next one comes from Thomas. I'll read it out for you. Are you planning on doing any soil borings on the surrounding
properties such as the properties which both touch the same watershed creeks that flow to the north?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:20
There currently isn't any plans to do any off site soil sampling. I mean, You saw the.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:30
You saw the volume of samples. I know it was a bit of look like a bit of an eye exam, but it was just intended to convey
the density of.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:37
Soil sampling's been done on site. The extent of contamination of PCBs.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:44
And now the co-located with the PCBs and the soil around the site.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:52
So now there's no There's no, current plan to do that.

                                                             14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:36:57
Take me back to that slide just so that we have a visual.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:36:58
Okay.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:37:05
And Daniel, we have the 3rd question in the chat.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:37:06
Yes. Okay, good. This one is from Diane. I missed the exact location.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:37:13
Is this near Russo's farm? Concerned about residential wells. So I can say very quick that.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:37:24
Street address. In fact, I'll just put this right in the chat. This is directly from the Goose Farm.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:37:33
Web page. So it's in. Bumps that townships New Jersey on route 5 39 between routes 5 37 5 28 I'm not familiar with
Russo's farm.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:37:48
Well, yeah, I'll jump in, Daniel, but the,

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:37:49
Perry or Tiffany? Yeah.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:37:55
Part of the site is proximate to the Russo recycling facility. I have gotten somewhat familiar with.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:38:04
That property. For one of your fellow residents. And there is an ongoing.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:38:13
Enforcement action by the state of New Jersey. With regard to that property but that property doesn't have anything to
do with the site, with the Superfund site.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:38:26
The, Tiffany talked about that we're talking about this evening. They're unrelated.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:38:36
Sorry, did that answer your question?

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:38:38


                                                                15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

And I know that she also was concerned about residential wells, although that was. Addressed in John's question to and
just to reiterate, we have no reason to.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:38:52
Feel that residential wells will be affected.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:38:56
Not from the Goose Farm site now.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:38:58
Okay, I'll read the follow-up question from John. I know that most residential wells are fairly deep in this area.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:39:07
I was just curious if there had been any cross-aquifer contamination. Would EPA be OK with providing any residents in
the immediate area with potential PCB sampling and also provides spill fund type money.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:39:22
If there are any PCBs found that would possibly match the contamination fingerprint from the site?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:39:31
There's a lot to unpack there, so what Try to take a little time. PCBs generally speaking.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:39:42
They they're not mobile they're not particularly mobile in the soil So, compared to other types of contaminants like
VOCs, for example.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:39:52
You don't typically find PCBs in the water. Not to say it never happens, but it But, typically that's not the case.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:01
The groundwater treatment system. It's been operating out at the site. For a long time now.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:10
You know, has been successful in reducing the, the groundwork contamination. In the general area the site.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:18
So. There was another aspect of the question about PCB sampling. Daniel, I don't know if you can reiterate it because I
can't see the question.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:40:28
Yeah, would EPA be okay with providing any residents in the immediate area with PCB sampling?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:29
Okay.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:37
Meaning would EPA come take samples in somebody's yard? Is that what the to make sure I understand the question.

                                                              16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:40:46
Yeah, and then they would were wondering if

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:40:48
Well, sorry, John, if, if you, would you unmute yourself and maybe clarify the question?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:40:57
Thank you.

[John Protonentis] 18:41:01
Sure, can you hear me now? I was kind of. Not trying to get in here with my voice, cause I have like, I lost my voice.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:41:03
Yeah.

[John Protonentis] 18:41:09
I just. My main my main question is I work at the Ocean County Health Department. And I know that that area has other.

[John Protonentis] 18:41:20
Potential contamination is using other places. I understand that. But with this part with this spot in particular, I know
most of the wells in that area probably go about 220 to 340 around there around especially on that's like up toward 539
area.

[John Protonentis] 18:41:33
There could be shallower ones in other places. Most of the ones I've seen that have been drilled down to about a
hundred 120 have all dried up right away because there's not enough water to come out of there.

[John Protonentis] 18:41:41
But my question basically is if any of the residents that might be in that particular area wanted to as a almost like a feel-
good thing just to know that hey I live next I know this property just here for 40 years was there any potential for any,
migration from either a little bit off to the side from that property or say some well driller did a terrible job and didn't
grow properly and you put

[John Protonentis] 18:42:08
contamination from one aquifer to the next whatever happens to be Would the EPA be willing to turn around and do
some sampling within a radius of that particular site just to show that, hey, you don't have a problem with.

[John Protonentis] 18:42:20
Contamination from PCBs on your site and if there happens today. Would the EPA be willing to cover the cost of possibly
drilling a new well to a different aquifer and that's possible?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:42:36
Well, again, there's a lot to unpack there, John, but I think. You know this site's been around since the eighties, it's one
of the earliest -- unfortunately I've been around that long so -- but there's been a lot of testing done over a long period
of time and yeah, you know, we believe we've sufficiently -- when I say we, the private party responsible for


                                                             17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:00
the cleanup does the work and the government oversees it, although all the way back when I, I'm not mistaken.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:08
EPA and or the state of New Jersey did some, did some cleanup work there as well.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:14
But nonetheless. We think we've delineated the problem pretty well. What I think I would do, John, to try to, you know,
be responsive to your questions.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:27
We would take a look, we can take a look at the body of data that's been collected and where it's been collected
because a lot of this predates myself, let alone Tiffany.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:35
And maybe we can follow up and give you a little better answer about -- You know about the potential for something for
some of the things you're suggesting.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:45
I mean, but in general we think we delineated the, we think we've delineated the problem, you know, the nature and
the extent of the contamination over time.

[John Protonentis] 18:43:46
Right, that.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:43:54
Tiff, can you put up that one slide with, with the, with the you know where it's kind of Swiss cheese there's like there it
is.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:03
Jon, that's a and for the rest of the group attending. You know, that's to give you an idea of the density of samples that
have been taken over time.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:11
Now, yes, it's confined to the site, but. Again, much earlier in time here at the beginning of this process with the site.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:22
You know, historical records were reviewed about where the disposal took place, sampling was done.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:28
As far back as the early to mid eighties. And so on so this is really represents kind of a refinement of where we are in
terms of the soil contamination.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:43
And how we propose to address what remains out there. But, but John, we'll go back and look and work with you.

[John Protonentis] 18:44:48

                                                             18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

I gotcha.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:44:51
To try to get you some better information about that. And in the responsiveness summary as well.

[John Protonentis] 18:44:54
Yeah, that I mean

[John Protonentis] 18:45:00
Sure, the one thing I remember is I've been there almost 30 years. I knew about this when it first started, but I wasn't
involved with this at all because basically to help our health department.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:10
Wasn't involved with any to clean up process whatsoever, we were just kind of a repository for information.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:16
And if anybody had called us, we were, we had some talking points, I think, back then.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:20
But that was still way above my pay grade back in the day. And I just wanted to. Know that we.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:28
Like. With a 40 year old. Plan in place with some with things that go. We get better technology, but everything else as
the years go by that we've implemented everything all across those 40 years and we're actually moved in the right
directions so we don't have to worry about this but for people that are new to the area.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:48
Or most of the people that probably worked on this originally even the regional plan. We're probably retired by now.

[John Protonentis] 18:45:55
And it was kind of handed down through offices. I just wanted to make sure that we're all moving in the right direction
and if anybody did have a concern like that moved into the area and they found out about this and panicked.

[John Protonentis] 18:46:11
If they called you. Within a certain distance, I'm not saying all plumps that township should be sampled.

[John Protonentis] 18:46:18
That's not what I'm getting that here. But if you lived within. A quarter mile or whatever happens because I know they
don't go very far.

[John Protonentis] 18:46:25
I know they don't understand that portion of it, but in a certain radius, is it possible that if you had a concerned
homeowner that moved into the area?

[John Protonentis] 18:46:35
That the last round of sampling that they ever, cause when, when we require our well to be sample for resales and stuff
PCBs is not one of those parameters.

                                                             19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[John Protonentis] 18:46:47
It's not a common one out there. So honestly, I mean the rest of the county, I wouldn't even know if there was a PCB
problem anywhere that probably not because people.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:46:49
Yeah.

[John Protonentis] 18:46:58
Don't just go around dumping the stuff. We had a couple. Hits here and there based on like old natural gas lines or
whatever that might have been broken but but that's kind of where I was going with this.

[John Protonentis] 18:47:10
I wanted to make sure that number one we had a little bit of information people called us wanted to know that number
one we had a little bit of information people called us wanted to know to make sure the state had all the information
when they got cold there and definitely We would like to have a couple of points of contact up at your office just in case
we get in questions that we can't answer.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:47:26
John, absolutely. I actually was a health inspector early in my career. Not in this county, but I'm sensitive to the needs of
the health departments.

[John Protonentis] 18:47:34
Right.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:47:37
I actually went on the website and tried to find contacts and I was unsuccessful so I'm glad you're on. We'll set up, you
know, where if it's you or someone else within the department is an appropriate point of contact for.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:47:52
We'll do that in. Make sure you get information. You know, there's some things that have been put together already.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:01
With Shereen who's our in Daniel our public affairs folks. That we can make sure get into your hands a fact sheet and
some other information.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:11
And we'll take a look at some of the historical work that's been done as well to try to.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:12
Thank you.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:18
Answer that a couple of questions you raised earlier a little better. I mean, we generally don't preemptively go out.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:22
Alright, that sounds good.

                                                             20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[John Protonentis] 18:48:27
Yeah.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:27
And sample people unless we have a reason to do so. So, I mean, just. So, but.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:30
Right, no, I understand.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:34
So, you know.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:34
Oh, what I'll do is I'll throw my email address. I'll throw my email address in the.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:40
Chat just so you have it so I, actually I run the environmental division for the county.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:41
Please do. Yep.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:48:45
Okay, great.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:45
So, what I'll do is I'll throw mine in there. My health officer is probably gonna wanna be in there too.

[John Protonentis] 18:48:53
I could just throw his, actually. I'll be the main point of contact for this and I can forward him the stuff as a comes in.

[John Protonentis] 18:49:00
I think county planning might also wanna have a little bit of knowledge of this too.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:04
Well, if you just provide contact information to us, we'll get it, we'll get it to folks.

[John Protonentis] 18:49:09
Okay.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:09
We, Shereen and Daniel, we maintain it in the. You know, part of our practice is the maintain a list of.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:16
Stakeholders you know local state federal residents etc. NGO Okay.

[John Protonentis] 18:49:22

                                                                21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Sure, no, that makes sense.

[John Protonentis] 18:49:25
Yeah, I'll throw that in there. I appreciate, you putting this together today.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:31
You're welcome. Tiffany and Shereen and Daniel did the heavy lifting.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:49:36
Very good. There's another question from Thomas. Read it.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:49:45
Will this be a 7 days a week cleanup? And will EPA be on site when all work is being completed?

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:54
So Thomas, good evening.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:49:59
The next once we select that this will be a little long when I apologize. Once we select the cleanup option that we're
going to pursue.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:50:09
The next thing that's gonna happen is that they're gonna they're gonna design the remedy, engineers will put together
plans and specifications.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:50:17
Environmental specialists will prepare plans. Those plans will include things like. Health and safety plans. Quality control
plans to ensure that the information is collected, meets the appropriate specifications.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:50:36
Traffic control plans. There's a whole series of these that are developed. It would unlikely be a 7 day a week operation
Thomas the rest of the rest of the attendees it would more likely be 5 days a week.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:50:55
And there would be government oversight of the work that would be performed by Dow and its contractors.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:51:02
We also. We work in tandem. With the Army Corps of Engineers. Who do a lot of management and oversight of our
environmental construction.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:51:12
So it wouldn't necessarily be an EPA representative, although. We will be out there frequently, but it would be, in all
likelihood a core of engineers.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:51:23
Representative or representatives who have the requisite skills to oversee. Environmental construction projects. Is that
any time to say answer your question on that?

                                                              22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:51:36
Hopefully. Okay.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:51:37
He says yes.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:51:46
While we wait for additional questions, hi everyone, this is Shereen. I just wanna let you know that I added.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:51:53
A couple of links in the chat. So please let me know if you can access the chat.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:52:00
One link, 1, 1 link is to the goose form, super funds, Ep's website.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:52:07
Specific to the Goose Farm Superfund site, which has the proposed plan. A community update faction and additional
information related to the site and then the other link is directly to the five-year review that Perry mentioned earlier.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:52:24
From 2000 and '23.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:52:50
Okay.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:52:50
So, as Daniel mentioned, will, you know, we're here and if you have any questions tonight, we're happy to answer as
best as we can, we're happy to answer as best as we can.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:04
We're happy to answer as best as we can or take back questions and do some research to respond.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:04
If the questions aren't popping up just yet and you want to ask them later you have until August.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:13
11th to submit your questions and comments on the proposed plan to Tiffany and if you have general questions about
the site unrelated to the proposed plan you can contact either myself or Tiffany our contact informations on the site
profile page but we also have a slide here.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:31
With our contact information.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:35
So we can continue Daniel. And then if any other questions come up as we can close out.


                                                             23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:53:42
We can certainly turn back to the questions.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:53:45
Yeah, absolutely. I'll be monitoring the chat.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:53:52
Let's reiterate. Absolutely, you can send it to either Tiffany Harden here or I think.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:53:59
That there's another slide after this with Shereen's contact.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:08
Yeah, so for just to, clarify, any comments on the proposed plan itself should go directly to Tiffany.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:17
And Tiffany can go back to the previous slide. So you can either qualify and provide your comments by phone.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:25
You can email Tiffany at Harden.Tiffany@EPA.Gov or you can send a hard copy mail to Tiffany, at the address listed 290
Broadway 19th floor.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:36
Again, the public comment period is from July 11th which began last week until August 11th.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:47
And then again, if there is additional questions and if you can go to the next slide related to the site in general, you can
contact me, and if you can go to the next slide related to the site in general, you can contact me, you can contact Tiffany,
the website is again linked in the chat.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:54:57
It's also listed here in the slide. And we also have this QR code that will, send you directly.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:55:05
So if you take a photo with your phone or your tablet, I'm sorry, if you open up your camera and scan the QR code with
your tablet or phone, you can, it'll take you directly to the site profile page.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:55:43
Okay.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:55:43
So Daniel, I think we can hang around for another. As long as anybody needs, but.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:55:50
This concludes the presentation for the proposed cleanup plan.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:55:57

                                                              24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Yeah, I think so.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:56:06
We thank you all for coming out in the evening and participating with us virtually. Really appreciate your time, your
feedback, your questions, your comments.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:56:16
And, really looking forward to receiving any additional comments and questions.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:56:23
And the next few weeks.

[Daniel Schoolenberg, EPA] 18:56:26
Absolutely looking forward to all your additional comments and thank you again for your time tonight everybody.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:56:36
Also for everyone's awareness, this presentation tonight will be posted on that side profile page. So you'll be able to look
at it more closely on your own.

[Shereen Kandil, EPA] 18:56:48
Thank you.

[Perry Katz, EPA] 18:56:51
Thanks everyone.

[Tiffany Harden, EPA] 18:56:52
Thank you.




                                                            25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  ATTACHMENT D


WRITTEN COMMENTS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

From:              Patricia Gale
To:                Harden, Tiffany
Subject:           Goose Farm Remediation
Date:              Thursday, August 7, 2025 8:24:01 AM




[You don't often get email from      . Learn why this is important at
https://aka.ms/LearnAboutSenderIdentification ]

Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open
attachments or click on provided links.


As a resident of the Deep Run Community located near the intersection of Routes 537 and 539 in Plumsted
Township and less than a mile from the Goose Farm Site, I am writing to state my endorsement of REMEDIATION
PROPOSAL NUMBER 2 at the Goose Farm site. It is my hope that maximum cleanup efforts will yield the best
options for everyone affected by the dangerous chemicals stored there. As a lifetime resident of Plumsted and
Upper Freehold Townships, I have been aware of the 9 such sites in this area. Additionally, I know that at least 6
residents on a portion of nearby Millstream Road who died from cancer and often wonder if there is a connection to
those chemicals. As the resident of my community - so close to the site- I am fearful of possible negative health
effects on all of us. Please utilize OPTION 2 to remediate this issue. Thank you. Patricia W. Gale,
Cream Ridge, NJ 08514 (Ocean County)

Sent from my iPhone

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

From:              CAROL ERRICKSON
To:                Harden, Tiffany
Subject:           Goose Farm, Plumsted Township
Date:              Friday, August 8, 2025 10:39:58 AM



   You don't often get email from            . Learn why this is important

   Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when
   deciding whether to open attachments or click on provided links.
I have reviewed the information.
I consider Option 2 the best plan to use.
Carol A Errickson

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plumsted Township Environmental Commission

Plumsted Township Environmental Commission
Goose Farm – Superfund Cleanup
EPA Public Comment Response
121 Evergreen Road, Plumsted NJ 08533
September 11th 2025: 9/11/2025
Prepared By: John Neyenhouse


Environmental Commission Goose Farm Comments: Tiffany Harden:
               Remedial Project Manager
               United States EPA


Dear Ms. Harden and the EPA Region 2 Team,

The Plumsted Township Environmental Commission has been actively reviewing the quarterly and yearly
reports for the ongoing cleanup efforts at the Goose Farm Superfund site located within our township for
many years.

As an agricultural community we have a vested interest in ensuring that our land is free from contamination
and that we are providing as welcome of an environment that we can to our residents, our farmers and the
countless visitors who come to our town to experience the rural community that we have maintained, to visit
the many farms to pick and purchase our local produce, livestock, wine and other products of our farming
families.

As you are aware, Plumsted was home to multiple Superfund sites and many years and countless hours of
work have gone into remediation of these sites throughout our community with the Goose Farm as our last
remaining site under remediation.

We do appreciate the EPA’s continued commitment to remediation of the Superfund locations within
Plumsted and we commend the work that has been done so far in removing so many of the hazardous
materials and enforcing the cleanup of these locations within our township.

However the Goose Farm continues to raise many concerns with our residents and our Environmental
Commission. Over the last few years we have seen an upwards trend of volatile chemicals well in excess of
the safe limits throughout many of the monitoring wells throughout the property. We have also seen
multiple reports of degradation of the treatment facility and equipment through many ways such as iron
fouling of the pipes and sensors, failures of machinery within the air stripping equipment and other issues
that have led to extended pauses of treatment while replacement equipment was on order or other issues.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Environmental Commission Goose Farm Comments
September 11th 2025
Page 2



We have also raised concerns about the increased detection levels of Benzene outside of the slurry wall
especially the continued elevated readings adjacent to the tributary that flows through the northern area of
the property. Our concern is that the chemical levels being detected continue to drastically exceed the safe
levels that this cleanup project is trying to achieve and that the detections outside of the slurry wall bring
concerns that the slurry wall may not be sufficient to contain the contaminated soil.

Due to many issues such as the distance from an active tributary that feeds into the surrounding towns and
watersheds and the fact that the majority of our town relies on private wells for drinking water – any risk of
contamination in our ground water is a major concern that we want to ensure is being treated as thoroughly
and as quickly as possible.

We have reviewed the presentation and the options being presented for ongoing cleanup. We would like to
request to have as much effort as possible put into cleaning this property as thoroughly as possible. We feel
that out of the solutions offered – that solution 2 appears to be the best option for the cleanup with the
removal of soils above 1.1ppm of PCB’s and associated LNAPL. We would also like to request long term
monitoring of the surface and groundwater at and around this property after the cleanup as well to catch any
previously unidentified contamination on this property that may not have been found during the previous
investigations.

Due to our community’s reliance on private water wells both for drinking water and for agricultural uses we
need to ensure that every effort is being put forth to cleanup this known chemical dumping location and
protect the lives of our current and future generations and maintain the stringent cleanup requirements and
high environmental standards that the EPA has shown on previous projects for many years.

Thank you again for your willingness to extend the public comment period and for your presentation to the
community on the proposed cleanup options and the ongoing cleanup efforts that have already taken place.

We look forward to working with you to achieve the goals of remediation of this property and to be able to
have this site removed from the active Superfund program at some point in the future.

Sincerely,
Plumsted Township Environmental Commission
Chairman: John Neyenhouse
