LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES FOR OU2 FOR THE MANSFIELD TRAIL DUMP SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/758102
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 96604cdcebf6170be194309f32b842d0d8970d6044c3c5e5e28fcb898e0f1151
Source PDF pages: 7
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                              Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
                                       September 2025
                                        Operable Unit 2




Site Name and Location
Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site
Byram Township, Sussex County, New Jersey
EPA ID # NJN000206345

Introduction
The purpose of this Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) is to explain the United States
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) changes to the remedy selected in the September
2019 Record of Decision (ROD) for the Mansfield Trail Dump Superfund Site (Site), Operable
Unit (OU) 2. The OU2 ROD was prepared by EPA as lead agency for the Site, in consultation with
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). The selected remedy
described in the OU2 ROD represents the second of two planned remedial phases, or operable
units, for the Site.

Under Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA or Superfund), 42 U.S.C. § 9617(c), EPA is required to
publish an ESD when, after issuance of a ROD, subsequent enforcement or remedial actions
lead to significant, but not fundamental, changes in the selected site remedy. Sections
300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. §§ 300.435(c)(2)(i) and 300.825(a)(2), set forth the criteria for
issuing an ESD and require that an ESD be published if the remedy is modified in a way that
differs significantly in scope, performance, or cost from the remedy selected in the ROD for the
Site.

This ESD presents the significant differences to the remedy selected in the OU2 ROD. This ESD
also provides a brief history of the Site, describes the original remedy, and explains how,
subsequent to the finalization of the decision document, issues concerning the scope and
performance of the selected remedy were identified.

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the ESD decision will be incorporated
into the administrative record maintained for the Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2)
of the NCP, 40 C.F.R. § 300.825(a)(2). The administrative record file is available for review
during business hours at EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center, 290 Broadway, New York, NY


                                                                                      *758102*
                                                                                           758102

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

10007 (Monday through Friday, 9:00 AM–5:00 PM); at the information repository at the Sussex
County Library Louise Childs Branch, 21 Sparta Road, Stanhope, New Jersey 07874 (for library
hours: http://www.sussexcountylibrary.org); and online at:
https://www.epa.gov/superfund/mansfield-trail.

EPA recommends contacting EPA Region 2 Superfund Records Center at (212) 637-4308 or the
Sussex County Library Louise Childs Branch at (973) 770-1000 to discuss options for viewing the
administrative record before visiting.

Site Location, History, Contamination Problems, and Selected Remedy

The Site cleanup is being addressed in two phases, or OUs. EPA issued the OU1 ROD in
September 2017. OU1 addresses drinking water wells at residential properties downgradient of
the former waste disposal trenches that are known to be impacted by a Site-related
contaminated groundwater plume. The OU1 ROD remedy is currently in the remedial action
phase. EPA issued the OU2 ROD in September 2019, with an estimated capital and total present
worth cost for the selected groundwater and soil remedies of $9,106,000 and $2,399,000,
respectively. This ESD describes the changes to the OU2 ROD. The scope of the response action
for OU2 is to address human health risks associated with contaminants above remediation
goals (RGs) in contaminated groundwater and residual soil contamination at the Site.

The major components of the remedy selected in the OU2 ROD include the following:

   •   Capping and vapor extraction in the source area vadose zone,
   •   Treatment of groundwater contamination in the source area saturated zone through
       amendment injection,
   •   Monitored natural attenuation in the distal groundwater plume,
   •   Excavation and off-site disposal of contaminated soil in the former dump areas,
   •   Excavation of residual soil contamination and restoration of the affected residential
       area,
   •   Installation of additional, and maintenance of existing, vapor intrusion mitigation
       systems as needed, and
   •   Institutional controls for capped areas and to prevent the installation of wells in the
       contaminated plume.




                                                2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The soil remediation goals selected in the ROD, consistent with the NJDEP’s residential direct
contact soil remediation standards then in effect, 1 are 0.2 mg/kg for polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and 400 mg/kg for lead. 2

  I.          Background

       A. Site Location and Description

The Site is located in a residential neighborhood in Byram Township, Sussex County, New
Jersey. The Site consists of former waste disposal trenches in a wooded area and Site-related
groundwater contamination in the area. Contamination, primarily trichloroethylene (TCE), from
the former waste disposal trenches has migrated into the groundwater and from there into
nearby residential drinking water wells. The former waste disposal trenches are bounded to the
north, south, and west by upland woods, and by a former rail line to the east. The remedy
selected for OU1 addresses impacted residential drinking water wells. The OU2 remedy,
addresses the Site-wide contaminated groundwater, residual soil contamination and related
vapor intrusion at the Site. The area addressed by OU2, the subject of this ESD, includes one
residential property in Byram, New Jersey.

       B. Site History

EPA believes that the Site was used as a dump for septic and other industrial wastes from the
late 1950s through at least the early 1970s. In May 2005, the Sussex County Department of
Health and Human Services and NJDEP became aware of TCE contamination in residential
drinking water wells serving homes on Brookwood and Ross Roads and notified residents in the
neighborhood of the contamination. Point-of-Entry-Treatment Systems (POETS) were installed,
primarily by NJDEP, at impacted residential properties to provide safe drinking water. By June
2005, 13 residential drinking water wells were known to be contaminated with TCE at
concentrations in excess of New Jersey Ground Water Quality Standards (NJ GWQS) and
additional POETS were installed. Currently, 19 homes are equipped with POETS, installed by
NJDEP or by homeowners, to remove the contamination and to ensure potable water for area
residents.

In addition, from 2006 to 2008, NJDEP collected indoor air and sub-slab soil gas samples from
homes throughout the affected neighborhood. NJDEP installed vapor intrusion mitigation



1 In May 2021, NJDEP promulgated revised soil remediation standards pursuant to New Jersey law, renaming the
standards and separating direct contact soil remediation standards into one set of standards for ingestion-dermal
exposure, and another set for inhalation exposure.

2 EPA further indicated in the ROD that lead concentrations at residential properties (in addition to meeting the
400 mg/kg maximum concentration remediation goal) shall be subject to meeting a 200 mg/kg property-wide
average cleanup goal.


                                                         3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

systems or modified existing radon mitigation systems in five of the affected homes to prevent
the migration of harmful vapors associated with Site-related contamination from entering the
homes.

NJDEP first identified the former waste disposal trenches at the Site in 2009 during an effort to
determine the source of the contamination detected in the nearby residential drinking water
wells along Brookwood and Ross Roads. On October 16, 2009, NJDEP submitted a request to
EPA Region 2 to evaluate the Site for a removal action under the CERCLA. Subsequent
reconnaissance efforts conducted by NJDEP and EPA in December 2009 and May 2010 indicated
disposal trenches that were designated Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. EPA collected soil and
sludge-like-waste, groundwater (on-site monitoring wells), and residential well samples from
February to May 2010. EPA also installed a background monitoring well, MW-3, south of
NJDEP’s previously installed monitoring wells, MW-1 and MW-2. Concurrently, in February and
March of 2010, EPA collected well water samples from 21 residences along Brookwood Road
and Ross Road and from the Byram Intermediate School wells. The school well samples did not
exceed Maximum Contaminant Levels (“MCLs”), state and federal drinking water standards, for
Site-related contaminants.

Based on NJDEP and EPA’s sampling from 2009 to 2010, the groundwater plume was found to
begin at the former waste disposal trenches and extend downgradient toward the Brookwood
Road and Ross Road residential area. The contaminated waste and soil that were present within
the trench areas were determined to be a source of TCE to the underlying aquifer and
presented a threat to the public via ingestion of groundwater. After performing a Removal Site
Evaluation, EPA concluded that a CERCLA removal action was warranted to address the threats
posed by the former waste disposal areas (i.e., trenches) at the Site.

In March 2011, based on the impacted disposal and residential areas outlined above, the Site
was added to the National Priorities List (“NPL”). On September 29, 2011, an Action
Memorandum was approved by EPA for the excavation and off-site disposal of TCE-
contaminated soil at the Site. From February 21 to May 30, 2012, EPA completed excavation
activities to remove soil contamination from Dump Areas A, B, C, D and E. Approximately
11,170 tons of nonhazardous soil and debris and 383 tons of hazardous soil were removed from
the Site and transported to approved off-site disposal facilities. The removal action was
completed on July 23, 2012. The contaminated waste disposal trenches were excavated to
bedrock and re-graded and restored to match the former topography.

From August 2013 to December 2015, EPA performed the first phase of remedial investigation
(“RI”) activities at the Site. Ten multilevel system (“MLS”) groundwater wells and eleven
conventional (screened or open-hole) groundwater wells were installed. Wells in the shallow
and deep groundwater aquifer were sampled between March 2014 and December 2015. During
this phase EPA also collected overburden soil samples, subsurface soil samples, rock core
samples, groundwater samples, soil gas and indoor air samples. Samples were taken from both
the former dump area and the downgradient residential neighborhood.


                                               4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA performed a second phase of RI between 2017 and 2018. Additional groundwater
monitoring wells were installed at the Site including three MLS wells and two conventional
wells. This phase also included surface water sampling, sediment sampling, soil sampling, and
three rounds of groundwater sampling. A detailed description of both phases of the
investigation is included in the 2019 RI Report, which is in the administrative record.

OU2 addresses residual soil contamination at the former dump areas and one residential
property. At the residential property, the slope where the highest concentrations of lead and
PCBs are found is generally steep and only has a few feet of overburden soil above the bedrock
surface. The extent of contamination is confined to the slope with samples collected in the
residential backyard. Soil sample results from the adjacent properties indicated contaminant
levels were below EPA residential soil screening levels. The data and topography suggest lead
and PCB containing materials were dumped in or around Dump Area A and have migrated via
surficial runoff or movement of fine-grained materials down the steep slope and onto a portion
of the residential property.

 II.          Description of Significant Differences

The remedy selected in the OU2 ROD includes excavation of residual soil contamination and
restoration of the affected residential property. The OU2 ROD did not address whether
relocation, either temporary or permanent, would be required for the occupants of the
residential property to implement the selected remedy. Although there is no contamination
under the residence, sampling in the rear portion of the property detected PCBs in the soil in 20
out of 38 samples at a maximum concentration of 4.1 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg) (Aroclor
1254). The ROD remediation goal is 0.2 mg/kg. Lead was also detected in the rear portion of the
property at a maximum of 1,460 mg/kg, exceeding the ROD remediation goal in 7 out of 38
samples in the residential area.

Based on investigation and design evaluations conducted as part of the remedial design efforts
for the rear portion of the residential property, EPA has determined that the remedial response
will result in long-term disturbance to the resident, unless relocated, with construction
activities reasonably expected to last longer than one year. This will likely include using the
resident’s driveway to create a temporary access road suitable for the construction vehicles,
removing and salvaging stone walls, and removing trees and vegetation. During construction,
the entire backyard including the deck will not be accessible to the resident. Access to areas
immediately behind and at the side of the house will be limited because of the drainage
mitigation and site restoration that will be necessary as part of the cleanup.

After review of all investigation and design documentation regarding the staging of materials,
potential timeframe of remedial action being longer than one-year, and long-term disruption to
the homeowner, EPA has made the determination that permanent relocation of the resident at
the property in Byram Township, New Jersey is necessary.



                                               5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Per EPA’s National Superfund Permanent Relocation Interim Policy, and EPA’s OSWER Directive:
9355.0-71P, Interim Policy on the Use of Permanent Relocations as Part of Superfund Remedial
Actions, permanent relocation/property acquisition should be considered as part of a remedial
action when an alternative under evaluation includes a temporary relocation expected to last
longer than a year. This condition is met in this instance. The modification to the OU2 ROD
described in this ESD will include the permanent relocation of the resident, and acquisition of
the property interest by purchase of the property. As required, Superfund-related permanent
relocations and property acquisitions are conducted under the Uniform Relocation Assistance
and Real Property Acquisition Policies Act of 1970, as amended.

Support Agency Comments

The State of New Jersey concurs with this ESD. The State’s letter providing its concurrence is
located in the administrative record file maintained for the Site.

Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

EPA, after consultation with NJDEP, is issuing this ESD to modify the OU2 selected remedy to
provide for permanent relocation of the affected resident and acquisition of the property. The
OU2 remedy, as modified by this ESD, continues to satisfy the requirements of Section 121 of
CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621.

The remedy, as modified by this ESD, will be protective of human health and the environment
and will comply with federal and state requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and
appropriate to the remedial action.

The modified remedy is technically feasible, cost-effective, and represents the maximum extent
to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be used in a practicable manner
at the Site.

This ESD does not alter the five-year review requirements outlined in the OU2 ROD.

Public Participation Compliance

In accordance with the NCP, a formal public comment period is not required when issuing an
ESD. A notice briefly summarizing this ESD will be published in a major local newspaper of
general publication in accordance with Section 300.435(c)(2)(i) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.435(c)(2)(i).

In September 2025, EPA informed the resident and the adjacent neighbors about the findings
from the remedial design investigation and why the relocation of the one resident is necessary
and responded to the questions and comments from the homeowners.




                                                6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This ESD and the documents that provide the basis for the decision to modify the OU2 remedy
to provide for permanent relocation and property acquisition will be incorporated into the
administrative record for the Site in accordance with Section 300.825(a)(2) of the NCP, 40 C.F.R.
§ 300.825(a)(2). The administrative record file is available for review at the information
repositories at the locations and times discussed above.




Pat Evangelista Digitally signed by Pat Evangelista
                Date: 2025.09.30 10:46:50 -04'00'                  September 30, 2025

Pat Evangelista, Director                                          Date
Superfund & Emergency Management Division
U.S. EPA, Region 2




                                                7
