LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Explanation of Significant Differences, Kin-Buc Landfill Superfund Site, prepared by U. S. EPA, Region 2, August 16, 2001.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/80046
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: b6d19449cc5d3c446a8a41514fb4ca0c6179a6018c77398db4b9978108d12972
Source PDF pages: 13
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         *80046*
                                                            80046




               Explanation of Significant Differences
                  Kin-Buc Landfill Superfund Site

Site Name and Location

Kin-Buc Landfill
Edison Township
Middlesex County, New Jersey

Introduction

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) presents this
Explanation of Significant Differences (ESD) to explain
modifications to the remedy selected in the September 28, 1992,
Record of Decision (ROD) for the Kin-Buc Landfill Superfund site.
In particular, this ESD explains changes to the Operable Unit 2
remedy relating to the Mound B area of the landfill.

EPA is the lead agency for this site. The New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is the support agency.

This ESD is issued in accordance with Section 117 (c) of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. § 9617 (c) , and
Section 300.435 (c) (2) (i) of the National Oil and Hazardous
Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 C.F.R. §
300.435 (c) (2) (i) , which contains provisions for addressing and
documenting changes that occur to a remedy after a ROD is signed.

This ESD, and the documents that form the basis for the decision
to modify the remedy, will be incorporated into the
Administrative Record maintained for the site in accordance with
Section 300.825(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is
available for review during normal business hours at the
following site repositories: the Edison Township Public Library,
340 Plainfield Avenue, Edison, New Jersey 08817, Monday through
Thursday from 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM, Friday and Saturday 9:00 AM
through 5:00 PM, and the U.S. EPA Records Center, 290 Broadway -
18th floor, New York, New York 10007-1866, (212) 637-4380, Monday
through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM.




                                                          502415

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site History, and Contamination Problems

The Kin-Buc Landfill Superfund site is located at the end of
Meadow Road, Edison Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey. The
site is bordered on the south by the Edison Township Landfill, on
the east by wetlands and the inactive ILR landfill, on the west
by the Raritan River, and on the north by the Edison Salvage
Yard, the Edison Township boat launch, and a chemical
manufacturing plant. The Edgeboro Landfill is located across the
Raritan River from the Kin-Buc and Edison landfills. The Heller
Industrial Park, a light-industrial and commercial complex, is
located approximately one mile to the north of the site.

The landfilled areas associated with the site are the Kin-Buc I
and Kin-Buc II mounds; an area east of Kin-Buc I referred to as
Pool C; the Low-Lying Area, which begins just south of Kin-Buc I;
and Mound B, which is on the Raritan River south and west of Kin-
Buc I and the Low-Lying Area. The following adjacent areas have
also been affected by contaminant migration from the site:
Edmonds Creek, the wetlands associated with Edmonds Creek, and
Mill Brook/Martins Creek (see Figure 1).

The Kin-Buc I mound covers approximately 30 acres and rises to a
maximum elevation of approximately 93 feet above mean sea level
(MSL). The Kin-Buc II mound, just north of Kin-Buc I, covers
about 12 acres and rises to approximately 51 feet above MSL.
Mound B covers approximately nine acres along the shoreline of
the Raritan River with an elevation of approximately 15 to 20
feet above MSL.

Landfilling began at the site in about 1947. Kin-Buc, Inc.
started operating there in 1968. Between 1971 and 1976, Kin-Buc,
Inc. operated the site as a state-approved landfill for
industrial (solid and liquid) and municipal wastes. Hazardous
wastes were disposed in the main landfill mound, Kin-Buc I, as
well as in Kin-Buc II. In 1976, the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) revoked Kin-Buc's permit to
operate because of violations of both state and federal
environmental statutes. Little is known of the waste disposal
history of Mound B, other than the fact that primarily municipal
wastes were buried in the Mound.

EPA's involvement with the site began in 1976 during the
investigation of an oil spill at the site, which revealed the
discharge of hazardous substances from the facility. EPA filed




                                                         502416

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

initial charges against the owner-operators in 1979, under such
statutes as the Water Pollution Control Act and the Solid Waste
Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA). Under a 1980 partial settlement, Kin-Buc, Inc. (and
not the other defendants) agreed to install a landfill cap and
initiate a long-term monitoring program, but not to remediate the
site or control the further migration of contaminants in the
area. Therefore, in 1980, EPA initiated cleanup activities under
Section 311 (k) of the Clean Water Act, .collecting aqueous and
oily leachate from the Pool C area for treatment and disposal.

In September 1982, Kin-Buc, Inc. assumed the removal operation at
the Pool C area that EPA had been conducting since February 1980.
In addition, EPA attempted negotiations for performance of the
remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS) with Kin-
Buc, Inc. However, negotiations were unsuccessful and, on
September 23, 1983, EPA issued a Unilateral Administrative Order
(Findings of Fact, Determination and Order Docket No: II-CERCLA-
30102) against the 11 initial defendants of the 1979 civil
action, directing the parties to perform the RI/FS. Also, in
September 1983, the site was added to the National Priorities
List.

Operable Unit 1

In May 1984, a draft RI/FS was submitted to EPA by the
Respondents to the 1983 Order. On March 25, 1986, EPA issued an
amended Unilateral Administrative Order (Findings of Fact,
Determination, and Amended Order Docket No: II-CERCLA-60105)
updating the 1983 Order to require the potentially responsible
parties (PRPs) to follow newly issued guidance on the conduct of
an RI/FS. A revised draft OU1 RI was submitted in April 1988 and
approved by EPA. The RI identified highly contaminated landfill
leachate and groundwater contamination emanating from the refuse
in the Kin-Buc I and Kin-Buc II mounds, containing volatile and -
semi-volatile organic compounds (VOCs and SVOCs), metals,
pesticides, and polychlorinated byphenyls (PCBs). These
constituents appeared to have migrated from the Kin-Buc I and
Kin-Buc II mounds toward the Low-Lying Area, Mound B, and the
Raritan River to the west, and Pool C and the Edmonds Creek marsh
to the east. The RI also concluded that the landfill closure
efforts were inadequate and that releases from the source areas
was continuing. A draft FS was submitted in May 1988.

The EPA issued the first of two Records of Decision for the site
on September 30, 1988. This first ROD divided the site into two




                                                          502417

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remedial phases known as operable units: Operable Unit 1 (OU1)
consists of the Kin-Buc I and II mounds, as well as portions of
the Low-Lying Area (between Kin-Buc I and the Edison Landfill)
and Pool C (see Figure 1). The selected remedial action for OU1
consisted of the following components:

     •    installation of a circumferential slurry wall to
          bedrock on all of the sides of the site;

     •    maintenance, and upgrading if necessary, of the Kin-Buc
          I cap and installation of a cap in accordance with RCRA
          Subtitle C and State requirements on Kin-Buc II,
          portions of the Low-Lying Area between Kin-Buc I and
          the Edison Landfill, and Pool C;

     •    collection and off-site incineration of oily phase
          leachate;

     •    collection and on-site treatment of aqueous phase
          leachate and contaminated groundwater with disposal via
          direct surface water discharge;

     •    periodic monitoring; and

     •    operation and maintenance.

The second operable*unit (OU2) included adjacent areas affected
by contaminant migration from the landfill, including Mound B,
the Low-Lying Area, Edmonds Creek, and .the wetlands associated
with Edmonds Creek, and Mill Brook/Martins Creek. The OU1 ROD
required that an RI/PS be conducted for these OU2 areas.

Remedial Action for OU1

The OU1 Remedial Action was performed by the two main groups of
PRPs for the site, Transtech, Inc. (formerly Kin-Buc, Inc.) and
certain of its affiliated companies, and SCA Services, Inc., a
subsidiary of Waste Management, Inc., and certain of their
affiliates, under a September 21, 1990 Unilateral Administrative
Order (Administrative Order, Index No. II-CERCLA-00114).
Construction was initiated in June 1993. The slurry wall and
landfill cap were substantially completed in May 1995, and the
leachate collection and groundwater treatment system started
operation in April 1995. A Remedial Action Report for the OU1
remedy was approved by EPA on May 9, 1997.




                                                             502418

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Operable Unit 2

The OU2 RI/FS was conducted by the Respondents to the 1990
Order. This investigation focused on evaluating the nature and
extent of: groundwater contamination in the Low-Lying Area and
Mound B; wetlands contamination in the Edmonds Creek/Marsh
system; and surface-water contamination in Edmonds Creek and Mill
Brook/Martins Creek. The OU2 RI/FS was completed in July 1992.

Results of the OU2 RI

The OU2 RI identified the following geologic profile (from top to
bottom) in the Low-Lying Area and Mound B: surficial cover
material(between one and nine feet thick), refuse (between seven
and 24 feet thick), a layer of organic-rich clay and silt known
as "meadow mat" (approximately seven feet thick) ,. gravel, and
bedrock. Prior to installing the slurry wall, groundwater flowed
radially from the Kin-Buc I mound toward the Pool C area, the
Edison Landfill, and the Raritan River, and was not tidally
influenced by the river. The underlying meadow mat layer was
identified as a semi-confining layer; its fine-grained organic-
rich matrix exhibited very low permeability, indicating that
groundwater does not readily flow in this unit either vertically
or laterally. The sand and gravel unit was found to be in direct
hydraulic contact with the river, and is therefore affected by
tidal influences. At low tide, groundwater in this unit flows
across the site from southeast to northwest. At high tide, this
flow is reversed when groundwater flows from Mound B toward the
Low-Lying Area. However, net flow is west, towards the river.
Groundwater flows in the bedrock unit towards the south; though
bedrock flow is tidally influenced in the vicinity of the site,
causing a general oscillation of flow in the Mound B and Low-
Lying areas. Vertical gradients within the four units indicate
that net discharge from these units is to the Raritan River,
either directly or indirectly.

VOC and SVOC contaminants were found in the refuse unit leachate
similar to the contaminants found emanating from Kin-Buc I and
Kin-Buc II. The sand-and-gravel unit contained similar VOCs and
SVOCs as were found in the refuse unit, although at lower
concentrations. These constituents also appear to have migrated
from the landfill mounds. The bedrock unit contained very low
levels of VOCs, which may also be attributed to migration from
Kin-Buc I.




                                                         502419

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The OU2 RI/FS and Proposed Plan for OU2 were released to the
public for comment on July 15, 1992. The ROD for OU2 was issued
on September 28, 1992. The major components of the selected
remedy for OU2 included:

     •    excavation of approximately 2,200 cubic yards of
          sediments containing PCBs at levels greater than 5
          parts per million;        ,

     •    consolidation of the excavated sediments within the OU1
          containment system;

     •    restoration of wetlands areas impacted by the
          excavation of contaminated sediments; and

     •    long-term monitoring of ground and surface water to
          ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.

The ROD for OU2 called for maintenance of the existing cover over
Mound B and monitoring of groundwater underlying it. The
existing clay cap over Mound B was considered adequate to prevent
water infiltration from coming into contact with the refuse, and
it was believed that the source of groundwater contamination to
this area was primarily from the Kin-Buc I and II Mounds and
other areas addressed by the OUI ROD, and would be mitigated by
the OUI remedial action. Furthermore, EPA did not develop
remedial action objectives for groundwater or surface water in
the OU2 ROD, because the implementation of source control
provided for in the OUI remedial action, including a slurry wall
and cap, was expected to be sufficient to prevent further
migration of contaminants into the Mound B area. In addition, it
was unlikely that the groundwater would be used for human
consumption, given the proximity of the Edison Landfill
immediately to the south of Kin-Buc and the defunct ILR Landfill
in the eastern side of the Edmonds Creek wetlands, which limit
the future development of this area for residential purposes.

Since it appeared highly unlikely that any exposure pathways
would exist in the foreseeable future, EPA did not believe that
there were any actual or plausible potential site risks
associated with groundwater which could justify active response
measures to reduce contaminant concentrations in groundwater. In
addition, groundwater modeling conducted during the FS indicated
that natural processes, such as degradation, dispersion, and
dilution, would gradually reduce contaminant concentrations to




                                                          502420

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

acceptable levels in the sand and gravel aquifer and in the
refuse layer. Contaminants in the bedrock aquifer were already
at acceptable levels. Finally, contaminant transport modeling
for both the Mound B and Low-Lying Area indicated that levels of
contaminants drop most rapidly in the Low-Lying Area (MCLs may be
attained within 50 years) and less quickly within the Mound B
area. However, over time, compliance with federal and state
groundwater quality standards will be achieved.

Remedial Action for OU2

The Remedial Action for OU2 was initiated in June 1994 by SCA,
under a November 19, 1992 Unilateral Administrative Order
(Administrative Order Index No. II-CERCLA-93-0101; the "1992
Order"). Approximately 9,400 cubic yards of PCB-contaminated
sediments were excavated from five separate zones located within
the Edmonds Creek/Marsh system where PCB concentrations exceeded
the cleanup goal of 5 parts per million (ppm). The excavated
sediments were placed within the OU1 slurry wall, and the wetland
areas were then restored. A Remedial Action Report for the OU2
Remedial Action was approved by EPA on January 1996.

Discussion of Significant Differences

The differences between the remedy selected in the 1992 OU2 ROD
and the actions described in this BSD are a result of the
discovery and removal of buried drums in Mound B that were a
potential source of groundwater contamination. The differences
are significant, but not fundamental.

Boring logs taken during the OU2 RI/FS indicated that the primary
components of the fill in the Mound B area were municipal and
household refuse and debris. EPA's investigations at that time
concluded that the primary continuing sources of groundwater
contamination at the site were the Kin-Buc I and II Mounds and
the other areas to be addressed by the OU1 remedy. The RI/FS
indicated that the contributions of the Kin-Buc site to
groundwater contamination would be mitigated after the
construction of the OU1 source control remedial action.

In 1995, during the excavation activities associated with
installation of the outfall line for the OU1 leachate treatment
plant, seven buried drums were discovered at the southern edge of
Mound B, at a location 75 to 100 feet from the Raritan River. As
a result, in June 1997, EPA initiated a supplemental Mound B




                                                         502421

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

investigation by collecting groundwater, and surface and
subsurface soil samples from Mound B. The groundwater samples
were collected from four monitoring well clusters installed in
and around Mound B as part of the site's groundwater monitoring
program. The groundwater contamination was found to be
consistent with the levels detected previously in these wells.
None of the seven surface soil samples showed concentrations
above NJDEP Non-Residential Direct Contact Soil Cleanup
Criteria1. At six of 30 subsurface (two foot) sample locations,
arsenic was found in excess of the NJDEP Non-Residential Soil
Cleanup Criterion of 20 parts per million (ppm), with levels as
high as 104 ppm.

In November 1997, EPA excavated four test trenches along the
southwestern area of Mound B near where the drums were discovered
in 1995. The four test trenches varied in size from 155 to 230
feet in length and were approximately nine to 13 feet deep. One
test pit had no drums. In the other three pits, 49 drums were
identified and removed, and 46 drum carcasses were found. The
drums that still held at least part of their original contents
had tears, rips and were in advanced stages of deterioration.
The drum carcasses were severely crushed and contorted. The
drums were overpacked for off-site disposal, and the drum
carcasses were returned to Mound B. Four soil/refuse samples
were collected from each test pit. None of the samples from the
pits showed concentrations above NJDEP Non-Residential Direct
Contact Soil Cleanup Criteria. However, several samples from
some of the recovered drums contained elevated levels of benzene,
toluene, and xylenes.

In January 1998, a geophysical survey of Mound B was conducted,
identifying a number of subsurface anomalies that might indicate
the presence of additional buried drums. In May 1998, based on
the geophysical survey results, 14 exploratory trenches were dug
to investigate the nine most distinct anomalies. The 14 trenches
varied in size from 23 to 145 feet in length and approximately 5
to 13 feet deep. Of the 14 trenches, six trenches contained no


     ^ While Table 8 of the OU2 ROD identified 16 Chemicals of Concern
in the sediments, surface water and groundwater, including VOCs,
SVOCs, DDT, PCBs, and metals, the OU2 ROD only established one cleanup
goal of 5 ppm PCBs in sediments. . During the various Mound B
investigations, the New Jersey Impact to Groundwater Soil Cleanup
Criteria and Non-Residential Direct Contact Cleanup Criteria are used
here for screening purposes only.

                                  8




                                                              502422

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          drums or drum carcasses, seven contained five or fewer drum
          carcasses, and one trench contained 11 drums and 3 drum
•     *   carcasses. A total of 32 drums and 22 drum carcasses were found
          in the 14 trenches. As in 1997, the drums that still had at
          least part of their original contents were in poor condition.
          One leaking drum was overpacked for off-site disposal; the
          remainder of the drums contained solids, and all remaining drums
          and drum carcasses were returned to Mound B. A total of 13 drum
          waste samples (including one duplicate) were collected. Results
          indicated that hazardous substances, including VOCs, SVOCs and
          metals were found in excess of the New Jersey Non-Residential
          Direct Contact Cleanup Criteria or Impact to Groundwater Cleanup
          Criteria in drums at each of the identified anomalies. EPA
          concluded from these findings: (1) that the investigation of
          subsurface anomalies identified in the geophysical investigation
          provided a basis for identifying the presence of additional
          buried drums; and (2) that at least some of the drums still
          buried in Mound B contained hazardous substances which could
          serve as a continuing source of contaminants to groundwater and
          ultimately to the Raritan River.
          Modified Remedy

          Based upon the post-ROD investigations compiled in the Mound B
x—v       Supplemental Investigation Report, as found in the Administrative
          Record, EPA determined that additional drums remained in Mound B
          that are a potential source of groundwater contamination (i.e.,
          drums that pose a threat of release of contaminants into the
          environment). Thus, EPA directed the Respondents to locate and
          remove as many of these drums as practicable. The Respondents
          submitted a Mound B Work Plan in November 2000. In January 2001,
          EPA approved, with conditions, the Mound B Work Plan.
          The Work Plan analyzed the remaining uninvestigated subsurface
          anomalies identified in EPA's geophysical survey, compared the
          results of the 1997 and 1998 test trenches to the geophysical
          findings, and identified seven anomalies where trenching was
          called for. In addition, because all of the earlier trenches and
          the subsurface anomalies were concentrated on the southern and
          central portion of Mound B, EPA required an additional trench on
          the northern portion of the landfill to assure that the landfill
          had been adequately investigated. In all, eight separate
          trenching locations were identified in the Work Plan. The field
          work began in April 2001. EPA oversaw the field activities,
          which were substantially complete by May 2, 2001.




                                                                    502423

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The trenches varied in size from approximately 18 feet to 110
feet in length and six to 10.5 feet deep, stopping at the water
table. Of the eight trenches, two trenches contained no drums or
drum carcasses, three contained five or fewer drum carcasses, and
three trenches contained the bulk of the material: 30 drums and
75 drum carcasses. As the trenches were opened, any drums found
in sidewalls were also removed. Approximately 38 drums and 77
drum carcasses were found in the eight trenches. The drums were
unearthened and bulked together for off-site disposal. The
excavated landfill refuse along with the drum carcasses were
placed back in the landfill and the landfill cap was restored.

In an effort to compare the profile of these trenches with those
excavated in 1997 and 1998, EPA again collected sidewall waste
material samples in five of the trenches, at the rate of four
samples per trench. Results indicate that hazardous substances,
including VOCs, SVOCs and metals were found in excess of the New
Jersey Non-Residential Direct Contact Cleanup Criteria or Impact
to Groundwater Cleanup Criteria in each of the sampled trenches;
however, these results are consistent with the findings from the
earlier Mound B investigations, and are consistent with EPA's
expectations of the contents of this landfill.

Groundwater and solid waste sampling in Mound B during the recent
post-ROD investigations has not shown a pattern of high levels of
contamination (i.e., levels-that would indicate substantial
continuing sources of groundwater contamination) in Mound B. The
results of the groundwater and surface water monitoring performed
to date are summarized in quarterly and annual monitoring reports
prepared by the Respondents as part of the monitoring
requirements of the OU2 ROD. The monitoring to date shows that,
in general, there are no trends in the water quality data which
would indicate that the remedy is not protective. These reports
have been placed in the Administrative Record for the site.

In addition, while excavations in Mound B did reveal drums and
drum carcasses not originally contemplated by the OU2 ROD, the
general nature of the waste found is consistent with that
described in the OU2 ROD - that is, primarily municipal and
household refuse and debris.

In short, while significant additional work was required to
properly dispose of additional drums at Mound B, that work is
fundamentally consistent with the remedy selected in the ROD.

                               10




                                                          502424

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         Therefore, EPA has determined that, under Section 117 of CERCLA,
         42 U.S.C. § 9617, and 40 C.F.R. § 300.435 (c), it is appropriate
 / N
i ***"   to issue this ESD, but that a ROD amendment is unnecessary.

         In addition, other activities are planned for Mound B that are
         consistent with the OU2 ROD and do not require an ESD. The
         Respondents, in cooperation with the Township of Edison, are
         planning shoreline improvement activities along the Mound B
         portion of the Raritan River. Because Mound B is very close to
         the river, natural erosion periodically exposes garbage along
         Mound B. This shoreline improvement will involve excavating some
         of the waste material closest to the river, regrading and
         replacing the landfill cap in this area, and installing a
         vegetation barrier on the shoreline to limit future erosion.

         The OU2 ROD calls for maintaining the existing clay cap on Mound
         B. SCA has proposed the replacement of this clay cap with a
         vegetative cap or "tree cap", made up of a fast-growing, deep-
         rooted hybrid poplar trees planted into specially prepared soils.
         This alternative cap method has been used at other landfills.
         EPA has indicated that the change to this alternative type of cap
         would be acceptable at Mound B, and SCA plans to start upgrading
         the Mound B cap later in 2001.

,/•—*•   Support Agency Comments

         The State of New Jersey concurs with the modified remedy as
         described in this ESD, contingent upon the following Technical
         Requirements for Site Remediation (N.J.A.C. 7:26E et seq.):
         Electronic Data Submittal of all data generated during the
         activities; application for and issuance of a Classification
         Exception Area in areas where Groundwater Quality Criteria
         are exceeded; and the application for and issuance of permit
         equivalencies for those actions that require them.

         Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

         Considering the new information that has been developed and the
         changes that have been made to the selected remedy, EPA and NJDEP
         believe that the remedy remains protective of human health and
         the environment, complies with federal and state requirements
         that were identified in the ROD and this ESD as applicable or
         relevant and appropriate to this remedial action, and is cost
         effective. In addition, the modified remedy utilizes permanent
         solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum

''   "                                  11




                                                                   502425

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

extent practicable for this site.

Finally, as required by the OU2 ROD, a review of the remedy wil
be conducted every five years to ensure that the remedy continues
to provide adequate protection of human health and the
environment.     '

Public Participation Activities

As discussed above, EPA has determined that the additional Mound
B work is significantly, but not fundamentally, different from
the remedy selected in the ROD; therefore, in accordance with the
NCP, an BSD is appropriate. An BSD does not require a formal
public comment period. Nevertheless, pursuant to Section
300.435 (c) (2) (i) of the NCP, EPA will make the BSD available to
the public by publishing a notice and summary of it in a major
local newspaper, the Home News and Tribune, and by placing it
with supporting documentation in the Administrative Record for
the site. The Administrative Record is available for public
review during business hours at the following site repositories:
the Edison Township Public Library, 340 Plainfield Avenue,
Edison, New Jersey 08817, and the EPA Records Center, 290
Broadway - 18th floor, New York, New York 10007-1866, Monday
through Friday from 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM.




William J. Mus^yn^WxP • E •                  Da'te
Acting RegLeJnal Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region II          •




                                  12




                                                          502426

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Ul
o
to
I*
to
-J


     Figure
