LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION, ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP WELLS SITE, ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP, MORRIS COUNTY, NEW JERSEY. (WITH APPENDICES)
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/83478
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: f4af943206c9090c09ee33a699ec32fabd246957d8c0e7195a1aabc03d03d730
Source PDF pages: 173
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     Declaration for the Record of Decision
    Site Name and Location

Rockaway Township Wells Site
Rockaway Township
Morris County, New Jersey

Statement of Basis and Purpose

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for the Rockaway
Township Wells Site (also known as the Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination
Site), in Rockaway Township, Morris County, New Jersey, which was chosen in
accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA) and, to the extent practicable, the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). The
information supporting this remedial action decision is contained in the administrative
record for this Site.

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) concurs with the selected
remedy.

Assessment of the Site

The remedial action selected in the Record of Decision (ROD) is necessary to protect
public health or welfare or the environment from actual or threatened releases of
hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants from the Rockaway Township Wells
Site which may present an imminent and substantial endangerment to public health or
welfare.

Description of the Selected Remedy

The remedial action described in this ROD represents the second of two planned operable
units for the Rockaway Township Wells Site. The first operable unit (OU1) addresses the
contaminated ground water that is adversely impacting the Rockaway Township Wells and
was the subject of the 1993 ROD. The second operable unit (OU2) addresses the
contaminated soil that is adversely impacting the ground water. A change to the remedy
previously selected for OU1 is also described in this ROD.

The major components of the selected remedy include the following:

•     Soil vapor extraction of volatile organic contaminants in both the Former Degreaser
      Area and the Former Underground Storage Tank Area,

•     Treatment, if required, for the extracted vapors prior to release to the atmosphere, and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   Operation of the soil vapor extraction system for approximately 3 to 5 years to attain
    the New Jersey Impact to Ground Water Soil Cleanup Criteria,

In addition, the 1993 ROD is being modified to allow the treated ground water to be
discharged to the surface water (Beaver Brook) instead of being re-injected or reused as a
potable source.                                                               •*••

Declaration of Statutory Determinations

The selected remedial action is protective of human health and the environment, complies
with Federal and State requirements that are legally applicable or relevant and
appropriate to the remedial action, and is cost-effective. This remedy utilizes permanent
solutions and alternative treatment (or resource recovery) technologies to the maximum
extent practicable, and satisfies the statutory preference for remedies that employ
treatment that reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume as their principal element.

Because this remedial action will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or
contaminants remaining on the Site above levels which allow for unrestricted and
unlimited exposure, the five year review will not apply to this action.




                           ______
Bradley^M. Camp|9eH~ Commissioner                                  Date
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           Record of Decision
           Decision Summary
       Rockaway Township Wells Site
       Rockaway Township, Morris County
                 New Jersey




New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
                 October 2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    Table of Contents
Site Name, Location, and Description                           1

Site History and Enforcement Activities                        1
                                                        '<..
Highlights of Community Participation                          8

Scope and Role of Operable Unit within Site Strategy           8

Summary of Site Characteristics                                8

Current and Potential Future Land                              14
  and Resources Uses

Summary of Site Risks                                          14

Remedial Action Objectives                                     18

Description of Remedial Alternatives                           19

Summary of Comparative Analysis of Alternatives                20

Principal Threat Wastes                                        25

Selected Remedy                                                25

Statutory Determinations                                       26

Documentation of Significant Changes                           28

Change to the 1993 Ground Water                                28
 Record of Decision


Appendices

Appendix I - Figures

Appendix II - Tables

Appendix III - Total Risk Summary Tables

Appendix IV - Responsiveness Summary

Appendix V - Administrative Record Index

Appendix VI - USEPA's Letter of Concurrence

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             Decision Summary for the Record of Decision
SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION
The Rockaway Township Wells Site (also known as the Rockaway Township Wellfield
Contamination Site) is located in both Rockaway and Denville Townships in Morris
County, New Jersey. Rockaway and Denville Townships are situated in the center of
Morris County, approximately 10 miles north of Morristown and 20 miles northwest of
Newark in the north-central portion of the state.

The Site, located immediately north of Interstate 80, is an area of approximately 185
acres, which lies in the center of a Y-shaped valley in an otherwise hilly area of the New
Jersey Highlands, Figure 1. The area has been developed by commercial businesses and
light industries including service stations, restaurants, hotels, plastic manufacturers,
truck/transit companies, and commercial office complexes. The Denville Technical Park
is located within the Site.

Near the center of the Site are the Rockaway Township Wells, which serves as the source
of potable water for approximately 14,000 residents in Rockaway Township. The
Wellfield originally consisted of municipal wells PW4, PW6 and PW7 which are located
on the northeast side of Green Pond Road, south of White Meadow Brook, and west of
the New Jersey Transit railroad tracks, Figure 2. In 1983 PW4 was sealed. At present,
PW6 and PW7 are intermittently pumped at an average rate of approximately 1.3 million
gallons per day, and a maximum of approximately 1.8 million gallons per day.

The municipal wells are situated in glacial sediments, which have been deposited in a
large bedrock valley. The "valley fill" has a thickness of up to 200 feet near the center of
the Beaver Brook valley and primarily consists of sands and gravels, with abundant
cobbles and boulders. Within the sands and gravels, prominent clay lenses and boulder
zones occur. The municipal wells are screened in sand and gravel deposits at a depth of
130 feet to 160 feet below the ground surface.

Prior to the construction of the municipal wells in the mid to late 1960's, the predominant
direction of ground water flow in the aquifer was thought to be south-southwest.
However, water levels measured in monitoring wells throughout the area indicate that the
influences from the Wellfield dominate local ground water flow. Within the local area,
ground water flows toward the Wellfield and is thought to be recharged by natural
precipitation falling on the area, ground water drainage along the valley walls, ground
water flowing from areas upgradient of the Site, and infiltration from surface streams.
This area of Rockaway and Denville Townships overlie the Rockaway River Basin Area
Sole Source Aquifer. The USEPA designates areas as sole source aquifers under the Safe
Drinking Water Act to protect principal drinking water sources.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
This section is divided into five (5) subsections for ease of discussion.         The first

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

subsection discusses the Rockaway Township Wells Site. Three of the remaining
subsections discuss other tacihties that are potential sources oi contamination oi the
Wellfield.   These are gas stations owned and/or operated by Town and Country
Gasoline/Exxon and Shell Oil Company, and the Denville Technical Park Figure 2.
Because of property ownership and corporate changes, brief corporate histories for Town
and Country Gasoline and Thiokol Corporation (former owner/operator of the Denville
Technical Park) are provided in Table 1. The last subsection discusses remedial actions
that were completed under New Jersey regulatory programs.

Rockawav Township Wells

Water samples collected from the Rockaway Township Wells in late 1979 and early 1980
indicated the presence of trichloroethene (TCE) and other volatile organic compounds
(VOCs). The Township installed an activated carbon adsorption treatment system in
response to this contamination. In October 1980, the treated water developed an
unpleasant taste and odor. Analysis showed it to be contaminated with di-isopropyl ether
(DIPE) and methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), both gasoline additives. On October 10,
 1980, the Township declared a water emergency and advised residents to avoid
consumption of the water until an air stripping unit was installed for additional treatment
of the water prior to distribution. An air stripping unit was subsequently installed.
Currently, Rockaway Township uses only the air stripping unit for water treatment. The
water treated with the air stripping unit meets the New Jersey and Federal Safe Drinking
Water Act requirements without the need for supplementary treatment. However, to
ensure a safe drinking water supply, Rockaway Township uses the carbon adsorption
treatment system whenever the air stripping unit is taken out of operation for
maintenance or repair.

In 1982, NJDEP requested that USEPA consider this Site for inclusion on the National
Priorities List (NPL) of Superfund sites because a public water supply was impacted and
the source of the contamination to the Wellfield was unknown. USEPA placed the Site
on the NPL on September 1, 1983.

Following the discovery of contamination in the Wellfield, NJDEP conducted an area-
wide industrial survey to identify potential sources of these hazardous substances. The
survey, along with additional information, revealed that petroleum hydrocarbon products
were present in the ground water at the Shell Gas Station and the Town and Country Gas
Station, which are both located on Green Pond Road to the west of the Wellfield, Figure
2. Chlorinated VOCs were present in ground water at the Denville Technical Park.

In June 1986, pursuant to the New Jersey Spill Compensation and Control Act (Spill
Act), N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et. seq.. NJDEP issued Directives to Morton Thiokol
Incorporated (then owner of the Denville Technical Park property), Shell Oil Company
and the Town and Country Gas Station requiring payment to NJDEP to conduct a
remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS), and payment to Rockaway Township for
the operation and maintenance of the air stripping unit. In May 1987, pursuant to the
Spill Act, NJDEP entered into an Administrative Consent Order (AGO) with Morton

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Thiokol Incorporated and Shell Oil Company in which the two companies agreed to
make the above payments. The RI Report was tmahzed in November 1988. The iown
and Country Gas Station never complied with the Directive.

Based on the information from the 1988 RI Report, NJDEP determined that additional
studies were necessary and began a Phase II RI. In April 1989, NJDEP issued Directive
II to the Town and Country Gas Station requiring payment to NJDEP to conduct the
Phase II RI/FS. The Town and Country Gas Station never complied with Directive II. In
September 1989, NJDEP issued Directive III to Thiokol Corporation, Motion
International Incorporated and Shell Oil Company requiring payment to NJDEP to
conduct the Phase II RI/FS, and payment to Rockaway Township for the continued
operation and maintenance of the air stripping unit. The Phase II RI Report was finalized
in September 1992. The FS Report was finalized in December 1992.

From April 1988 through April 1995, Thiokol Corporation and Shell Oil Company split
the operation and maintenance costs of the air stripping unit. In 1995, NJDEP notified
Shell Oil Company that it had satisfied its obligation since gasoline-related contaminants
were no longer being detected in the Rockaway Township Wells. Thiokol Corporation
and its successors continue to pay the operation and maintenance costs of the air stripping
unit. Additional information is provided in the appropriate sections, below.

Based on the RI and FS Reports, the USEPA signed, and NJDEP concurred with, a
Record of Decision (ROD) on October 5, 1993. The 1993 ROD documents the selection
of the ground water remedy for the Rockaway Township Wells Site. The major
components of the selected remedy include:

•   Extraction, treatment, and re-injection or utilization of the treated water for potable
    purposes,
•   Monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy, and
•   Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping unit on the Rockaway Township Wells.

In addition, the 1993 ROD stated that a subsequent decision document was planned to
evaluate the need for remediation of soils and contaminant sources. This ROD was
developed for that purpose.

Town and Country Gasoline Station

Town and Country Gas Station operated on Green Pond Road in Rockaway Township.
In June 1984, the property was leased to Exxon Company, U.S.A. (Exxon).

In January 1984, Exxon installed four (4) monitoring wells on the property as a condition
imposed by Rockaway Township on Exxon's application for facility plan approval. The
results of the monitoring showed the presence in the ground water of hazardous
substances including benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, xylene and petroleum
hydrocarbons. Water level measurements showed that the ground water flow was
towards the Rockaway Township Wells, as influenced by the pumping of the Wellfield.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In April 1984, Exxon removed three (3) underground storage tanks (USTs) on the
property. Exxon also collected soil samples that indicated the presence oi petroleum
hydrocarbons. On July 17, 1984, NJDEP issued a letter to Town and Country Gas
Station requiring a complete hydrogeologic study and remedial measures for- soil and
ground water. Town and Country Gas Station never complied with the NJDEP
requirements.                                                            ?*

In June 1985, Exxon removed 2,500 cubic yards of contaminated soil from the property
in accordance with New Jersey regulations in effect at that time. Exxon then installed
five (5) new 10,000 gallon fiberglass reinforced plastic USTs for the storage of gasoline,
medium diesel fuel and waste oil. Exxon also installed a storm water collection system.
The storm water flows across the facility into a catch basin connected to an oil-water
separator. Oil from the oil-water separator is pumped into the waste oil UST and
disposed of at.a licensed facility, while the water is discharged to the municipal storm
sewer in accordance with a NJDEP discharge to surface water permit (No. 0061816)
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1 et. seq. The USTs were upgraded in 1992 to meet
regulatory requirements. According to NJDEP records, there have been no documented
releases from the five USTs, and the storm water collection system is currently in
compliance with the permit.

Because the soil and ground water contamination present at the Town and Country Gas
Station has been addressed under New Jersey rules and regulations, including the
regulations implementing the Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances Act,
N.J.A.C. 7:14B-1 et. seq., and because gasoline-related contaminants are no longer being
detected in the municipal wells, the Town and Country Gas Station will not be discussed
further in this ROD.

Shell Oil Company Gasoline Station

Shell Oil Company (Shell) operates a gas station on Green Pond Road in Rockaway
Township.

In 1979, approximately 1,000 gallons of unleaded gasoline were discharged to the
subsurface as a result of an UST failure. The leaking UST was replaced in 1980. In
1980-1981, Shell installed eleven (11) monitoring wells on and around the property. The
results of the monitoring indicated the presence of hazardous substances including
benzene, toluene, TCE, DIPE and MTBE. Water level measurements showed that
ground water flow was towards the Wellfield, as influenced by the pumping of the
Wellfield. As discussed above, Shell contributed money towards the installation and
operation and maintenance of the air stripping unit installed on the Rockaway Township
Wells.

In 1991, Shell installed and activated a soil vapor extraction (SVE) system to address the
contamination present in the soil at its gas station in accordance with NJDEP rules and
regulations.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

On March 2, 1995, NJDEP informed Shell that, pursuant to Paragraph 38 of Directive III,
it was no longer required to pay Rockaway 1 ownship for the operation and maintenance
of the air stripping unit since the on-site contamination appeared to be under control and
gasoline-related contaminants are no longer being detected in the municipal wells.

Shortly after, however, monitoring well data from the Shell facility began to -again show
increasing concentrations of MTBE. In December 1996, it was discovered that the
remote fill and vent lines at the gas station had separated from the tanks at the joints,
resulting in another release of gasoline. The remote fill and vent lines were repaired at
that time. NJDEP's Underground Storage Tank Program required Shell to reactivate the
SVE system in December 1996, which Shell had deactivated in 1994 without NJDEP's
approval. The SVE system operates in accordance with an NJDEP Air Pollution
Discharge Permit. Shell also installed and activated a ground water pump and treat
system on-site and a second ground water pump and treat system off-site. The off-site
system was activated in September 1997 at 130 gallons per minute and the on-site system
was activated in December 1997 at 30 gallons per minute. Both ground water systems
operate in accordance with an NJDEP Discharge to Surface Water Permit. The treated
ground water from both systems is combined prior to discharge to the drainage ditch,
which flows to White Meadow Brook, which in turn flows into Beaver Brook.

The on-site ground water extraction system has a similar treatment train to the off-site
system, including an air stripping unit, total dissolved solids filters and granular activated
carbon treatment units. In March 2000, NJDEP approved Shell's request to deactivate the
on-site system because the concentrations of contaminants in the ground water were
below the New Jersey Ground Water Quality Criteria, N.J.A.C. 7:9-6 et. seq.

Rockaway Township conducts biweekly monitoring of municipal wells PW-6 and PW-7
for MTBE. Although monitored, MTBE has rarely been detected in the wells. When
MTBE has been detected, it has been significantly below the New Jersey Safe Drinking
Water Act Maximum Contaminant Level of 70 ppb, N.J.A.C. 7:10-1 et. seq. Benzene
and toluene have not been detected in the wells.

Because the soil and ground water contamination present at the Shell Oil Company Gas
Station are being addressed under New Jersey rules and regulations, including the
regulations implementing the Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances Act,
N.J.A.C. 7:14B-1 et. seq., the Shell Oil Company Gas Station will not be discussed
further in this ROD.

Thiokol/Dcnvillc Technical Park

In 1953, the United States government purchased 52.7 acres of property in Denville
Township and established the Naval Industrial Reserve Plant. A number of buildings,
including Buildings 1, 2 and 3, were constructed and utilized for the research,
development and manufacture of rocket engines and associated components. In that
same year, the United States government leased the facility to Reaction Motors Company
who continued the same operations. In 1958, the Thiokol Chemical Corporation

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(Thiokol) purchased the Reaction Motors Company and continued the operations at the
iacility pursuant to government contracts. In 1964, the United States government sold
the property, including Block 62101, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 and all buildings, to Thiokol,
Figure 3. In 1968, Thiokol began to close down its operation at the facility and started
leasing portions of the buildings to various businesses.
                                                                               ' ft.

In 1973, Thiokol sold Lots 2 and 4, including Building 7, to the International Paper
Realty Company. W.P. Realty acquired Lots 2 and 4 and Building 7, from International
Paper in 1977. W.P. Realty purchased from Thiokol the buildings on Lots 1, 3 and 5 in
1978 and the property in 1996, operating as the Denville Technical Park.

Thiokol described some of the tenants, which operated or currently operate at the
Denville Technical Park, in the Preliminary Assessment dated September 1996. The
locations of the historical process operations are shown on Figure 4. Many of the tenants
were and are subject to the requirements of the New Jersey Industrial Site Recovery Act,
N.J.S.A. 13K-1 et. seq. Remedial actions completed pursuant to this Act are described in
the Remedial Actions Completed Under New Jersey Regulations section, below.

In December 1989, Thiokol removed seven USTs from the Denville Technical Park. The
USTs contained gasoline, No. 2 and No. 6 fuel oils, waste oil and ammonia. A
description of the removed USTs is presented in Table 2. The locations of the USTs are
shown on Figure 4. Several of the USTs had leaked so contaminated soil was removed
along with the USTs. In 1990, as required by NJDEP, Thiokol performed a subsurface
investigation associated with the leaking USTs, in accordance with the New Jersey
regulations in effect at that time. As part of this investigation, five shallow monitoring
wells (MW-1 through MW-5) were installed near the former UST locations. Ground
water sampling results showed elevated levels of VOCs at each of the well locations.

In June 1995, Thiokol removed a 1,000-gallon waste oil UST (Waste Oil) located
between Buildings 1 and 2. No soil delineation or remediation was conducted during the
UST excavation since it was located in an area of known soil contamination, which was
to be addressed as part of the Superfund action. With NJDEP approval, the excavated
soil was returned to the excavation that had been lined with polyethylene sheeting prior to
backfilling. Base and sidewall soil samples indicated elevated levels of petroleum
hydrocarbons ranging from 490 ppm to 16,400 ppm. A variety of VOCs were also
detected in the soil samples at levels ranging from less than 0.3 ppm to 2,000 ppm.

With the signing of the October 5, 1993 ROD, NJDEP determined that the replacement of
the deteriorating air stripping unit at the Rockaway Township Wells should be expedited.
In April 1994, pursuant to the Spill Act, the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et. seq., and the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13.1E-1 et. seq..
NJDEP entered into an AGO with Thiokol, in which Thiokol agreed to replace the air
stripping unit. The air stripping unit was replaced and has been operational since May
1995.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In March 1996, NJDEP entered into a second AGO with Thiokol, in which Thiokol agreed
to pay for the full cost of the operation and maintenance of the Rockaway 1 ownship air
stripper, to implement the ground water remedy required in the 1993 ROD, and to
investigate and remediate contaminant sources at the Denville Technical Park.

Remedial Programs Completed Under New Jersey Regulations                      ?.«.

Several industrial establishments that operated or currently operate at the Denville
Technical Park were subject to regulation pursuant to the New Jersey Industrial Site
Recovery Act, N.J.S.A. 13K-1 et. seq., which requires the owner/operator to clean up
environmental contamination prior to the sale of the business or property. A list of the
industrial establishments can be obtained from NJDEP, although many were identified in
the 1996 Preliminary Assessment. For the majority of the industrial establishments NJDEP
issued Non-Applicability Determinations or Negative Declarations indicating that remedial
actions were not required. Two industrial establishments, Avionic Products Company
(Avionics) and Lockheed Electronics Company (LEG), however, were required by NJDEP
to conduct remediation as follows.

Avionics (Case No. 86540) was required to investigate its drum storage area adjacent to
Building 2. The location of the Avionics Drum Storage Area is shown on Figure 4. In
1987-1988, Avionics investigated the soil and found it to be contaminated with petroleum
hydrocarbons, cadmium and silver. Sediments in a nearby catch basin were contaminated
with the same hazardous substances. Approximately 39 cubic yards of contaminated soil
and sediment were excavated and disposed of at a licensed disposal facility. Upon final
inspection of the remedial action, NJDEP issued a letter requiring No Further Action to
Avionics in April 1988.

LEG (Case No. 89846) was required to investigate its Raw Materials Storage Area,
Hazardous Material Storage Area and Empty Drum Storage Area. These areas are shown
on Figure 4. Two samples were collected beneath the Raw Materials Storage Area, one
sample was collected from the Hazardous Materials Storage Area and one sample was
collected from the Empty Drum Storage Area. Samples were collected at a depth of one
foot below the surface. Chemical analyses of the soil samples detected only one hazardous
substance, TCE. It was found in a sample collected from the Hazardous Material Storage
Area at a concentration well below the New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria (NJSCC).

LEG was also required to investigate its air handling unit located in the eastern side of
Building 2. The location of the Air Handling Unit is shown on Figure 4. Two surface soil
samples were collected below drainage valves on the unit. Analytical results indicated the
presence of elevated levels of petroleum hydrocarbons and zinc. Approximately 24 tons of
contaminated soil were excavated from this area and disposed of at a licensed disposal
facility. Upon final inspection of the remedial action, NJDEP issued a letter requiring No
Further Action to LEG in January 1992.

In response to a request by the property owner of the Denville Technical Park, USEPA
issued an Administrative Determination in 1997 that Block 62101, Lot 4 and a portion of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Lot 1 were not considered to be part of the Rockaway Township Wells Site. In 1998,
USEPA issued a second Administrative Determination that Block 62101, Lot 2 was not
part of the Site. Both Determinations were made based on information and conditions
known to USEPA, including sampling data, and a finding that the low levels of hazardous
substances detected on these lots have not resulted in or threaten to result in a release or a
threatened release of hazardous substances, pollutants or contaminants under CERCLA
which would require remedial action at the property.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
The RI/FS Report and the Proposed Plan for the Rockaway Township Wells Site were
released to the public for comment on July 16, 2002. These two documents were made
available to the public in both the administrative record and a document repository at the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection headquarters in Trenton, New
Jersey and also at the Rockaway Township Free Public Library. The notice of
availability for these two documents was published in the Morris County Daily Record
on July 15, 2002. A public comment period on the documents was held from July 16,
2001 to August 14, 2002. In addition, a public meeting was held on July 23, 2002. At
this meeting, representatives from NJDEP and USEPA were available to answer
questions about the contamination at the Site and the remedial alternatives under
consideration. NJDEP's responses to the comments and questions received during this
period is included in the Responsiveness Summary, which is part of this ROD.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF OPERABLE UNIT WITHIN SITE STRATEGY
As with many Superfund sites, the problems at the Rockaway Township Wells Site are
complex. As a result, NJDEP has organized the remedial work into two (2) operable
units. This ROD addresses the second of two operable units for this Site. OU1 addresses
the contaminated ground water that is impacting the Rockaway Township Wells. A ROD
for OU1 was signed in 1993 requiring a pump and treat system in the Denville Technical
Park to capture the most contaminated ground water before it reaches the Wellfield. The
system is currently in the remedial design stage with construction scheduled for mid-2003.
OU2 addresses the remediation of the two (2) identified contaminant sources in the soil at
the Denville Technical Park that are adversely impacting the ground water. This remedial
action addresses the principal threats posed by the conditions at the Site.

In addition, this ROD includes a change to the 1993 ROD for OU1 regarding the discharge
of treated ground water from the Denville Technical Park portion of the Site. The treated
ground water will be discharged to the surface water (Beaver Brook) instead of being re-
injected or reused as a potable source. This change is discussed in a separate section at
the end of this ROD.

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The RI for the Rockaway Township Wells Site was initiated in December 1986 to identify
the source and extent of ground water contamination. Field investigations spanning 1987

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to 1988 included the installation of 23 monitoring wells and the sampling of soil, sediment,
surface water and ground water within the Site area. The Rl Report was finalized in
November 1988 and concluded that within the Site area volatile organic compounds had
been detected in the ground water beneath the Shell Gas Station, the Denville Technical
Park and property located north of the Denville Technical Park, Figure 2. The RI Report
recommended further investigation to further delineate the ground water contamination and
to identify contaminant sources.

The Phase II RI was initiated in 1990. Field investigations spanning from 1990 to 1991
included the installation of nine additional monitoring wells, sampling of all monitoring
wells installed in Phases I and II, one soil boring and an investigation of the "degreasing
pits" located within Building 2 at the Denville Technical Park. The Phase II RI Report was
finalized in September 1992 and concluded the following:

•   The "deep aquifer" is a sole source aquifer that provides potable water to the residents
    of Rockaway Township. TCE, 1,1,1-tricholorethane (TCA), 1,1-dicholoroethane (1,1-
    DCA), MTBE and DIPE have been detected in the Rockaway Township Wells in the
    past.

•   A perched "shallow aquifer" occurs in some areas of the Site but it is not used as a
    water supply. The shallow aquifer is contaminated with several contaminants. These
    contaminants have a local effect on ground water quality and, if not attenuated by
    natural means, may eventually move to the deep aquifer or to the streams.

•   The major sources of TCE, TCA and related contaminants in the Rockaway Township
    Wells appear to be located within the area of the Denville Technical Park. One or more
    sources of TCE are located somewhere near Building 2. Additional sources of TCE,
    TCA, tetrachloroethene (PCE), their breakdown products and carbon tetrachloride are
    located in the vicinity of Building 1, possibly within Building 1, between Buildings 1
    and 3, behind and/or adjacent to Building 1, including Building 3,4, 5, and 7.

•   It is likely that the TCE, TCA and related contaminants detected in the deep aquifer on
    the K&E property are attributable to sources on the Denville Technical Park, where
    most of the same contaminants were detected in the deep aquifer upgradient of K&E.

•    TCE and TCA were detected in a surface water sample collected near the outfall of a
    drainage pipe at the southeast side of the Denville Technical Park. TCE and TCA were
    also detected in a sediment sample collected in this area. The drainage pipe conducts
    runoff from the Denville Technical Park and it is likely that the facility is the source of
    the detected TCE and TCA.

Based on the Phase I and Phase II RI Reports, the Final FS for ground water was completed
in December 1992. On October 5, 1993, the USEPA signed, and NJDEP concurred with, a
ROD for ground water. The 1993 ROD stated that the remediation of contaminant source
areas would be presented in a subsequent decision document.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Thiokol began investigating the Denville Technical Park prior to the signing of the 1993
ROD, as discussed below. Three investigations were conducted for the purpose oi
identifying possible sources of VOCs to the ground water. These were the Site
Investigation, the Preliminary Assessment and the Soil RI/FS. The investigations are
summarized below with all sampling locations shown on Figures 5 and 6.
                                                                                 <A

In 1992, Thiokol performed a two-phased Site Investigation for soil. The first phase
consisted of collecting nine (9) subsurface soil samples from monitoring well drilling
locations that were outside of suspected source areas. The second phase focused on
possible sources of ground water contamination. Five (5) areas of concern were identified:

•   Area between Buildings 1 and 2, which included three former USTs (A-3, A-4 and
    Waste Oil),
•   Former degreaser area inside Building 2,
•   Former sand filter bed/grease trap south of Building 2,
•   Two former fuel oil USTs south of Building 4 (A-5 and A-6), and
•   Former gasoline UST south of Building 2 (A-1).

The second phase of work included 12 soil borings (BH-1 through BH-12), 20 soil
samples, 3 soil gas wells (VW-1 through VW-3), 3 soil gas probes (VP-1 through VP-3),
and 10 soil gas samples. The soil and soil gas samples were collected at various depths.
The Site Investigation Report was submitted to NJDEP in February 1993.

In 1996, Thiokol conducted the Preliminary Assessment, which identified two main areas
of concern that warranted further investigation as potential sources of VOCs:

•   Area between Buildings 1 and 2, which included three USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste Oil)
    and the flush tank, and
•   Southwest corner of Building 5 which formerly contained two degreaser units and a
    drum distribution business.

In 1997, Thiokol implemented its Soil RI Work Plan in accordance with the 1996 AGO.
The Soil RI included a subsurface soil study to further investigate three (3) of the potential
source areas of ground water contamination, which were identified through the previous
investigations. The three areas were:

•    Building 1 Area,
•   Area between Buildings 1 and 2, which included three USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste Oil)
    and the flush tank, and
• Southwest corner of Building 5 which formerly contained two degreaser units and a
    drum distribution business.
The 1997 Soil RI included 10 soil gas probes (SG-1 through SG-10), 7 soil gas samples, 3
soil borings (BH-13 through BH-15) and 9 soil samples. The soil gas samples were
collected at a depth of 4 to 6 feet below the ground surface. The soil samples were
collected at various depths.



                                             10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The three investigations identified a total of seven (7) areas of concern at the Denville
Technical Park. The results of the soil and soil gas investigations are discussed below. The
analytical results for the soil samples are compared to the NJSCC, including those for
Residential Direct Contact, Non-Residential Direct Contact and Impact to Ground Water.
Since no standards or criteria for soil gas exist, the analytical results for the soil gas
samples are simply reported.                                                     •.<,.

 \.     Former UST Area — Building 2

This area of concern includes the area between Buildings 1 and 2 which included the
three former USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste Oil), the Flush Tank and the Former Chemical
Storage Area.

Soil Samples- A total of 24 soil samples, including duplicates, were collected at various
depths from bore holes BH-1, BH-2, BH-3, BH-4, BH-5, BH-8, BH-9, BH-12, BH-13,
BH-14 and BH-15 and analyzed for VOCs. Soil sampling results are presented in
Table 3 and shown on Figure 5. In nineteen soil samples concentrations of VOCs were
either not detected or were detected at concentrations below all of the NJSCC. Five of
the samples exhibited VOCs at concentrations above the Impact to Ground Water
NJSCC. These five samples were collected at various depths from BH-12, BH-14, and
BH-15. Of these five samples, one also exceeded the Residential Direct Contact NJSCC
and three also exceeded both the Residential and Non-Residential Direct Contact NJSCC
for the same contaminant. The contaminants found above the NJSCC Impact to Ground
Water criteria were TCA, PCE, TCE, 1,1-DCA and cis-l,2-dichloroethene (cisl,2-DCE).

Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected in this area.

Based on the fact that VOC concentrations exceeded the NJSCC Impact to Ground Water
criteria, this area is considered to be a source of ground water contamination and direct
contact risk that warrants remediation. In addition to the soil contamination, ground
water contamination exists in this area. The ground water contamination will be
addressed by the ground water recovery system that is being designed as part of OU1.

2.     Former Degreaser Area - Building 2

This area of concern includes the former degreaser units located inside Building 2.

Soil Samples - A Phase II RI soil sample collected from bore hole B-4 exhibited a TCE
concentration of 51 ppm which exceeds the NJSCC for TCE. This boring was planned to
be drilled through one of the degreasing pits located inside of Building 2, but the drilling
proved difficult logistically. Instead, as shown on Figure 6, B-4 was drilled just outside
of Building 2. As part of the 1997 Soil RI, seven soil samples were collected at various
depths from VP-1, VP-2, VP-3, VW-1 and VW-2 for VOC analysis. Soil sampling
results from the 1997 Soil RI are presented in Table 4 and shown on Figure 5. None of
these seven soil samples exhibited concentrations of VOCs above any of the NJSCC.



                                            11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Soil Gas - Ten soil pas samples were collected from three soil vapor probes (VP-1, VP-2
and VP-3) and three soil vapor wells (VW-1, VW-2 and VW-3) and analyzed for VOCs.
Soil gas sampling results are presented in Table 5 and shown on Figure 6. VOCs were
detected in all ten soil gas samples. The majority of VOCs detected were chlorinated
VOCs, particularly TCE. Total VOC (TVOC) concentrations ranged from 5.21 ppm/v to
293.42ppm/v. TCE accounted for up to 90 percent of the TVOCs detected. These
concentrations were the highest of all soil gas samples collected as part of the 1997 Soil
RI.

Based on the elevated soil and soil gas data, this area is considered to be a continuing
source of ground water contamination. The ground water contamination will be
addressed by the ground water recovery system that is being designed as part of OU1.

3.      Former Sand Filter Bed South of Building 2

This area includes the sand filter bed, the grease trap and a former UST (C-2) that are
located in close proximity south of Building 2. The sand filter was part of the treatment
system for acid-chromate metal plating wastewater.

Soil Samples- Based on previous sampling data results, one sample was collected from
bore hole B-l 1 and analyzed for VOCs. Soil sampling results are presented hi Table 3 and
shown on Figure 5. The sample contained extremely low concentrations of VOCs at
concentrations below all of the NJSCC.

Soil Gas- No soil gas samples were collected hi this area.

Based on the soil data, this area is not considered to be a continuing source of ground
water contamination.

4.     Building 4 Area

This area includes the two former fuel oil USTs (A-5 and A-6) located to the south of
Building 4 (between Buildings 3 and 4).

Soil Samples - Three soil samples were collected at various depths from bore holes BH-6
and BH-7 and analyzed for VOCs. Soil sample results are presented in Table 6 and
shown on Figure 5. None of the three samples collected in this area exhibited detectable
concentrations of VOCs.

Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected in this area.

Based on the soil data, this area is not considered to be a continuing source of ground
water contamination.




                                            12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5.      Former Gasoline UST A-l

This area includes the former gasoline UST (A-l) located to the south of Building 2.

Soil Samples - Based on previous sampling data two samples were collected at various
depths from bore hole BH-10 and analyzed for VOCs. Soil sampling-.results are
presented in Table 3 and shown on Figure 5. None of the three samples collected in this
area exhibited detectable concentrations of VOCs.

Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected in this area.

Based on the soil data, this area is not considered to be a continuing source of ground
water contamination.

6.     Building 1 Area

This area includes the area in and around the western side of Building 1.

Soil Samples - A total of four soil samples were collected at various depths from soil gas
probe locations SG-2, SG-3, SG-4, and SG-5 for VOC analysis. Soil sampling results are
presented in Table 7 and shown on Figure 5. The VOCs detected included chlorinated
and petroleum hydrocarbons, but at concentrations below all of the NJSCC.

Soil Gas - Thirteen soil gas samples were collected from five soil gas probes (SG-1
through SG-5) and analyzed for VOCs. Soil gas sampling results are presented in Table
8 and shown on Figure 6. VOC were not detected in ten of the soil gas samples. Soil gas
samples collected from SG-2 exhibited TCE at each sample depth. TCE was detected at
the 5-foot (1.62 ug/L), 10-foot (0.84 ug/L), and 15-foot (0.61 ug/L) depth sample
intervals.

The very low levels of VOCs detected in soil and soil gas do not indicate a clearly
defined continuing source of ground water contamination or a direct contact risk in or
around Building 1. Despite the lack of a source of contamination in the soil, ground
water contamination does exist in this area. The ground water contamination will be
addressed by the ground water recovery system that is being designed as part of OU1.

7.     Former Degreaser Area - Building 5

This area includes the area in and around Building 5, which formerly contained two
degreaser units and a drum distribution business.

Soil Samples - Three soil samples were collected from soil gas probes SG-8, SG-9 and
SG-10 for VOC analysis. Soil sampling results are presented in Table 9 and on Figure 5.
Two samples detected chlorinated and petroleum hydrocarbons, but at concentrations
below all of the NJSCC.



                                            13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Soil Gas - Thirteen soil pas samples were collected from five soil gas probes (SG-6
through SG-10) and analyzed tor VOCs. Soil gas sampling results are presented in
Table and shown on Figure 6. VOCs were not detected in twelve of the soil gas samples.
The 10-foot interval sample collected from SG-10 exhibited TCE at a concentration of
1.27ug/L.
                                                                                '*

Based on the soil and soil gas data, this area is not considered to be a continuing source
of ground water contamination.

Conclusions

Based on the results of the Phase II RI, Site Investigation, Preliminary Assessment and
1997 Soil RI, only two of the seven areas of concern require soil remediation. These areas
of concern are the Former UST Area adjacent to Building 2, and the Former Degreaser
Area in Building 2. VOC concentrations in these two areas exceed NJSCC or have
elevated levels in soil gas. These areas are shown on Figure 7.

CURRENT AND POTENTIAL FUTURE LAND AND RESOURCE USES
Land Uses

As discussed above, the area has been developed by commercial businesses and light
industries including service stations, restaurants, hotels, plastic manufacturers,
truck/transit companies, and commercial office complexes. It is unlikely that this
development scenario will change in the future.

Ground and Surface Water Uses

The ground water is drawn from the Rockaway River Basin Area Sole Source Aquifer as
a drinking water source for approximately 14,000 residents in Rockaway Township. The
surface waters of the White Meadow Brook and the Beaver Brook flow into the
Rockaway River and are not used for drinking water. The ground water will continue to
be the source of drinking water for the foreseeable future. Wetlands associated with
these brooks exist in the vicinity of the Site.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
A Baseline Risk Assessment was conducted as part of the Phase II RI Report in September
1992.    The Baseline Risk Assessment addressed the potential human health and
environmental impacts associated with chemicals detected in ground water and other media
at the Rockaway Township Wells Site.

The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment stated that the domestic use of untreated ground water
was considered unlikely under both current and future land use scenarios because the
ground water is treated at the Wellfield prior to distribution to the public. However, human
health risks associated with the hypothetical use of untreated ground water in selected


                                            14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

source areas and from the Wellfield were evaluated. The human health exposure pathways
evaluated were:

•   Ingestion of untreated ground water by hypothetical residents; and
•   Inhalation exposures of hypothetical residents to chemicals that may volatilize during
    showering.                                                               '•«

The potential for adverse ecological impacts from chemicals detected at the Rockaway
Township Wells Site was evaluated using approaches similar to those used in the human
health risk assessment.

The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment indicated human health risk above acceptable limits
for the hypothetical scenarios identified above involving exposure to untreated ground
water. These human health risks are addressed by the remedial action presented in the
1993 Record of Decision for OU1. The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment also indicated that
adverse impacts to ecological receptors were unlikely.

To specifically estimate the risks associated with the contaminated soils at the Denville
Technical Park, a Focused Risk Assessment was completed in 1997. The Focused Risk
Assessment estimated the human health and ecological risks presented by the soil contami-
nation at the Site if no remedial actions were taken and addressed exposures to soil and to
soil gas at the Site. It also addressed the protection of the ground water in response to the
unacceptable risk identified for the hypothetical ground water use scenarios in the 1992
Baseline Risk Assessment. The results of the Focused Risk Assessment were reported in
the July 1999 Soil RI/FS and are discussed below.

Human Health Risk Assessment

A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks for a reasonable
maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identification—identifies the contaminants of concern
at the site, based on several factors such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and detected
levels. Exposure Assessment—estimates the magnitude of actual and/or potential human
exposures, the frequency and duration of these exposures and the pathways (e.g., ingesting
contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed. Toxicity Assessment—
determines the types of adverse health effects associated with chemical exposures and the
relationship between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse effects
(response). Risk Characterization—summarizes and combines outputs of the exposure and
toxicity assessments to provide a quantitative (e.g., one-in-a-million excess cancer risk)
assessment of site-related risks.

As a first step in the Focused Risk Assessment, contaminants of potential concern were
selected that would be representative of site risks. Soil and soil gas were evaluated
separately based on different exposure scenarios. The contaminant selection criteria for
soil were based on frequency of detection and whether the detected concentration was
greater than the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC. The contaminant selection criteria for
soil gas were based on frequency of detection. The Focused Risk Assessment identified a


                                             15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

total of 5 soil and 14 soil gas contaminants of concern for the Denville Technical Park. The
contaminants ol concern are listed in 1 able 10. The majority oi the contaminants ot
concern are chlorinated VOCs. Four of the contaminants of concern were identified for
both soil and soil gas. They are TCE, PCE, TCA, and cis-l,2-DCE. TCE and PCE are
probable (Group B2) human carcinogens according to the USEPA Carcinogen Assessment
Group classification system.                                                    >.<,.

The property is currently used for industrial/commercial purposes and for the risk
assessment it was assumed that this use would continue into the future. Based on this, the
potentially exposed populations were assumed to be industrial/commercial workers,
construction workers and trespassers. These populations may be exposed to the
contaminants in soil, in ambient (outside) air and/or in indoor air through dermal (skin)
contact, incidental ingestion (swallowing), or inhalation (breathing). Therefore, potential
exposures under current and future land use are summarized as follows:

             Media        Exposure         Receptor Population     Current/Future
                          Pathway
            Soil      Dermal Contact,   Industrial/Commercial          Future
                      Incidental        Workers,
                      Ingestion         Construction Workers,
                                        Trespassers
           Ambient    Inhalation        Industrial/Commercial          Future
           Air                          Workers,
                                        Construction Workers,
                                        Trespassers
           Indoor     Inhalation        Industrial/Commercial          Future/
           Air                          Workers,                       Current
                                        Construction Workers


Protection of ground water was addressed by comparing the data to the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC.

Summary of Human Health Risks

Through an assessment of exposure pathways for the contaminants of concern, specific
health risk levels were calculated for each significant exposure pathway to enable a
quantitative evaluation of health risks for human receptors.

Current USEPA guidelines for acceptable exposures are individual lifetime excess
carcinogenic risk in the approximate range of 1 x 10"4 to 1 x 10"6. This can be interpreted to
mean that an individual may have a one in 10,000 to a one in 1,000,000 increased chance
of developing cancer as a result of a site-related exposure to a carcinogen under specific
exposure conditions. Current federal guidelines for acceptable exposures for non-
carcinogenic risk allow a maximum Hazard Index of 1.0. The Hazard Index is defined as
the sum of the Hazard Quotients for all contaminants of concern within a particular
exposure pathway that have a similar mechanism of action or end point. A Hazard


                                             16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Quotient greater than 1.0 indicates that the exposure level exceeds the protective level for
that particular chemical.

The Focused Risk Assessment provided an assessment of the potential human health risks
posed by existing site conditions. A quantitative risk assessment was completed for
affected media for which a completed human exposure pathway exists. The potential risks
were evaluated based on an integrated analysis of three factors: contaminant concentration,
toxicity, and exposure potential. In order for an exposure event to occur, a complete
exposure pathway would be required. A complete exposure pathway would consist of a
contaminant source and release mechanism, a retention or transport medium, a point of
potential receptor contact with the contaminated medium, and an exposure route (e.g.,
ingestion or inhalation) at the contact point. The calculated additional lifetime cancer risk
for the potentially exposed populations ranged between l.OSxlO"6 to 5.90xlO"9, which does
not exceed USEPA's acceptable risk range of 1x10"4 to IxlO"6. The calculated Hazard
Indices ranged between 0.298 to 0.000117, which do not exceed USEPA's Hazard Index
limit of 1.0. The calculations are presented in Table 11.

The New Jersey Brownfield and Contaminated Site Remediation Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10B-1
et. seg., has set the acceptable cancer risk for human carcinogens at IxlO"6 (one-in-one-
million) and acceptable non-carcinogenic risk for any given effect to a value not to exceed
a Hazard Index of 1.0. These established acceptable risk values are for any particular
contaminant and not for the cumulative effects of more than one contaminant at a site. The
Impact to Ground Water NJSCC were developed to protect ground water from exceeding
the risk-based New Jersey Ground Water Quality Criteria due to the leaching of
contaminants from the soil.

The Hazardous Indices do not exceed NJDEP's Hazard Index limit of 1.0. However, soil
samples collected from the Former UST Area and the Former Degreaser Area indicate the
presence of VOCs at elevated levels which exceed the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC.
Because these VOCs act as a continuing source of contaminants to the ground water, soil
remediation is required.

Qualitative Ecological Risk Assessment

The Focused Risk Assessment did not include a qualitative ecological risk assessment
because the Denville Technical Park is highly industrial and thus lacking in ecological
habitat and subsequent ecological exposure, although the Beaver Brook lies
approximately 300 feet to the south. However, evaluations will be made as part of the
remedial design process to address measures that will be taken to ensure that the
treatment systems are adequately protected during flood events.

DISCUSSION OF UNCERTAINTIES
The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evaluation, as in all such
assessments, are subject to a wide variety of uncertainties. In general, the main sources
of uncertainty include:


                                            17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•   Environmental chemistry sampling and analysis;
•   Environmental parameter measurement;
•   Fate and transport modeling;
•   Exposure parameter estimation; and
•   Toxicological data.
                                                                           '.$•
Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the potentially uneven
distribution of chemicals in the media sampled. Consequently, mere is significant
uncertainty as to the actual levels present. Environmental chemistry analysis error can
stem from several sources including the errors inherent in the analytical methods and
characteristics of the matrix being sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates of how often an
individual would actually come into contact with the chemicals of concern, the period of
time over which such exposure would occur, and the models used to estimate the
concentration of the chemical of concern at the point of exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both from animals to humans
and from high to low doses of exposure, as well as from the difficulties in assessing the
toxicity of a mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by making
conservative assumptions concerning risk and exposure parameters throughout the
assessment. As a result, the Focused Risk Assessment provides upper bound estimates of
the risks to populations near the Site, and is highly unlikely to underestimate actual risks
related to the Site.

REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human health and the environment.
These objectives are developed considering exposure routes; human, ecological, and
environmental receptors; protection of ground water resources; and potential future land
use. These objectives are based on available information, criteria and standards such as
applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs).

The remedial action objectives established for the soils at the Rockaway Township Wells
Site, OU2, are:

•   To provide protection for the Rockaway Township Wells, and
•   Remediate the contaminant source areas in the soil at the Denville Technical Park to
    meet the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC

Two (2) areas in the Denville Technical Park, the Former UST Area adjacent to Building 2
and the Former Degreaser Area in Building 2, were identified as having soil contamination
that is continuing to contribute contamination to the ground water. Contaminants in these
areas exceed the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC and/or exhibit elevated concentrations of
contaminants in soil gas samples. The ground water contamination from the Denville
Technical Park is.being drawn into the Rockaway Township Wells. The Township must


                                            18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

treat the ground water using an air stripping unit prior to distributing the water to the
public. The remedial action objective oi removing the source ol ground water
contamination would be accomplished through the remediation of the soil to the Impact to
Ground Water NJSCC in the Former UST Area. In addition, since the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC for VOC contamination present in the soil at the Denville Technical Park are
more conservative than the Direct Contact NJSCC, compliance with the former would
address both the protection of ground water and the direct contact risks. The elevated areas
of the soil gas hi the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area will also decrease by implementing
this remedy.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
The FS for the Denville Technical Park was completed in July 1999. hi it many different
remediation technologies were evaluated for potential use at the Site. From the evaluation,
four (4) remedial action alternatives were developed as discussed below.

Soil Alternative 1 - No Action

The No Action alternative is required by the NCP. This alternative entails no Site actions
and no remedial efforts. No reduction hi Site risk or impact to ground water would be
afforded.

Total Cost: $0
Estimated Construction Timeframe: None

Soil Alternative 2 - Soil Vapor Extraction for Both Areas

Alternative 2 involves implementing soil vapor extraction (SVE) treatment to remove the
VOCs from the soils at both the Former Degreaser and Former UST Areas. This includes
the installation of vapor recovery wells in the Former UST Area and vacuum pumps to
extract the VOCs from the soil. The three existing vapor extraction wells in the Building 2
Former Degreaser Area would be used. The extracted vapors (off-gas) may require
treatment prior to release to the environment. The need for off-gas treatment would be
evaluated during the design phase of the remediation. If required, the off-gas treatment unit
would likely be located within the same building as the OU1 ground water treatment unit.
Approximately 3 to 5 years of operation would be required for the Former UST Area to
attain the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC.

Estimated Capital Costs: $477,000
Estimated O&M Costs: $55,000
Estimated Construction Timeframe: 1-2 years




                                             19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Soil Alternative 3 - Excavation and Off-Site Landfilling of Soil from the Former
Waste Oil UST Area and Soil Vapor Extraction in the Building 2 Former Degreaser
Area

Alternative 3 involves the excavation of approximately 3000 cubic yards of VOC-
contaminated soil from the Former UST Area and off-site landfilling of the excavated soil.
The soil contamination in the Former UST Area would be excavated to meet the Impact to
Ground Water NJSCC. The excavated soil would require characterization to determine if
pretreatment would be required prior to off-site landfilling.

Like Alternative 2, this alternative includes SVE treatment of soil in the Building 2 Former
Degreaser Area since it exists beneath Building 2 and is not amenable to excavation. The
extracted vapors (off-gas) from the SVE unit may require treatment prior to release to the
environment and would be evaluated during the design phase of the remediation.

Estimated Capital Costs: $2,812,000
Estimated O&M Costs: $47,000
Estimated Construction Timeframe: 1-2 years

Soil Alternative 4 — Excavation and On-Site Low-Temperature Thermal Desorption
Treatment of Soil from the Former Waste Oil UST Area and Soil Vapor Extraction of
Soil in the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area

Alternative 4 involves the excavation of approximately 3000 cubic yards of VOC-
contaminated soil from the Former UST Area to attain the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC
then on-site low-temperature thermal desorption (LTTD) treatment of the excavated soil.
The off-gas from the LTTD unit may require treatment prior to release to the environment
and would be evaluated during the design phase of the remediation. The volatilized
contaminants would be condensed and collected for off-site disposal. The treated soil
would be backfilled into the excavation.

Like Alternative 2, this alternative includes SVE treatment of soil in the Building 2 Former
Degreaser Area since it exists beneath Building 2 and is not amenable to excavation. The
extracted vapors (off-gas) from the SVE unit may require treatment prior to release to the
environment and would be evaluated during the design phase of the remediation.

Estimated Capital Costs: $2,957,000
Estimated O&M Costs: $47,000
Estimated Construction Timeframe: 2-3 years

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
During the detailed evaluation of remedial alternatives, each alternative for each category
was assessed against the nine CERCLA evaluation criteria.
A summary of the comparative analysis is provided below:



                                            20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Overall Protection of Human Health

This criterion addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate protection and
describes how risks are eliminated, reduced or controlled through treatment,
engineering controls or institutional controls.
                                                                               '<•;

Alternative 1 does not mitigate Site risk.

Alternative 2 would reduce the Site risk by extraction and treatment of VOCs from the
soil, especially in the Former UST Area, thus eliminating the potential for direct contact
and for continued releases to the ground water which is impacting the Rockaway
Township Wells.

Alternatives 3 and 4 would reduce the Site risk since the contaminated soils in the Former
UST Area would be excavated and either disposed of off-site or treated on-site. Using
SVE in the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area would reduce the Site risk by extraction
and treatment of VOCs from the soil thus eliminating the potential continued releases to
the ground water, which is impacting the Rockaway Township Wells.

Compliance with ARARs

This criterion addresses whether or not a remedy will meet all of the ARARs of
other environmental statutes and/or provides grounds for invoking a waiver.     It
also addresses whether or not a remedy will meet non-promulgated criteria that are
"to be considered." The chemical-specific, location-specific and action-specific
ARARs and criteria for the alternatives developed for the Denville Technical Park
are listed in the Soil RI/FS.

The Impact to Ground Water NJSCC were selected as the cleanup criteria for the soil at the
Denville Technical Park. There are no chemical-specific ARARs for soil cleanup.

Alternative 1 would not comply with the selected cleanup criteria, since no remediation
would be implemented.

 Compliance with chemical-specific cleanup criteria would be achieved with
Alternatives 2, 3, and 4 through removal, containment, and treatment. The soil vapor
extraction component of Alternative 2 would result in the containment and subsequent
removal of the contaminants from the soil. The soil excavation components of
Alternatives 3 and 4 would result in the removal of contaminated soil from the ground.
All three alternatives would result in the remaining soil meeting the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC. The excavated soils would be either treated to meet the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC before on-site reuse (Alternative 4) or pre-treated before off-site
landfilling (Alternative 3). The extracted soil gases (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4) would be
treated, if necessary, to meet New Jersey air emission regulations prior to discharge to the
atmosphere, as would the emissions from the LTTD unit (Alternative 4) or the pre-
treatment unit (Alternative 3).


                                             21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Compliance with location-specific ARARs would be achieved with Alternatives 2, 3 and
4. Ihe location-specilic AKARs include restrictions on activities taking place m the
wetlands, flood plain and flood hazard areas associated with the Beaver Brook, a
tributary of the Rockaway River. Since the contaminated soils in the Former UST Area
and the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area are not located within the wetlands or the 500-
year floodplain (Figure 8), the location-specific ARARs are not applicable to the
excavation or vapor extraction components of Alternatives 2, 3 or 4. However, the
location of any treatment unit for either the soil vapors (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4) or the
soil (Alternatives 3 and 4) would be sited and constructed in accordance with all wetland,
floodplain and flood hazard ARARs. It is possible for a soil vapor treatment unit
(Alternatives 2, 3 and 4) to be located in the same building as the ground water treatment
unit, currently being designed. That building would comply with the location-specific
ARARs.

Compliance with different action-specific ARARs would be achieved by Alternatives 2,
3, and 4, depending on the components of the alternative. All remedial actions taken at
the Site would comply with applicable sections of the New Jersey Technical
Requirements for Site Remediation, such as post-remediation soil sampling to ensure the
success of the remedial action. The soil vapor treatment unit (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4),
the LTTD unit (Alternative 4), and the soil pre-treatment unit, if necessary, (Alternative
3) would comply with the operational requirements for protection of ambient air quality.
Alternative 3 would comply with the requirements for the solid and/or hazardous waste
transportation and off-site disposal. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 would comply with the
requirements for residuals treatment and disposal. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 would comply
with well installation requirements, and then, after the soil attains the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC and the vapor extraction system is turned off, well abandonment
requirements.

Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence

This criterion refers to the ability of the remedy to maintain reliable protection of
human health and the environment over time once cleanup goals have been met.

Alternative 1 would not provide long-term effectiveness and permanence since no
remedial actions would be implemented. The long-term residual risk would be greatest
for this alternative, as compared to the other three alternatives, since the risk of protection
of ground water would not be addressed.

Alternative 2 includes SVE, which is a well-proven method of effectively removing
VOCs from contaminated soil. SVE would provide for reduction of VOCs in soil which
subsequently reduces the impacts of future releases of contaminants to ground water.

Alternatives 3 and 4 provide additional long-term effectiveness since the contaminated
soil in the Former UST Area would be excavated and replaced by clean fill material. The
excavation would be backfilled with material from an off-site location or with the treated
soil from the excavation. In either scenario, the backfill material would meet the Impact


                                             22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to Ground Water NJSCC prior to replacement in the excavation. The effectiveness of
these alternatives could be diminished should the soil contamination extend to
inaccessible areas beneath existing structures or to inaccessible depths. Both alternatives
would provide the same long-term effectiveness as Alternative 2 in the Building 2
Former Degreaser Area.
                                                                              '•if.
Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume through Treatment

This criterion addresses the degree to which a remedy utilizes treatment
technologies to reduce toxicity, mobility or volume of contaminants.

Alternative 1 would not provide reduction in the toxicity, mobility, or volume of
contaminants since no remedial actions would be implemented.

Alternative 2 would provide reduction in the toxicity, mobility and volume of VOC
contamination in soils hi both areas of concern through VOC removal and treatment.
However, since the VOC removal would be conducted with the soil remaining in place, a
very small volume of contaminants may be left in the soil after treatment, but only at
concentrations below the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC.

Alternative 3 would provide a comparable reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume for
the SVE portion of the remedy. If the VOC contaminated soil is not treated, prior to
landfilling offsite, this alternative would not be as effective in reducing the toxicity and
volume as Alternative 2.

Alternative 4 would provide a comparable reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume
than Alternative 2 since, in addition to SVE in the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area, the
contaminated soil hi the Former UST Area would be excavated and treated using a LTTD
unit and reused on-site.

Short-Term Effectiveness

This criterion considers the period of time needed to achieve protection and any
adverse impacts on human health and the environment that may be posed during
the construction and implementation period until cleanup goals are achieved.

Alternative 1 would not provide any increased short-term impacts since no remedial
measures would be implemented.

Alternative 2 involves the installation of SVE wells and short-term impacts would be due
to construction activities. Impacts associated with construction would be minimized by
employing proper dust control and health and safety procedures. Off-gas treatment
would be implemented, if necessary, to meet air emission requirements and regulations.

Alternatives 3 and 4 both involve excavation, so releases of fugitive dusts may occur
during construction, but would be minimized by employing proper dust control and


                                            23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

health and safety procedures. The SVE component of Alternatives 3 and 4 would also
have short-term effectiveness issues similar to those in Alternative 2. All active
treatment alternatives would have the same cleanup timeframe, since the SVE component
is a common element.

Implementability                                                            •<,,

This criterion examines the technical and administrative feasibility of a remedy,
including availability of materials and services needed to implement the chosen
solution.

Alternative 1 would require no implementation effort since no remedial actions would be
implemented.

Alternative 2 would be readily implemented with conventional equipment, methods, and
materials. A pilot study would be required to determine system configuration.

The SVE portion of Alternatives 3 and 4 is readily implementable, as discussed for
Alternative 2. The excavation portion of Alternatives 3 and 4 is also implementable, but
with some difficulties since it involves excavation in an area surrounded by buildings,
and which has numerous underground utilities. Shoring would also be required.

Alternative 4 is considered the most complex alternative to implement because of
permitting and community acceptance issues for the LTTD unit, although it is an
available technology.

Cost

This criterion includes capital as well as operation and maintenance costs
representing 30-year present worth value.

A comparison of the estimated capital costs, annual O&M costs, and total present worth
in 2002 for each of the four alternatives is presented below:

                      Alternative Alternative Alternative Alternative
                           1           2           3           4
              Capital     $0       $477,000 $2,812,000 $2,957,000

              O&M          $0        $55,000      $47,000      $47,000

             Present       $0       $721,000    $3,021,000 $3,167,000
             Worth

USEPA Acceptance

This criterion indicates whether, based on its review of the RI/FS and Proposed

                                          24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plan, the USEPA concurs with, opposes, or has no comment on the proposed
alternative(s).

USEPA concurs with the selected remedy for the Rockaway Township Wells Site.

Community Acceptance                                                            ?*

This criterion addresses whether, based on comments received, the community
accepts the proposed altemative(s).

A public comment period was held from July 16, 2000 to August 14, 2002 to allow the
public to voice their comments and questions about the Proposed Plan and the
Administrative Record. In addition, a public meeting was held on July 23, 2002 and was
attended by local officials and residents. One letter containing written comments was
received by NJDEP during the public comment period.

Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public comment period. The
community expressed no objections to the proposed alternative during the public meeting
or the public comment period and appears to accept the selected remedy for the
Rockaway Township Wells Site. NJDEP's responses to the comments and questions
received during the public comment period and public meeting are included in the
Responsiveness Summary, which is part of this ROD.

PRINCIPAL THREAT WASTES
The chlorinated VOCs present in the soil and adversely impacting the ground water are
considered to be the principal threat wastes that are the subject of this ROD.

SELECTED REMEDY
Based on the evaluation of remedial alternatives that was presented in the previous section,
NJDEP selects and USEPA concurs with the selection of Alternative 2, Soil Vapor
Extraction for Both Areas. This alternative involves SVE treatment to remove the VOCs
from the soils at both the Former UST Area and the Building 2 Former Degreaser Area.
Should the extracted vapors require treatment prior to release to the atmosphere to meet the
New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulations, N.J.A.C. 7:27-8, the treatment unit would
be housed in the same building as the ground water treatment system, which is currently
being designed.

The selected alternative satisfies the remedial action objectives and the requirements of
CERCLA, as amended; the NCP, and the 1996 ACO. It will require 3-5 years of operation
for the remedy to meet the cleanup criteria, which are the New Jersey Impact to Ground
Water Soil Cleanup Criteria.

The selected alternative provides the best balance of trade-offs among alternatives with
respect to the nine CERCLA evaluation criteria. The selected alternative is protective of


                                            25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

human health and the environment, complies with ARARs and cleanup criteria, is cost-
etiective, and uses permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies or resource
recovery technologies to the maximum extent practicable. The selected remedy also meets
the statutory preference for the use of treatment as a principal element to the maximum
extent practicable.
                                                                              '.<!
Estimated capital and operation and maintenance costs for the SVE system $477,000 and
$55,000, respectively, making the present worth approximately $721,000. It will take 1 to
2 years to construct the SVE system. It must be noted that some changes may be made to
the remedy as a result of unforeseen events during the remedial design and construction
processes. Any necessary changes will likely be minor. Significant changes will be
presented to the public for comment and will be appropriately documented as required by
CERCLA.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
The selected remedy satisfies the statutory requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA,
which mandates that a remedial action be protective of human health and the environment,
cost effective, and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. Section 121 also establishes a preference for remedial actions
which employ treatment to permanently and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, and
nobility of the hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants at a site. CERCLA
further specifies that a remedial action must attain a degree of cleanup that satisfies ARARs
under federal and state laws, unless a waiver can be justified pursuant to CERCLA Section
121 (d)(4).

For the reasons discussed below, NJDEP and USEPA have determined that the selected
remedy meets the requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment

The selected remedy for the Site soils (OU2) protects human health and the environment by
reducing the volume of contaminants by extraction and treatment. Treatment of the soil to
the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC will prevent the contaminants from continuing to
adversely impact the ground water, which is being drawn into the Rockaway Township
Wells. In addition, since the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC for the VOCs present hi the
soil are more conservative than the Direct Contact NJSCC, compliance with the former will
address both the protection of ground water and the direct contact risks.

Compliance with ARARs

The selected remedy for OU2 will comply with ARARs and cleanup criteria, see Table 12.
The soil will be treated in place using SVE to reduce the volume of contaminants to the
Impact to Ground Water NJSCC. The extracted vapors will be treated, if necessary, to
meet New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulation limitations prior to their release to the
atmosphere. The siting of the SVE system and any needed treatment unit will be in


                                            26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

compliance with wetland and floodplain requirements.

Cost-Effectiveness

The selected alternative for OU2 is cost-effective and represents a reasonable value for the
money to be spent. In making this determination, the following definition was used: "A
remedy shall be cost-effective if its costs are proportional to its overall effectiveness."
(NCP §300.430(f)(l)(ii)(D)). This was accomplished by evaluating the "overall
effectiveness" of those alternatives that were both protective of human health and the
environment and ARAR-compliant. Overall effectiveness was evaluated by assessing
long-term effectiveness and permanence; reduction in toxicity, mobility, and volume
through treatment; and short-term effectiveness. Overall effectiveness was then
compared to costs to determine cost-effectiveness. The relationship of the overall
effectiveness of this remedial alternative was determined to be proportional to its costs
and hence this alternative represents a reasonable value for the money to be spent.

The present worth of the selected alternative for OU2 is approximately $721,000 in 2002
dollars. NJDEP and USEPA believe that SVE will provide an overall level of protection
comparable to Alternative 3 (excavation and SVE) and Alternative 4 (excavation, treatment
and SVE) at a significantly lower cost.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment Technologies to the
Maximum Extent Practicable

NJDEP and USEPA have determined that the selected alternative represents the maximum
extent to which permanent solutions and treatment technologies can be utilized in a
practical manner for OU2. Of those alternatives that are protective and comply with
ARARs, NJDEP and USEPA have determined that the selected alternative provides the
best balance of trade-offs, while also considering the statutory preference for treatment as a
principal element and bias against off-site treatment and disposal, and considering
community acceptance.

The selected remedy treats the source materials constituting principal threats at the site,
achieving significant reductions in VOC concentrations in the soil. The selected remedy
satisfies the criteria for long-term effectiveness by removing the VOC contamination from
the soil. The selected alternative does not present short-term risks different from the other
treatment alternative (Alternative 4). There are no special implementability issues that sets
the selected alternative apart from any of the other alternatives evaluated.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected remedy for OU2 provides for on-site treatment of the soils, and the extracted
vapors, if required. By treating the contaminated soils by SVE, the selected remedy for
OU2 addresses principal threats posed by the site through the use of treatment
technologies. By utilizing treatment as the significant part of the remedy, the statute's
preference for remediation that employs treatment as a principal element is satisfied.


                                             27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Five Year Review Requirement

Because this remedy will not result in hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants
remaining on the Site above levels which allow for unrestricted and unlimited exposure
for non-residential property, the five year review will not apply to this action.
                                                                               '.<*.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Site was released to the public on July 16, 2002. The Proposed
Plan identified the preferred alternative for the Site. NJDEP and USEPA reviewed all
comments received during the 30-day public comment period. Upon review of these
comments, NJDEP and USEPA determined that no significant changes to the selected
remedy as originally identified hi the Proposed Plan were necessary.




PROPOSED CHANGE TO THE 1993 GROUND WATER RECORD OF DECISION

The 1993 ROD documents the selection of the ground water remedy for the Rockaway
Township Wells Site. The major components of the selected remedy include:

•   Extraction, treatment, and re-injection or utilization of the treated water for potable
    purposes,
•   Monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy, and
•   Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping unit on the Rockaway Township Wells.

Based on the 1992 FS, the 1993 ROD specifies re-injection of the treated ground water
through a recharge basin, with an unspecified amount to be distributed through the public
potable water distribution system. In the July 16, 2002 Proposed Plan, NJDEP suggested
amending the remedy selected in the 1993 ROD to allow all of the treated ground water to
be discharged to the surface water of Beaver Brook. The 1993 ROD did allow for the
discharge of some of the treated ground water to the adjacent wetland areas of the Beaver
Brook, if appropriate, to help offset some of the dewatering of the aquifer since the ground
water is recharged in part by infiltration from surface water. The 1993 ROD assumed a
pumping rate of 370 gallons per minute to capture the ground water contamination.
Current data shows that a rate of between 50 and 100 gallons per minute would be effective
for the remediation of the ground water contamination from the Denville Technical Park.

Among the disposal options evaluated in the 1992 Feasibility Study was the option to
discharge the treated ground water directly to the Beaver Brook (Disposal Option 5:
Treated Water Pumped to Surface Water). The option was not selected because, at the
time, it did not represent the best balance of trade-offs among the options with respect to
the nine CERCLA Evaluation Criteria. However, technical considerations and changes in
NJDEP's policy towards the distribution of treated ground water from contaminated sites


                                            28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

through the public water supply required the re-evaluation of this option.

In a letter dated February 11, 1998, Thiokol presented a technical comparison of four
discharge options:
• Discharge to surface water,
• Discharge to ground water via re-injection wells,                      <*.
• Discharge to ground water via an infiltration basin, and
• Beneficial reuse.

The four discharge options are described below. The cost of effluent monitoring is not
included in the following comparative analysis since it will be the same for all of the
options. The costs reflect the substantive differences among the discharge options.

Option 1 - Discharge to Surface Water

Discharge to surface water would involve pumping the treated water to a new discharge
pipe constructed for this purpose or to an existing storm water pipe that drains into the
wetland area adjacent to Beaver Brook. The potential discharge point would be located
near monitoring wells NJDEP-3S and NJDEP-3D, shown on Figure 3.

Beaver Brook and its associated wetlands lie approximately 300 feet south of the
Denville Technical Park. Beaver Brook flows towards the west where it eventually
enters the Rockaway River. Beaver Brook is classified as a FW2-NT stream, which is a
freshwater non-trout production waterway.

Implementation of this option would require the responsible party to comply with the
New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) - Discharge to Surface
Water requirements. These requirements would include the daily maximum Effluent
Standards for Remediation Projects, specified in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-12, Appendix B. For
the contaminants associated with the Denville Technical Park, the daily maximum
effluent standards are:

       TCE            5.4 ug/L
       TCA            54 ug/L
       1,1-DCA        59 ug/L

Compliance with the requirements of the New Jersey Wetlands Protection rules and
regulations would also be required should a new discharge pipe be constructed.

The cost of the Discharge to Surface Water Option would be approximately $56,000 for
the installation of the new discharge pipe. The cost was developed for comparison
purposes, and therefore, does not include effluent monitoring since all discharge options
would require monitoring.




                                            29

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Option 2 - Discharge to Ground Water via Re-injection Wells

Direct discharge to ground water would require the design and construction of a re-
injection well system. The number and location of re-injection wells would be based on
the results of aquifer hydraulic testing. Conceptually, two to four re-injection wells
would be capable of discharging the approximate 50 -100 gallons per minute of treated
ground water back into the aquifer. Because the depth to the low permeability bedrock is
shallow (less than 50 feet) on the eastern portion of the Denville Technical Park, the re-
injection wells would have to be installed on the western side of the Denville Technical
Park along the southern property boundary.

Implementation of this option would require the responsible party to obtain a NJPDES-
Discharge to Ground Water permit. For discharge to ground water, NJDEP requires
treatment to the least stringent of 95% removal of individual compounds or the Ground
Water Quality Standards, which are:

       TCE            1 ug/L
       TCA            30 ug/L
       1,1-DCA        50 ug/L

The cost of the Discharge to Ground Water via Injection Wells Option would be
approximately $110,000 for the installation of the piping and injection wells. The cost
was developed for comparison purposes, and therefore, does not include effluent
monitoring since all discharge options would require monitoring. The cost does not
include the cost to purchase or lease the required land.

Option 3 - Discharge to Ground Water via an Infiltration Basin

For the discharge of treated ground water back into the aquifer through an infiltration
basin, an area capable of receiving approximately 50 - 100 gallons per minute would be
required. The size of the required area would be based on the underlying soil properties
(e.g., permeability). Treated ground water would be pumped into a series of drain pipes
within the infiltration basin. The treated ground water would percolate through the soil
back into the aquifer. The infiltration basin would be constructed near the southern
boundary of the Denville Technical Park, which is hydraulically upgradient of the
contaminant source areas.

Implementation of this option would require the responsible party to comply with the
NJPDES-Discharge to Ground Water regulations. Again, for discharge to ground water,
NJDEP would require treatment to the least stringent of 95% removal of individual
compounds or the Ground Water Quality Standards.

The cost of the Discharge to Ground Water via an Infiltration Basin Option would be
approximately $85,000 for the installation of the piping and the infiltration basin. The
cost was developed for comparison purposes, and therefore, does not include effluent
monitoring since all discharge options would require monitoring. The cost does not


                                          30

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

include the cost to purchase or lease the required land.

Option 4 - Beneficial Reuse

Beneficial reuse would entail distributing the treated ground water into the municipal
water supply system of Rockaway Township and/or Denville Township. Ihe cost to
construct a pipeline from the ground water treatment plant to the municipal water mains
would be approximately $85,000. However, the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act,
N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.7(b), requires that "[a] public community water system shall acquire
and control all land within at least a 50 foot radius of any ground water source used for its
water supply. Major and minor pollutant sources and non-water system related activities
shall be prohibited within the specified area." A ground water remediation system, by its
very nature, in order to be effective, would have to be located at a point of heaviest
contaminant concentration. This conflicts with the requirements of the Safe Drinking
Water Act.

Because of potentially negative consequences of allowing the discharge of treated
effluent from a contaminated site into a public water system, the beneficial reuse option
has been eliminated from consideration.

DISCHARGE OPTION COMPARISON

The three remaining discharge options are compared in this section.

The discharge to surface water option would only require the construction of a new pipe
or more likely, the connection to an existing storm water pipe. The actual length of the
discharge pipe and its route would depend on where the treatment unit is located. This
type of design is relatively simple and would require minimal disruption of existing
businesses at the Denville Technical Park or to the wetlands around the Beaver Brook.
Therefore, it is relatively easy to implement and would be effective for long-term
operation because of its simple design. Scheduled monitoring of the treated effluent
would be required as part of the NJPDES permit. Beyond the required monitoring, very
little operation and maintenance would be necessary.

The cost for this option, $56,000, is less than the costs for the discharge to ground water
options.

Both of the discharge to ground water options would require more detailed designs. Both
would include the scheduled monitoring of the treated effluent as required by the
NJPDES-Discharge to Ground Water regulations.

Re-injection wells would be placed in a hydraulically upgradient area to minimize
disruption to ground water flow patterns. The re-injection wells would be installed in a
thicker portion of the aquifer because a longer screen length is required, typically 1.5 to 2
times longer than an extraction well screen. The depth to bedrock limits the re-injection
to the western third of the Denville Technical Park. The re-injection wells would need to


                                             31

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

be placed several hundred feet apart, away from existing businesses, and sufficiently
upgradient liom the proposed ground water extraction system. Other considerations
would include piping from the treatment building to the re-injection wells and installing
additional wells for hydraulic monitoring.

Re-injection wells typically have an operational life of 10 years before theyjieed to be
replaced. Clogging of the re-injection well screen by minerals or bacterial growth would
likely occur and the well screens would require replacement. This would increase
operation and maintenance costs of the system. Also, maintenance activities for the
injection well system would require shutting down the ground water treatment system for
periods of time, reducing the effectiveness of the recovery system.

The disadvantages associated with re-injection wells are the high capital and operation
and maintenance costs, implementability with respect to disruption of businesses at the
Denville Technical Park, and long-term effectiveness. The cost for this option, $110,000
is the highest of the three options.

The major disadvantage of an infiltration basin is the large area required to accommodate
the volume of treated ground water to be discharged back into the aquifer. Based on the
conservative discharge rate of 50 gallons per minute and other factors, the infiltration
basin would require an area of approximately 67,000 ft2, which is approximately 250 ft
by 250 ft. The infiltration basin would require hydraulic monitoring and a detailed
operation and maintenance program similar to that for re-injection wells would be needed
to prevent clogging.

The cost for this option, $85,000, is more than the cost for discharge to surface water, but
less than the cost for re-injection wells. However, because the basin would require the
dedication of a large singular area of the Denville Technical Park, substantial disruption
to existing businesses would occur making this option the least implementable.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITYPARTICIPA TION

The proposed change to the 1993 ground water ROD for the Rockaway Township Wells
Site was presented in the Proposed Plan for soil which was released to the public for
comment on July 16, 2002. Information supporting this proposal was made available to
the public in both the administrative record and a document repository at the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection headquarters in Trenton, New Jersey and also at
the Rockaway Township Free Public Library. The notice of availability for this
information was published in the Morris County Daily Record on July 15, 2002. A
public comment period on the documents was held from July 16, 2001 to August 14,
2002. In addition, a public meeting was held on July 23, 2002. At this meeting,
representatives from NJDEP and USEPA were available to answer questions about the
contamination at the Site and the remedial alternatives under consideration.

Written comments were received during the public comment period. Verbal comments
were received during the public meeting. The major concern expressed was the potential


                                            32

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

for the discharge of the treated ground water to the Beaver Creek, and subsequently the
Rockaway River, to contribute to downstream flooding.

SUMMARY

A comparison of the three discharge options showed that discharge to surface water is the
most technically feasible and cost effective option. Both of the discharge to ground water
options were determined to have significant disadvantages.

The discharge to surface water option includes discharging the effluent from the ground
water treatment plant into a new discharge pipe that will be connected, within the existing
parking lot area, directly to an existing 24 inch diameter, reinforced-concrete stormwater
discharge pipe. This discharge pipe currently drains stormwater on much of the fifteen-
acre site, most of which is impervious. A small watercourse within a defined outlet
channel starts at the discharge point of this pipe and flows directly into Beaver Brook.
The discharged treated ground water will flow directly into Beaver Brook without
diffusing through the wetlands. In addition, when the OU1 remedy was selected in 1993,
it was assumed that a pumping rate of 370 gallons a minute would be needed to capture
the site ground water contamination. However, current data indicates that the expected
pumping rate can be reduced dramatically to an average flow of 50 to 100 gallons per
minute. Analyses performed on behalf of the responsible party indicated that the
relatively low volume of the treated effluent flowing through the watercourse should not
cause erosion or increased water levels in the wetlands or in the brook, or cause
downstream flooding.

On May 28, 1999, NJDEP notified the responsible party that the action met the
requirements of the NJPDES-Discharge to Surface Water regulations, and that they could
discharge the treated groundwater via a storm sewer to Beaver Brook. The proposed
remedy would comply with the New Jersey State wetlands and water quality regulations.
The remedial design for OU1 includes some features that specifically address the need to
minimize potential harm to wetlands within the project area. The approximately five
hundred square foot ground water treatment building associated with the OU1 remedy
will be constructed on an existing gravel parking lot, near the project area wetlands.
Using the existing stormwater management system will preclude the need for
construction of a separate outfall for the ground water treatment plant.

The existing vegetative cover in the defined outlet is more than sufficient to prevent any
erosion of the existing wetlands resources in the vicinity of this unnamed watercourse. In
addition, the wetlands present in the project area do not appear to be connected
hydraulically to the ground water regime from which the contaminated ground water will
be drawn. Therefore, there should be no hydraulic effect on these wetlands from the
ground water extraction system.

Finally, the ground water treatment plant will be designed with fail-safe controls so that if
the air stripper blower fails, the ground water extraction pumps will be shut off. This will
prevent the discharge of untreated ground water into the wetlands of Beaver Brook. If


                                             33

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the entire system fails (from a power outage, for example), the ground water extraction
wells will either shut oti automatically or will, themselves, be without power. No
permanent or temporary construction-related activities will be needed in any undeveloped
areas or in the wetlands.

In conclusion, NJDEP and USEPA anticipate that the operation of the ground-water
pump and treat portion of the proposed remedy will have no effect on ground water
wetlands elevation either through the pumping of ground water for treatment or through
the subsequent discharge of the treated effluent through the existing stormwater system to
a tributary of Beaver Brook. The remedy will not affect the natural or beneficial values
of wetlands resources in proximity to this site. In addition, implementing the discharge to
surface water option will result in minimal disruption to the activities at the Denville
Technical Park.

USEPA concurs with this change to the 1993 ROD.




                                           34

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      APPENDIX                I
                               Figures


Figure 1   Location Map, Rockaway Township Wells Site
Figure 2   Site Map, Rockaway Township Wells Site
Figure 3   Site Plan, Denville Technical Park
Figure 4   Historical Process Operations, Denville Technical Park
Figure 5   Total VOC Soil Sampling Results, Denville Technical Park
Figure 6   TVOC Soil Gas Sampling Results, Denville Technical Park
Figure 7   Source Remediation Areas, Denville Technical Park
Figure 8   Wetland Delineation Results, Denville Technical Park

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP
                                                         WELLFIELD
             AREA OF
             INVESTIGATION



                                                                   BEAVER




BASE   MAPS     ARE U.S.G.S       7 '/2 - MINUTE
                                                                               2000
QUADRANGLE      MAPS,     DOVER     AND                                         J
BOONTON,     DATED'    1954,      PHOTOREVISED : 1986.             SCALE IN   FEET


                                                                                     FIGURE      I
              NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF
        ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENERGY     .
 ROCKAWAY TWP. WELLFIELD SITE. MORRIS CO.. NEW JERSEY
                                                                     LOCATION MAP
                                                           DATE:MAY 27, 1992         OR,:   0. BRENT
        ICF KAISER ENGINEERS
                 PITTSBURGH, PA.                           SCALE'- AS NOTED          DWG. NO.:
                                                   1-3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    EXISTING PRODUCTION W r LL




                                                             -   REFERENCE'
                                                                 DATE OF PHOTOGRAPHY, MARCH 14,
                                                                 1987 BY AERIAL DATA REDt'CTIONS




                                                                            I FIGURE      •   2
            NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF
       ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENERSY                             SITE MAP
ROCKAWAY TWP WELLFIELD SITE. MORRIS CO, NEW JERSEY

        1CF              ENGINEERS           >       DATE; OCT. 30. 1991      DR.: K: GARDNER
                 PITTSBURGH, PA                      SCALE AS NOTED           DWC. NO.
                                                           1-4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        0   100   200ft




 ——— —         PROPERTY LINE

 ——x— FENCE UNE
 —         — DRAINAGE
   *       *   WETLANDS

       2       LOT NUMBER
       •       SHALLOW MONITORING WELL
       •       DEEP MONITORING WELL
       a       EXTRACTION WELL
                                                          SITE PLAN
 NOTE LOCATIONS ARE APPROXIMATE.
                                         DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
 CRA
                                               Denvflle, New Jersey
0+3ia-S6(GAFTOSO)GN-SP001 APR 1S/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      X/.MW-16S
 //           /(            MW-16DB
          LEGEND
— -—           PROPERTY LINE

—— X—          FENCE LINE
— . — DRAINAGE

 *        *    WETLANDS

     2         LOT NUMBER
      •        SHALLOW MONITORING WELL
     •        ' DEEP MONITORING WELL
                                                                 figure 4
     0         EXTRACTION WELL
               NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE
                                         HISTORICAL PROCESS OPERATIONS
                     APPROXIMATE.              DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
                                                     Denvtlle, New Jersey
 CRA
04318-5«<GAFF050)GN-SP002 APR IS/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

—— <—       FENCE LINE
—        — DRAINAGE
 *       A WETLANDS

     A      SOIL GAS PROBE LOCATION
     •      SOI BORING LOCATION
     O      VAPOR WELL LOCATION       SC-3
                                        6" 10.00471 CONCENTRATION IN mi                     figure 5
           , VAPOR PROBE LOCATION
                                         ———————SAMPLE DEPTH
                                          1.28(21.8) DUPLICATE SAMPLES
                                                                                   TOTAL VOC SOIL
                                                                                 SAMPLING RESULTS
            NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE               NO    NOT DETECTED
                  APPROXIMATE.                                            DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
 CRA
                                              NS    NOT SAMPLED                 Denville, New Jersey
M318-S8(CAFfOSO)CN-SP003 APR 15/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   •t—         FENCE UNE
— -••—         DRAINAGE
  *        *   WOUNDS
       •       SHALLOW MONITORING WELL
      '«       DEEP UONTOR1NO WELL
       »       EXTRACTION WELL             O     VAPOR WELL LOCATION    \

      A        'SOIL GAS PROBE LOCATION    •     VAPOR PROBE LOCATION   \                            figure 6
      •        SOIL BORING LOCATION       1.27   TVOC SOIL GAS RESULT
                                                 IN ug/L OR 'ppm/V          TVOC SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS
               NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE
                     APPROXIMATE.          NO    NOT DETECTED
                                                                                   DENV1LLE TECHNICAL PARK
                                                                                         Denvflfe, New Jersey
 CRA
04i1»-3«(CAfTOSO)CH-SP004 APR IS/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    0      50       100ft




                  FORMER
                  DEGREASER
                  AREA

FORMER UST AREA




                                          \EGsia.
                                          ntopomwt
                                    •     SHAILOW MOMTOflNB "11 LOCATION

                                    0     DEEP UONITOmM WEU LOCATION
                                    a     EXTHACTOH *CU. LOCJnOH

                                    •     VAPOR PROBE LOCAtlON
                                          SOURCE REMEDIATION >REA




                              SOURCE REMEDIATION AREAS
                                DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
                                        Denvf/le, New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

— -—          PROPERTY LINE

—— *—         FENCE LINE
—         — DRAINAGE
  *       *   WETLANDS

      2       LOT NUMBER
      i       SHALLOW MONITORINC WELL
      e       DEEP MONITORING WELL
      a       EXTRACTION WELL             lU,,,1c...                          figure 8
      •       WETUNO BORING LOCATION                   WETLAND DELINEATION RESULTS
NOTE: LOCATIONS ARC AffWOXIIMTE.
                                                           DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
CRA
                                                                 Denville, New Jersey
                                     14/TOOJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    APPENDIX              II
                             Tables


Table 1   Corporate Histories
Table 2   Summary of Underground Storage Tanks Removed,
          Denville Technical Park
Table 3   Summary of Detected Organic Compounds in Soil
          Former UST Area - Building 2
Table 4   Summary of Detected Organic Compounds in Soil
          Former Degreaser Area - Building 2
Table 5   Summary of Soil Gas Sampling Results
          Former Degreaser Area - Building 2
Table 6   Summary of Detected Organic Compounds in Soil
          Building 4 Area
Table 7   Summary of Detected Organic Compounds in Soil
          Building 1 Area
Table 8   Summary of Soil Gas Sampling Results
          Building 1 and Building 5 Areas
Table 9   Summary of Detected Organic Compounds in Soil
          Former Degreaser Area - Building 5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Table 1
                                    Corporate Histories

Thiokol

1958 - Thiokol Chemical Corporation purchased Reaction Motors Company (RM) and
merged RM into itself.

1982 - Thiokol Chemical Corporation, an existing corporation, merged with Morton
Norwich to form Morton Thiokol, Inc.

1989 - Morton International, Inc. was spun off as a separate corporation and Morton
Thiokol, Inc. changed its name to Thiokol Corporation.

1999 - Thiokol changed its name to Cordant Technologies, Inc (Cordant).

2000 - Alcoa Inc. acquired all of the common stock of Cordant. As a wholly owned
corporation, Cordant maintained its name.

2001 - Alcoa Inc. sold the stock related to the Cordant rocket propulsion operations to
Alliant Techsystems, Inc (ATK).


Town & Country Gas

Pre-1984 - Robert S. Brower owned the property and operated it as the Town and
Country Gas Station.

1984 - Brower leased the property to Exxon Company, U.S.A. a division of Exxon
Corporation. The site began operation as an Exxon service station.

1986 - Exxon Company, U.S.A. purchased the property and continues to operate the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          TABLE 2

                                  SUMMARY OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS REMOVED
                                    DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                       UST Facility                         Tank Capacity                      Age       Date
   Designation           Number            ink Location       (gallons)       Contents       (years)   Removed

          Al              87771             Building 2          4,000         Gasoline         33      12/27/1989

          C2              87771             Building 2          7,000       No. 2 Fuel Oil    . 18     12/27/1989

          A3              87771             Building 2          1,000         Gasoline         33      12/27/1989

          A4              87771             Building 2          1,000         Waste Oil        33      12/15/1989

                           30550            Building 2      .   1,000         Waste Oil      Unknown   6/13A995
                    (Closure #C94-2273)

          A5              87771             Building 3          10,000      No. 6 Fuel Oil     33      12/27/1989

          A6              87771             Building 3          10,000      No. 6 Fuel Oil     33      12/27/1989

                                            Building 7           550          Ammonia          30       7/7/P89




CRA 431IGAFF50-T1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                             TABLES

                                                               SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                                FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                    DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                       BH-1               BH-2                        BH-3                      BH-4                New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
 Compound                             (8-10ft)          (18-20ft)          (2-4 ft)    (12-14/t) (6-8ft)      (8-10/t) (12-14/t)    Res.       Non-Res.         GV>
 1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                  ND                ND                ND        0.002 J(ND)    ND        ND         ND       210           1,000         sr
 1.1.2-Trichloroe thane                  ND                ND                ND          ND(ND)       ND        ND         ND        22            420           i
 1,1-Dichloroe thane                     ND                ND                ND          ND(ND)        ND       ND          ND       570          1,000         ir
 1.1-Dichloroethene                      ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND        8            150           10
 1.2-Dichloroethene (total)              ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND        0.004 J   79 0)        1000 {1)       in
 1,2-Dichloroe thane                     ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND         6            24           i
 2-Butanone                              ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND     . ND          ND      1,000         1,000         50
 Acetone                                 ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND      1,000         1,000         100
 Benzene                                 ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND         3            13           1
 Chloroform                              ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND        19            28           1
 Ethylbenzene                            ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND      1,000         1,000         101
 Methylene Chloride                      ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND        49 .         210           1
 Tetrachloroethene                       ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND         4             6           1
 Toluene                                 ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND      1,000         1,000         SOT
 Trlchloroethene                         ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND        0.008 J     23            54           1
 Vinyl Chloride                          ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)         ND       ND          ND         2             7           ir
 Xylenes                                 ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)        0.018    0.014        ND       410          1,000          10

 TICs                                    ND                ND                ND         ND(ND)        0.805    1.164       ND
 Notes;
 All values given in mg/kg
 ) • The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
 ND - Not Detected
 ( ) Duplicate sample
 TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
 <" NJSCCfords-U-Dichloroethene
 m
     Actual result for ds-l,2-Dtch!oroethene
 Res. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
 Non. Res. • Non-rf ildenti*! Direct Contact Criteria
 CW • Impact to Groundwater Criteria
 | ;:••>;•'. J.| SoileonemtnHonaboveNJ9CC




CM«l»CAFT50-n

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                TABLES                                                          P?ge2of4

                                                                  SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                             FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                    DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                                        BH-5                          BH-8               BH-9                New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
                  Compound                            (18-20ft)          (10-12 ft)    (20-22 ft) (2-4/9  (20-22 ft)         Res.       Non-Res.         GW
                  1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                 ND                   ND              0.048       0.120       ND       210          1,000         50
                  1.1.2-Trichloroe thane                  ND                  ND               ND         0.002    0.003 J      22            420       . 1
                  1,1-Dichloroe thane                     ND                  ND            0.001 J      0.009 J      ND       570          1,000         10
                  1.1-Dichloroethene                      ND                  ND                ND          ND        ND          8            150         10
                  1.2-Dichloroethene (total)            0.002 J               ND                ND          ND        ND     79 m         1000 (1)       1(1)

                  1,2-Dichloroethane                      ND                  ND                ND          ND        ND          6             24          1
                  2-Butanone                             ND                 0.012               ND          ND      0.013    1,000          1,000        50
                  Acetone                                 ND                  ND                ND          ND        ND     1,000          1,000        100
                  Benzene                                ND                   ND               ND           ND        ND          3             13        1
                  Chloroform                             ND                   ND                ND          ND        ND         19             28        1
                  Ethylbenzene                            ND                  ND                ND          ND         ND    1,000          1,000        100
                  Methylene Chloride                      ND                  ND                ND          ND        ND         49            210         1
                  Tetrachloroethene                       ND                  ND                ND        0.031        ND         4               6        1
                  Toluene                                 ND                  ND                ND          ND         ND    1,000          1,000   •    500
                  Trichloroethene                       0.006 J               ND                ND       0.005 J       ND        23             54         1
                  Vinyl Chloride                          ND                  ND                ND          ND         ND         2              7        10
                  Xylenes                                 ND                  ND                ND          ND         ND       410          1,000        10

                  TICs                                    ND                 ND              ND          3.830      ND

                  Notes
                  All values given In mg/kg
                  J - The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
                  ND • Not Detected
                  ( ) Duplicate sample
                  TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
                  <1)
                       NJSCCfords-U-Dichloroethene
                  ra
                       Actual result for ci»-l,2-Dlchloroethene
                   R*i. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
                   NOA. R*t - Non-K*ldentlal Direct Contact Criteria
                   CW • Impact to Croundwater Criteria
                  |         | Soil concentration above NJSCC




CM «1»CAFF50-TJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 TABLES                                                                  fage3 of4

                                                                SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SO IL
                                                                                   FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                     DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                                                   BH-10                      BH-11                                 New-
                                                                                                                                   BH    Jersey
                                                                                                                                          12    Soil Cleanup Criteria
                   Compound                            (13-lSft)           (21-23 ft)        (8-10ft) (6-8ft)         (20-22 ft)    Res.        Non-Res.         GW

                   1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                  ND                 ND             0.00006 J   liiliiiil1      I'*             210         1,000         50
                   1.1.2-TrichIoroe thane                  ND                 ND                ND         0.066        0.013            22           420           1
                   1,1-Dichloroethane                      ND                 ND                ND          0.041      0.005 J           570         1,000         10
                   1.1-Dichloroethene                      ND                 ND                ND          0.028        ND               8           150          10
                   1.2-DichJoroethene (total)              ND                 ND                ND         0.003 J      'ND             79 w        1000 0)        1<"
                   1,2-Dichloroethane                      ND                 ND                ND           ND     0.001 J               6            24           1
                   2-Butanone                              ND                 ND                ND           ND       ND'               1,000        1,000         50
                   Acetone                                 ND                 ND                ND           ND       ND                1,000        1,000         100
                   Benzene                                 ND                 ND                ND         0.001 J    ND                  3            13           1
                   Chloroform                              ND                 ND             0.0002 J        ND       ND                  19           28           1
                   Ethylbenzene                            ND                "ND                ND         0.006 J  0.001 J             1,000        1,000         100
                   Methylene Chloride                      ND                 ND                ND           ND       ND                 49           210           1
                   Tetrachloroethene                       ND                 ND                ND                | 0.065                  4        . 6             1
                   Toluene                                 ND                 ND             0.00008 J       10 J    0.026               1,000       1,000         500
                   Trichloroethene                         ND                 ND                ND          0.065   0.002 J                23          54           1
                   Vinyl Chloride                          ND                 ND                ND           ND       ND                    2           7      •   10
                   Xylenes                                 ND                 ND                ND          0.029   0.006 J               410        1,000         10

                   TICs                                    ND                 ND               ND           5.780        14.26

                   Notes:
                   All values given in mg/kg
                   J • The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
                   ND - Not Detected
                   ( ) Duplicate sample
                   TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
                   (l)
                        NJSCCfords-l,2-Dichloroethene
                   w
                        Actual rwult for ds-l,2-Dlch!oroethene
                    Rn. • RMldetittal Direct Contact Criteria
                    Non. Ret. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
                    CW • Impact to Groundwater Criteria
                   | .;:,-...•"> I Soil concentration above NJSCC




CRA OieCAFTSO-T)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                    TABLES                                                                        Tage4 of 4

                                                                     SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                                       FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                       DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                                BH-13                          BH-14                                    BH-15                             New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
Compound                             (8-10ft)           (10-12 ft)   (6-8ft)           (8-10 ft)     (6-8ft)        (10-12ft) (16-18ft)                   Res.       Non-Res.          GW
1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                  ND                 ND                                          ND              ND                   ND             210          1,000           50
1.1.2-Trichloroe thane                 ND                  ND          ND          ND(ND)              ND       0.0322 J (0.0633 J)         ND              22           420             1
1,1-Dichloroethane                     ND                  ND          ND          ND(ND)              ND      i^^Siliaj^^^l               0546            570          1,000           10
1.1-Dichloroethene                     ND                  ND          ND            ND                ND               ND                  ND               8            150           10
1.2-Dichloroethene (total)
1,2-Dichloroethane
                                       ND
                                       ND
                                                           ND
                                                           ND
                                                                       ND
                                                                       ND
                                                                               Hiiiiiiiiiiii
                                                                                   ND
                                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                       ND
                                                                                                                0.0083 J (0.0324 J)P) [
                                                                                                                        ND
                                                                                                                                                          79 0)        1000 (1)
                                                                                                                                             ND   •           6            24           1
2-Butanone                             ND                  ND        . ND           ND(ND)             •ND           ND (0.212)           ' ND            1,000         1,000          50
Acetone                                ND                  ND          ND         0.251 (0.332)        ND           0.986 (0.973)            ND           1,000         1,000          100
Benzene                                ND                  ND          ND             ND               ND               ND                   ND              3             13           1
Chloroform                            0.0253               ND          ND           ND(ND)             ND             ND(ND)                 ND              19            28           1
Ethylbenzene                           ND                  ND          ND             ND               ND               ND                   ND       :   1,000         1,000          100
Methylene Chloride                     ND                  ND          ND           ND(ND)             ND           ND (0.0112)              ND            49             210           1
Tetrachloroethene                      ND                  ND          ND           ND(ND)                           ND(ND)                 0.181            4              6           1
Toluene                                ND                  ND          ND         ND (0.0107)          ND            ND(ND)                 0.215         1,000         1,000          500
Trichloroethene                       0.0029               ND        0.0259     0.0936 J (0.0151)                 0.237 J (0507 J)    [                     23             54            1
Vinyl Chloride                         ND                  ND          ND        0.0535 J(ND)          ND            ND(ND)                 ND               2              7.          10
Xylenes                                ND                  ND          ND         ND (0.0089)          ND            ND(ND)                 ND             410          1,000           10
Total VOCs                            0.0282               ND        0.0259       9.828 (0.638)       360.2        1.264 (21.799)         31.242
Notes:
All values given in mg/kg
 J - The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
 ND - Not Detected
 ( ) Duplicate sample
 TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
 °> NJSCCfords-U-Dichlororthene
 m
    Actual r«ult for cte-U-Dkhlonwthene
 Re*. • Residential Dtrrcl Contact Criteria
 Non. Res. • Non-rrtldentUI Direct Contact Criteria
 GW • Impact to Groundwater Criteria
l^^fSJ Soil concentration above NJSCC




    CRAWUCAFFKVn

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 4

                                                             SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                    FORMER DEGREASER AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                               DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                 VP-1           VP-2                            VP-3                        VW-1           VW-2           Neto Jersey Soil Cleanup Crite'ia
Compound                        (6-8ft)        (6-8ft)        (4-6 ft)       (6-8 ft)         (12-14 ft)   (6-8 ft)      (11-13 ft)       Res.                Non.Res.        CW

1,1/1-Trichloroc thane            ND              ND            ND          ND(ND)               ND          ND         ND(ND)            210           1,000 rO
1,1/2-Trichloroe thane            ND              ND            ND          0.002 J (ND) '       ND          ND        0.002 J(ND)        22            420    1
Chloroform                      0.002 BJ       0.001 BJ         ND        0.001 J (0.003 J)      ND          ND       0.001 J (0.003 J)    .19           28              1
Trichloroethene                   ND              ND            ND        0.002 J (0.033 J)      ND          ND '     0.002 J (0.033 J)     23           54              1

Total VOCs                        0.002         0.001           ND         0.005(0.036)          ND          ND        0.005(0.036)




Notes;
All values given In mg/kg
B - Analyte was found In the associated blank as well as in the sample
J • The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
ND - Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
Non.Res. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria




CRA 431HGAFBO-T4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLE 5

                                                     SUMMARY OF SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS
                                                       FORMER DEGREASER AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                  DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                                                     Location
  Compound Name                           VP-M       VP-1B    VP-2A     VP-2B    VP-3A   VP-3A DUP   VP-3B    VW-1     VW-2     VW-3

  Trichlorofluoromethane                  ND           ND      ND       ND        ND       ND         ND      ND       ND       0.26
  1,1-Dlchloroethene                      0.70         1.00    1.10     1.50      1.90     2.10      2.50     0.66     0.98     ND
  l,l,2-Tridiloro-l,2,2-trifluoroethane   2.30         3.10    3.30     4.20      6.60     8.00      7.80     2.30     2.90     4.80
  1.1-Dichloroe thane                     0.50         0.67    0.70     0.90      1.30     1.50       1.50    0.54     0.62     ND
  cis-l,2-Dichloroethene                  1.80         1.00    1.00     1.30      2.20     2.60      2.20     1.60     1.10     ND
  Chloroform                              ND           ND      ND       ND        0.21     0.24      0.18     ND       ND       ND
  1.2-Dichloroethane .                    ND           ND      ND       ND        ND       ND         ND '    0.23     ND       ND
  1.1.1-Trichloroethane                   1.20         4.10    4.30     7.30      5.60     5.10      11.00    1.70     1.90     ND
  Trichloroethene                          78          110     120       140      230      270        230     140       120     0.15
  1.1.2-Trichloroethane                   0.19         ND      ND       ND        ND       0.18       0.17    ND       ND       ND
  Tetrachloroethene                       1.60         1.30    1.60      1.70     2.90     3.70       2.70    1.60     1.00     ND
  m,p-Xylene                              ND           0.21    ND       ND        ND       ND         ND      ND       ND       ND
  1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene                  ND           0.16    ND       ND        ND       ND         ND      ND       ND       ND
  Hexachlorobutadiene                     ND           0.16    ND       ND        ND       ND         ND      ND       ND       ND

  Total VOCs                              86.29      121.70   132.00    156.90   250.71    293.42    258.05   148.63   128.50    5.21



   Note:
  AH values In ppm/v




CRA4318GAFF50-T5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   TABLE 6

                                                        SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                       BUILDING 4 AREA
                                                            DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                                BH-6                       BH-7                 New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
                   Compound                          (2-4ft.)          (20-22 /U         (20-22ft.)     Res.               Non. Res.             GW

      1,1/1-Trichloroe thane                           ND                 ND                 ND          210                1,000              50
      1,1,2-Trichloroethane                            ND                 ND                 ND           22                 420                1
      1,1-Dichloroe thane                              ND                 ND                 ND          570                1,000              10
      1.1-Dichloroethene                               ND                 ND                 ND           8                  150               10
      1.2-Dichloroethene (total)                       ND                 ND                 ND           79                1,000               1
      1,2-Dichloroethane                               ND                 ND                 ND            6                  24                1
      2-Butanone                                       ND                 ND                 ND         1,000               1,000              50
      Benzene                                          ND                 ND                 ND            3                  13                1
      Chloroform                                       ND                 ND                 ND           19                  28                1
      Ethylbenzene                                     ND                 ND                 ND         1,000               1,000              100
      Tetrachloroethene                                ND                 ND                 ND            4                   6                1
      Toluene                                          ND                 ND                 ND         1,000               1,000              500
      Trichloroethene                                  ND                 ND                 ND           23                  54                 1
      Xylene                                           ND                 ND                 ND          410                1,000               10

      TICs                                             ND                 ND                 ND


      Notes:
      All value* given In mg/kg
      ND - Not Detected
      TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
      Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
      Non. Res. - Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
      GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
      01
         NJSCCforcis-l,2-Dichloroethene




CRA43I8CAFFSO-T6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 TABLE 7

                                                            SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                            BUILDING 1 AREA
                                                              DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                         SG-2                    SG-3          SG-4            SG-5                    Neio Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
Compound                                (8-Wft)                (18-20ft)      (2-4ft)         <6-8ft)          Res.                Non. Res.             GW

1,1,2-TrichIoroethane                        ND                   ND            ND              ND              22                   420                  1
1.1-Dichloroethane                        ND                      ND            ND             ND              570                  1,000                10
1.2-Dichlbroethylene (total)              ND                      ND            ND             ND                79                 1,000                 1
2-Butanone                                ND                      ND            ND              ND             1,000                1,000                50
Acetone                                   ND                    ' ND            ND              ND             1,000                1,000               100
Benzene                                   ND                      ND            ND              ND                3                   13                  1
Chloroform                                ND                      ND            ND              ND               19                   28                  1
Methylene Chloride                       0.0122                  0.0047        0.0054           ND               49                  210                 50
Tetrachloroethene                         ND                      ND            ND              ND                4                    6                  1
Toluene                                   ND                      ND            ND            0.0017           1,000                1,000               '00
Trichloroethene                          0.0312                   ND             ND             ND               23                   54    •             1
Vinyl Chloride                            ND                      ND            ND              ND                2                    7                 10
Xylenes                                   ND                      ND            ND              ND              410                 1,000                10

Total VOCs                               0.0434                  0.0047        0.0054          0.0017




Note;
All value* given In mg/kg
J • The associated value It an eiHmated quantity for detected analytes
ND - Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
TICs • Tentatively Identified Compounds
Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
Non. Res. - Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
         ' Soil concentration above NJSCC
(1)
    NJSCC for cis-l,2-Dichloroethene




   CRA431JCAFF50-T7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 8

                                                    SUMMARY OF SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS
                                                        BUILDING 1 AND BUILDING 5 AREAS
                                                 DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                                                                             Location
                                     SG-1 ___                  SG-2                                  SG-3                         SG-4                     SG-5
Compound Name                        Sfeet Sfeet             lOfeet       ISfeet        Sfeet       Wfeet    ISfeet     Sfeet   lOfeet   ISfeet   Sfeet   lOfeet   ISfeet

Building 1 Area
Trichloroethene                      ND           1.62 0.84 0.61 N D N D N D N D N D N D N D N D N D




                                     SG-6                     SG-7                                   SG-8                         SG-9                    SG-10
Compound Name                        Sfeet       Sfeet       lOfeet       ISfeet        Sfeet       lOfeet   ISfeet     Sfeet   lOfeet   ISfeet   Sfeet   lOfeet   ISfeet

Former Derreaser Area - Buildin? 5
Trichloroethene                       N      D    N      D    N       D    N       D    N       D   N    D   N    D     N   D   N   D    N   D    N   D    1.27 . N D




Notes:
All values in Mg/L
ND - Not detected




  CRA43I«GAIT»-T8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                               TABLE 9

                                                           SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                 FORMER DEGREASER AREA -BUILDING 5
                                                            DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                  SG-8                SG-9           SG-10                 New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
         Compound                                (4-6ft)             (4-6ft)         (4-6ft)          Res.            Non. Res.             GW

         1,1,2-Trichloroethane                     ND                  ND                ND             22 .            420                 1
         1.1-Dichloroethane                        ND                  ND             ND               570             1,000               10
         1.2-Dichloroethylene (total)              ND                 ND              ND                79             1,000                1
         2-Butanone                                ND                  ND              ND             1,000            1,000               50
         Acetone                                   ND                  ND              ND             1,000            1,000              100
         Chloroform                                ND                  ND              ND               19               28                 1
         Methylene Chloride                        ND                0.0034            ND               49              210                 1
         Tetrachloroethene                         ND                  ND              ND                4                6                 1
         Toluene                                   ND                  ND            0.0034           1,000            1,000              500
         Trichloroethene                           ND                  ND              ND               23               54                 1
         Vinyl Chloride                            ND                  ND              ND                2                7                10
         Xylenes                                   ND                  ND              ND              410             1,000               10

         Total VOCs                                ND                0.0034          0.0034




         Notes:
         All values given In mg/kg
         ND - Not Detected
         Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
         Non. Res. - Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
          GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
         (1)
            NJSCCforcis-U-Dichloroethene




CRA 43ISCAFF50-T9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     APPENDIX               III
                   Total Risk Summary Tables


Table 10   Contaminants of Concern
Table 11   Summary of Additional Lifetime Added Cancer Risks and
           Hazard Indices

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Table 10
                   Contaminants of Potential Concern
                       Denville Technical Park


      Building 2                Outdoor                  Soil
       Soil Gas                 Soil Gas

       Chloroform            Trichloroethene   1,2-Dichloroethene (Total)
   1,1 -Dichloroethane                           cis-1,2-Dichloroethene
   1.1-Dichloroethene                               Tetrachloroethene
   1.2-Dichloroethane                             1,1,1-Trichloroethane
cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                               Trichloroethene
 Hexachlorobutadiene
   Tetrachloroethene
 1,1,1 -Trichloroethane
 1,1,2-Trichloroethane
    Trichloroethene
Trichlorofluoromethane
 1,1,2-Trichloro-1,2,2-
     trifluoroethane
   Trimethylbenzene
    m- and p-Xylene

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             TABLE 11

                                                 SUMMARY OF ADDITIONAL LIFETIME ADDED CANCER RISKS
                                                                     AND HAZARD INDICES
                                                                   DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
                                                                     DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY



                                                                                          Additional Lifetime
                                                                                          Added Cancer Risk               Hazard Index
           Scenario                                       Medium                         Mean              RME       Mean             RME


           CURRENT/FUTURE EXPOSURE;
           Indoor Industrial/Commercial Worker     Soil Gas to Indoor Air               1.08E-06        1.08E-06    1.17E-04       1.17E-04



           FUTURE EXPOSURE:
           Outdoor Industrial Worker                          Soil                      3.91E-07        3.58E-06    3.25E-02       2.98E4D1
                                                   Soil Gas to Ambient Air              4.61E-07        4.61E-07   . O.OOE+00      O.OOE+00
                                                                             Totals:    8.52E-07        4.04E-06     3.25E-02      2.98E-01


           Construction Worker                              Soil                        1.25E-09        4.75E-08   2.60E-03        9.87E-02
                                                   Soil Gas to Ambient Air              1.48E-09        5.90E-09   O.OOE+00        O.OOE+00
                                                                             Totals:    2.73E-09        5.34E-08    2.60E-03       9.87E-02


           Trespasser                                        Soil                       2.25E-08        3.18E-07   4.68E-03         6.61E-02
                                                  Soil Gas to Ambient Air               1.41E-09        1.17E-08   O.OOE+00        O.OOE+00
                                                                             Totals:    2.39E-08    .   3.30E-07   4.68E-03        6.61E-02




CRA4318GAFF30-TI1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 APPENDIX                   IV
                 Responsiveness Summary

             Responsiveness Summary, Sections A-D
Appendix A   Transcript of Public Meeting
Appendix B   Written Comments
Appendix C   Proposed Plan
Appendix D   Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          Responsiveness Summary
                            Rockaway Township Wells Site

This responsiveness summary is divided into the following sections:

A.     Overview
B.     Background on Community Involvement
C.     Summary of Comments Received During the Public Comment Period and NJDEP
       responses
       Part I: Summary and responses to community concerns voiced at the July 23,
                2002 public meeting
       Part II: Summary and responses to written concerns received during the public
                comment period
D.     Appendices


A.     Overview

       This document is a summary of the comments and questions received from the
       public and the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection's (NJDEP's)
       responses regarding the Proposed Plan for the cleanup (remediation) of soils at the
       Rockaway Township Wells Site (also known as the Rockaway Township
       Wellfield Contamination Site) and the proposed change to the October 5, 1993
       Record of Decision regarding the discharge of treated ground water from the Site.

       A public comment period was held from July 16, 2002 through August 14, 2002
       to provide interested parties the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Plan for
       the Rockaway Township Wells Site. During the comment period, NJDEP held a
       public meeting on July 23,2002 at 7:00 PM at the Rockaway Township
       Municipal Complex. The public meeting was held to discuss the results of the
       Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) and the Ground Water Remedial
       Action Work Plan reports, and to present NJDEP's and the United States
       Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA's) preferences for the remediation of
       soil and the discharge of treated ground water.

      Two areas of soil contamination are impacting the ground water and, therefore,
      require remediation. Four (4) remedial alternatives for the soil were evaluated in
      the Proposed Plan. The remedial alternatives were developed in accordance with
      the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of
      1980 (CERCLA), as amended, and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
      Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). One (1) of the four alternatives was identified
      as the Preferred Alternative in the Proposed Plan. The Preferred Alternative for
      remediation of the soil at the Rockaway Township Wells Site includes: 1) Soil
      Vapor Extraction (SVE) treatment to remove the volatile organic compounds from

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        the soils; and 2) treatment of the extracted vapors, if needed, prior to release to the
        environment.

        The Proposed Plan also includes the proposed modification for the discharge of
        the treated ground water from the Rockaway Township Wells Site. This
        modification would allow the treated ground water to be discharged to'the surface
        water of the Beaver Brook instead of being re-injected or reused as a potable
        source.

B.      Background on Community Involvement and Concerns

        While active community involvement regarding this site has been minimal,
        Rockaway and Denville Township officials have consistently remained involved
        with this case. In addition, Congressman Rodney Frelinghuysen meets with
        NJDEP and USEPA officials annually at the Site to discuss the status of remedial
        activities. Issues of drinking water quality and flooding/drought conditions
        remain of primary concern to the residents and officials.

C.      Summary of Comments Received During the Public Comment Period and
        NJDEP Responses

        Part I: Summary and response to community concerns voiced at the July 23,
        2002 public meeting.

     Ground Water Contamination Issues

     1. COMMENT - What is the relationship between ground water flow and the
        technical park?

        RESPONSE - The ground water flows from the Denville Technical Park towards
        Rockaway Township Well Nos. PW6 and PW7. The wells are intermittently
        pumped at an average rate of approximately 1.3 million gallons per day, and a
        maximum rate of approximately 1.8 million gallons per day. The pumping of the
        wells at these rates has a significant effect on the flow of ground water in the area
        causing the contaminated ground water to flow towards the Wellfield.

     2. COMMENT - What is the time frame for the degradation of contaminants in
        ground water if no action is taken?

        RESPONSE - While this option has not been evaluated or modeled in the past 15
        to 20 years concentrations of contaminants in the ground water have not
        diminished. Therefore, the No Action alternative is not considered to be a viable
        option.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3. COMMENT - How can we be assured of the quality of water discharged and how
   often will the ground water be monitored?

   RESPONSE - The discharge of the treated ground water to surface water will be
   regulated under the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   (NJPDES) regulations. The requirements include operation of the treatment plant
   by a licensed operator, and compliance with discharge limits for the contaminants.
   Typically, the effluent is sampled weekly upon initiation of the system and then
   gradually drops down to monthly to ensure that the treatment system is continuing
   to operate in accordance with the regulations. Ground water is currently
   monitored annually since the contamination has not changed much over time. The
   frequency of ground water monitoring will increase once the treatment plant is
   built and operating. The ground water will need to be monitored to ensure that the
   contamination is being captured by the recovery wells. A sampling, analysis and
   monitoring plan will be developed during the design phase of the remediation and
   will include the ground water monitoring frequency.

4. COMMENT - Regarding testing of the public supply water, have efforts been
   made to determine whether high molecular halogenated compounds such as
   dichloroethane or benzene are in the water?

   RESPONSE - Rockaway Township is required by the federal and state Safe
   Drinking Water Acts to sample and analyze the water for a wide list of volatile
   compounds, which includes benzene and the chlorinated compounds found at the
   Site. The Township regularly performs the required sampling and analysis. The
   Safe Drinking Water Act also limits the concentrations of the compounds that
   may be present in the water before it is distributed to the public. These limits are
   known as the Maximum Contaminant Levels (MCLs). Below is a list of some of
   the MCLs:

   Benzene                          1 part per billion (ppb)
   Methyl tertiary butyl ether    70 ppb
   cis-1,2-Dichlorothene          70 ppb
   1,1 -Dichloroethane            5 0 ppb
   Tetrachloroethene               1 ppb
   1,1,1 -Tricholorethane         3 0 ppb
   Trichloroethene                 1 ppb

5. COMMENT - Regarding the discharge post treatment permits issued by NJDEP,
   are those limits generally the Safe Drinking Water Act MCLs, or are they higher
   or lower limits? And is there a public process allowing input on the permit?

   RESPONSE - Typically, the permit limits are generally the same as or lower than
   the MCL numbers. However, in the case of contaminated sites, the discharge
   limits may be higher than the MCLs to allow for accelerated cleanup of very

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   contaminated water. The NJPDES permit process includes an announcement that
   is sent out publicly to those within a certain radius of the discharge point, as well
   as a notification through the newspaper. If enough interest is received, NJDEP
   has the option to hold a public hearing. The NJPDES permit process for this site
   was initiated approximately 2 to 3 years ago and resulted in no public input. The
   NJPDES Discharge to Surface Water Permit No. NJ0133892 was subsequently
   issued on May 28,1999, with an effective date of July 1,1999 and with an
   expiration date of June 30, 2004.

Flooding Issues

6. COMMENT - The Township of Denville has had problems with flooding issues
   in the past. Will the discharge affect water levels in the Beaver Brook or the
   wetlands that may negatively impact downtown Denville?

   RESPONSE - Pumping rates for remediation of the contaminated ground water
   have been estimated to be between 50 and 100 gallons per minute. This is
   anticipated to have minimal impact on the Beaver Brook or the wetlands.
   Discharged water will exit through the existing storm water sewer and be guided
   by a waterway through the wetlands directly to the Beaver Brook. Therefore,
   minimal impact to the level of water is anticipated.

7. COMMENT - Can the discharge be interrupted on demand?

   RESPONSE - While the system is built to provide a continuous treatment and
   discharge of the water, there does remain the ability to shut the system down at
   any time.

Soil Treatment System Issues

8. COMMENT - Are the motors from the treatment system going to result in any
   unpleasant odors?

   RESPONSE - Most of the system is driven by electricity, therefore, no gasoline or
   diesel fuel odors will be involved. The air emissions from the treatment unit must
   meet federal and state air pollution regulations, so there should be no odors from
   the gases being removed from the soil. If necessary, NJDEP will require
   additional treatment to make sure that the air pollution discharge limits are met.

9. COMMENT - The neighborhoods surrounding Beaver Brook have been dealing
   with numerous noise issues from various sources. Can you assure us that the
   noise level from the treatment system will not exceed the noise level in the
   industrial park?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    RESPONSE - The treatment system including all fans, motors and controls will
    be contained in a brick block-type building. Mufflers will be used on the fans and
    the exhaust systems. All efforts will be made to design the system with as low a
    noise level as possible. NJDEP will include noise as an issue of concern when
    reviewing the design plans.
                                                                           '•<t.
Other

10. COMMENT - Aside from the Shell Gas Station, are any of the operations at the
    Denville Technical Park still generating contamination?

    RESPONSE - For clarification, the Shell Gas Station is not part of the Denville
    Technical Park. A separate cleanup is being conducted at the Shell Gas Station
    under NJDEP's Underground Storage Tank Program. To the knowledge of the
    NJDEP, there are no operations at the Denville Technical Park that are currently
    generating contamination.

11. COMMENT - A statement was made concerning the responsible party's
    commitments on maintenance of the Rockaway Township air stripper.

   RESPONSE - Thiokol Corporation is required, under a 1996 Administrative
   Consent Order (AGO) with NJDEP, to investigate and clean up soil contamination
   that is present at the Denville Technical Park, to investigate and clean up the
   ground water contamination, and to continue to pay for the operation of the air
   stripper on the Rockaway Township Wells. Alliant Techsystems Inc. acquired
   Cordant Technologies Inc. (previously known as Thiokol Corporation) in 2001.
   Alliant Techsystems Inc. has assumed the responsibilities of the 1996 AGO,
   including maintenance of the Rockaway Township air stripper.

   Part II: Summary and responses to written concerns received during the
   public comment period

Only one written comment letter was received during the public comment period.
The letter was from Alliant Techsystems, Inc., the responsible party for cleanup of the
site. The letter contained the following comments.

12. COMMENT - Alliant Techsystems, Inc. finds the proposed plan to be generally
    acceptable.

   RESPONSE - Alliant's comment is acknowledged.

13. COMMENT - The Proposed Plan states that in 1995 no soil delineation or
    remediation was conducted during the waste oil underground storage tank (UST)
    removal since it was located in an area of known soil contamination, which was
    going to be addressed as part of the forthcoming Superfund action. It goes on to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        state that the excavated soil was returned to the UST excavation that had been
        lined with polyethylene sheeting prior to backfilling. Alliant commented that the
        Proposed Plan should have noted that these decisions were approved by NJDEP
        before they implemented.

        RESPONSE - It is agreed that NJDEP approved the decisions to delay'the
        delineation and remediation of the soil around the UST until the Record of
        Decision, and to allow excavated soil to be returned to the polyethylene sheeting
        lined excavation. This clarification has been made in the ROD.

     14. COMMENT - The cost summary for the four (4) alternatives is presented hi 2002
         dollars, not 1999.

        RESPONSE - It is correct that the costs for the four alternatives are presented in
        2002 dollars, not 1999. This clarification has been made hi the ROD.

     15. COMMENT - The Proposed Plan states that a NJPDES permit would be required.
         NJPDES Permit No. NJ0133892 was already issued by the NJDEP on May 28,
         1999. Since the remediation system has not yet been constructed, no discharge
         under this permit has been made. This permit expires on June 30, 2004. The
         paragraph also states an effluent standard for 1,1-dichloroethane (l,l-DCA)i The
        NJPDES permit does not contain a specific standard for 1,1 -DCA, although there
         is a specified daily maximum effluent standard for chloroform at 11.4 ug/L.

        RESPONSE - It is correct that the NJDPES Discharge to Surface Water Permit
        No. NJ0133892 was issued by NJDEP on May 28, 1999 and expires on June 30,
        2004. It is correct that the permit does not include a specific standard for 1,1-
        DCA. It is correct that the permit includes a daily maximum effluent standard for
        chloroform of 11.4 ug/1. These clarifications have been made hi the ROD.

     16. COMMENT - The estimated costs for the re-injection well and infiltration basin
         options assumed that the area of the site required for these options would be made
         available during the project. These cost estimates do not include the cost to
         purchase or lease the required land.

        RESPONSE - It is correct that the estimated costs do not include the cost to
        purchase or lease the required land. This clarification has been made to the ROD.

D.      Appendices

        Appendix A            Transcript of Public Meeting
        Appendix B            Written Comments
        Appendix C            Proposed Plan
        Appendix D            Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        Appendix A
Transcript of Public Meeting

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Pagel
                                   COUNTY OF MORRIS
                                   TOWNSHIP OF ROCKAWAY

     A PUBLIC MEETING to DISCUSS
     THE PROPOSED PLAN for
     REMEDIATION of the ROCKAWAY                 TRANSCRIPT OF
     TOWNSHIP WELLFIELD CONTAMINATION            PUBLIC HEARING
     SUPERFUND SITE.




                 Place      Ro.ckaway Township Municipal Complex
                            65 Mount Hope Road
                            Rockaway, New Jersey
 8              Date:       Tuesday, July 23, 2002
 9   BE F O R E :
10       BRUCE VENNER,  Chief Bureau of Case Management
                        NJ Department of Environmental
11                      Protection
12       DONNA GAFFIGAN, Case Manager Bureau of Case
                         Managment, NJ Department of
13                       Environmental Protection
14       JON BODE, Project Manager, ATK
15       STEVE BOSS, Project Manager, CRA
16
17
18
19
20
21                       STREHLOW & ASSOCIATES
                  Court Reporters-Videographers
22                      20 Windybush Way
                 Titusville, New Jersey 08560
23        Serving New Jersey, New York & Pennsylvania
                (609) 538-0005, (215) 985-5991
24
25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           Page 2
 1              MR. LEVINSON:    My name is Steve Levinson and
 2   for those some of you who do not know we do have
 3   Councilman, Mr. Gellman, Doctor Gellman and Councilman
                                               **••
 4   Max Rodgers is here. This is actually a public hearing
 5   we have Mayor Gene Feyl from Denville Township.
 6              MAYOR FEYL:     How are you doing?
 7              MR. LEVINSON:    This is a meeting, actually
 8   this is DEP's public meeting dealing with the
 9   Township's Wellfield investigation that's been going on
10   for approximately 15 years maybe?
11              I might be retired by the time this is
12   resolved, I don't know.
13              Anyway DEP has requested to use our meeting
14   room and they're going to give an overview of their
15   assessments.
16              Now, this was published in the library the
17   announcements?
18              MS. GAFFIGAN:    Mailed fliers to people who
19   lived in the neighborhood.     The Mayor and Council of
20   the towns nearby affected and there's a big ad in the
21   paper —   which paper was it?    The Record.
22             MR. LEVINSON:     Also the public comment for
23   this meeting is opened to August 14th, so any comments
24   that the public may have that the information presented
25   can be presented in writing.     Also individuals who want

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 3
 1   to comment, they can submit, they can sign in to make
 2   any public comments of this meeting; is that correct?
-3            MS. GAFFIGAN:     Or ask outloud.
                                                   £«;
 4             MR. LEVINSON:     Also do you have any summary
 5   sheets regarding content of the presentation?
 6             MR. VENNER:     We have the public meeting
 7   agenda on your right, the slides that will be presented
 8   this evening by Donna and the gentlemen to my right and
 9   also the proposed plan in which this meeting is in
10   reference to.
11             MR. LEVINSON:      Well, we'd like to welcome
12   you to Rockaway Township and hopefully it's a good
13   location for your program this evening and I'm sure
14   we'll ask questions and go on the record later on.
15             MR. VENNER:     Great.
16             My name is Bruce Venner, I'm the case
17   management chief of the bureau of today's management
18   with the New Jersey DEP Remediation Program.        I'd like
19   to thank Steve Levinson for having us here; Councilman
20   Gellmah, thank you for having us also.
21            We're here tonight to discuss the proposed
22   plan for the remediation of the Rockaway Superfund site
23   as part of the Superfund hazardous waste --
24            MR. RODGERS:     Councilman Max Rodgers, Fifth
25   Ward.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    Page 4
 1   MR. VENNER:   Anyone else I should acknowledge

 2         Mayor Pollano from Denyille (sic).

 3                     Thank you, I apologize for not mentioning you
                                                        «*:


 4          earlier.
 5                     We have a sign-in sheet on your right on the
 6          table and I'd like to remind you that we have handouts

 7         that I have just held up including the agenda, proposed
 8         plan and hard copies of the slides that will be
 9         discussed this evening.

10                     I'd also like to request anyone who's not

11         signed in please do so, that way we can include you on
12         our mailing list for this site and we can also send you

13         out a meeting summary which can be developed as a

14         result of the meeting.

15                     We're here tonight both to share information

16         from you and receive your comments and questions.       On

17         the back of the public agenda the public meeting agenda
18         there's a float diagram that explains the steps in the
19         Superfund process.     We're in Step #6 at this time.
20                     As indicated in the proposed plan the

21         relevant documents for this site are being kept in
22         public repositories.     The repositories are the library

23         in the back of the complex, the DEP building in Trenton

24         and the EPA's office in New York City.

25                     I want to inform you that the Superfund

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Page 5
 1    program's technical assistance grants are available for

 2    this site.   This program is designed to provide citizen

. 3   groups of grants of up to $50,000 for the purposes of,

 4    for the purpose of hiring advisors to help Understand

 5    and interpret site related technical information.     If

 6    you're interested in applying for a grant please pick

 7    up the fact sheet that's on the sign-in table.

 8              The floor will be open to questions and

 9    comments after presentation.   We have a transcriber to

10    record our proceedings, so if you'd like to speak

11    please stand, identify yourself loudly so that the

12    transcriber can hear you, and as I said previously the

13    comment period is open until August 14th; two, and the

14    proposed plan gives details as to where you would write

15    comments if you prefer.   Written comments should go to

16    on Page 2, Donald Kakas, Section Chief, New Jersey DEP,

17    Bureau of Community Relations, Division of Publicly

18    Funded Site Remediation, 401 East State Street, 6th

19    Floor, PO Box 413, Trenton, New Jersey 08625.

20              We'll try to keep our presentation brief to

21    allow you to ask sufficient questions and comments,

22    please hold all comments until after the presentations
23    are finished.

24              I'd like to introduce Donna Gaffigan on my

25    right for the Department of Environmental Protection

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Page 6
 1    and she'll give you a brief overview of the site

 2    history; John Bode the. project manager for Alliant Tech

' 3   Services and Steve Voss their consultant will also
                                                     **:


 4    discuss remediation feasibility study and present the

 5    remediation treatment for the site.

 6                 The purpose of this meeting is to present the

 7    proposed plan for remediation, the cleanup of the soils

 8    which are sources of contamination to the Rockaway

 9    Wellfield.     The soil is located in Denville, the ground

10    water extends into Rockaway.       In addition to presenting

11    the proposed plan for the soils of the site you would
12    present the proposed changes to the ground water remedy

13    that was documented in 1993. This will be presented

14    after the proposed remedy for the soils.

15                 I'll   begin with a brief history of the site.

16    This shows the Rockaway Township Wellfield.          This

17    direction is north.      The wellfield is located North of

18    Route 80 which is here.      This is Ford Road which

19    divides Denville Township from Rockaway Township.

20                In 1980 the contamination was detected in the

21    wellfield which provides drinking water for 14,000

22    residence in Rockaway Township.      In response to the

23    contamination a treatment unit was constructed at the

24    wellfield so that safe drinking water could be

25    provided.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 7
 1                 Also in response to the contamination the

 2    wellfield was designated as a Superfund site in 1983 by

- 3   the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
 4    Investigations conducted by New Jersey DEP £0 identify

 5    potential sources of ground water contamination; the

 6    results of these early investigations show that some of

 7    the contaminants are the same contaminants found in the
 8    Rockaway Township Wellfield were also found in this
 9    area in Denville which is the current location of the
10    Denville Technical Park.

11                 Next slide.
12          .      This is a slide of the enlargement of the

13    Denville Technical Park and some of the adjacent

14    buildings.     The property was originally developed

15    around 1953 by the United States government as a naval

16    industrial reserve plants operating as a engineering

17    research and development facility for rocket engines,

18    under contract to the Reaction Motors and then Thiokol
19    Corporation continued operation, subsequently purchased
20    the buildings and the property.

21              In the 1960s Thiokol began to close down the

22    operations to the site and started leasing portions of
23    the properties to various commercial and industrial

24    entities starting in the 1970s.    Thiokol sold the

25    buildings and property, the areas now operating as the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            PageS
 1   Denville Technical Park, approximately 35 tenants

 2   operate there.

 3             Next slide.
                                              <*:
 4             In 1996 Thiokol Corporation entered into a

 5   Administrative Consent Order with the New Jersey DEP. '

 6   The Department of Environmental Protection, the

 7   Administrative Consent Order requires Thiokol to

 8   investigate and cleanup soil contamination that's

 9   present at the Denville Technical Park; the soil

10   contamination has gotten into the ground water which

11   has migrated into the Rockaway Township Wellfield.

12             In compliance with the Administrative Consent

13   Order, Thiokol has completed a site investigation which

14   evaluated the existing soil and ground water data that

15   had been collected for the site, a soil remedial

16   investigation which included the collections of

17   additional soil; to narrow it down to the locations of

18   the soil contamination and the feasibility study which

19   evaluated different technologies to clean up the

20   contamination.
21            The soil remedial investigation concluded

22   that two sources of ground water contaminations exist

23   in the soil at the Denville Technical Park.   One source

24   is the area where old parts degreasing unit was

25   located; the other area an old underground storage tank

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 9
 1   including an old waste oil tank were located, all of
 2   the tanks have subsequently been removed.

 3               The primary contaminants in the ground water
                                                   Wir
 4   were the volatile compounds, trichloroethene and

 5   1,1,1-trichloroethane both of which are probably human
 6   carcinogens.    Thiokol Corporation had entered into the
 7   Administrative Consent Order have gone into several

 8   corporate changes.      Alliant Techsystems is currently
 9   responsible for complying with the document.
10               I will turn the presentation over to John
11   Bode of Alliant Techsystems who will summarize his

12   involvement with it and turn it is over to Steve who

13   will summarize the remedial investigation feasibility

14   study.

15               MR. BODE:   My name is John Bode and I'm a

16   project manager for Alliant Techsystems and this is

17   probably a good time to take a couple of minutes to
18   introduce my company to you and explain our

19   involvement.
20               The proposed plan in the table, one in the
21   back of it you get a chance to look at it.          The words
22   "Alliant Techsystems" appear as recent as the year

23   2000.    Well, 16 months ago we purchased Cordant

24   Technologies from a company called Alcoa and Cordant

25   was the most recent name of Thiokol, and as a result of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 10
 1   that purchase in February of 2001, along with other
 2   facilities throughout the company that are active with
 3   Thiokol we inherited that a number of buildings that
                                               **
 4   Thiokol no longer occupied in including the site we're
 5   talking about now.
 6             So our involvement here is basically to
 7   finish up the efforts and to meet with the Department's
 8   requirements for the Administrative Consent Order.      A
 9   lot of folks you've never heard of us and we are
10   primarily a, primarily a defense contractor company for
11   the Defense Department.   We were spun off from
12   Honeywell in 1991, and our headquarters are —     so we
13   make munitions for the U.S. Army and also for most of

14   the U.S. Allies as well as involvement with some of

15   Thiokol's operation including solid rocket boosters for
16   the Space Shuttle.
17             So having said that and being -- I'm quite a

18   rookie of three weeks worth, I'll defer to our
19   consultant Steve Voss, who works for Conrovers, who has
20   been involved in this project who worked with Thiokol
21   and Alcoa since 1991.

22             MR. VOSS:   John, my name is Steve Voss and

23   I'm a senior project manager at Conrovers.   I've been

24   the project manager on this property since '93. It did
25   start with Thiokol and now on to Alliant, so w-ith the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 11
     1   content with DEP, and so I've been working as a project

     2   manager both as a result of the ground water remedy to
;
     3   now with the —  with the sole aspect of the property •
                                                    #*i
     4   for which we're here to night.

     5               As Donna mentioned there's a number of areas

     6   that are identified as source areas on the Denville

     7   Technical Park.    The two, there's actually three areas

     8   that we focused on during an investigation of '97 and

     9   '99, and the first area is on the far west side of

    10   Building 1 where we're suspected is a source area and

    11   we did what's called "soil gas work" where we get a
    12   sample of soil gas. Soil gas because usually it's

    13   indicative that there's soil contamination there, so

    14   there's soil gas investigation here; and' soil samples

    15   collected from the bore logs because this was a

    16   suspected area.

    17               The second area is the former degreasing pits

    18   in Building 2.    Here we had re-existing vapor wells

    19   which again we —    these were installed back in '92, as

20       one of the preliminary investigations done on the site;

21       based on site history Thiokol used degreasing pits

22       which actually used the chemicals concerned on the
23       property.

24                   Then the third area which has been quite a

25       bit of investigation was in the central area where

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 12
 1    there's a former waste oil underground storage tank

 2    that was removed back in 1995.

' 3             We knew based on the removal that there was
                                                 <**
 4    some impact to the soils there, so we want to pinpoint

 5    if there's any other potential sources and this area is

 6    an area of soil gas and borehole logs which we did soil

 7    samples.

 8               This next live lot information on here, I

 9    won't go through it, but basically what it comes down

10    to is the soil gas work in Building 1 indicates a very

11    low level of VOCs in the soil gas.   The investigation

12    that was conducted here was inconclusive that there was

13    a significant source of contamination of ground water

14    in that area.

15               In the former degreasing area based on the
16    fact we do get hits here and we knew for sure about the

17    historical operations, we know there was solvents in

18    that area, that became the basis for the suspected
19    source area there.   But the most predominant source
20    area is the central area where the formal various
21    significant hits of VOCs and the soil gas and that is a
22    definite source here right in the central area.

23               The next light summarizes that these are the

24    two defined sources are the degreaser and former UST

25    area.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 13
 1               Based on the data we received we

 2   characterized what was in the site and we used that
 3   data to start developing a cleanup remedy for the soil.
                                               «.«,
 4   The process, it's a long process you generally look at
 5   all of the technologies available and the first

 6   technology is called a "screening process" and you

 7   screen the technologies based on how effective they
 8   are, the effectiveness of the technology; its
 9   destructibility and also its relative cost.
10               The technology that we screen in general
11   were, no action alternative technology which is

12   basically doing nothing, letting it sit, that is also a

13   requirement of Superfund Law that you do analyze no

14   action.

15               Institutional controls which any number of

16   things from fencing to deed restrictions, just

17   preventing contact.   Containment which is capping or
18   somehow preventing the contaminant removal.    Generally

19   excavation and disposal and off-site facility such as a

20   landfill.    Removal and treatment which is again is
21   excavation and treatment of that soil to remove the

22   obvious soil and into a landfill.

23               Lastly, in place treatment which is again

24   treating the soil in place without excavation.    Then by

25   looking at each of these technologies, each technology

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Page 14
 1       is rated and those that were determined to be promising
 2       were retained and those that were not were just not set
 3       by the wayside for a number of reasons.   Then these
                                                    if*:


 4       technologies were developed into initial remedial

 5       alternative and each alternative is reviewed and rated
 6       and screened and based upon the effectiveness and the
 7       implementability which is basically how easy is it to
 8       remove.   Cost again is also used in the analysis to
 9       compare those technologies which are similar to
10       effectiveness.

11                 From that —   from those retained alternatives

12       which alternative can be a combination of different
13       technologies which you'll see in the next slide.     So

14       these alternatives have been evaluated in detail and

15   •   this follows a seven point analysis that is part of the

16       Superfund Law basically you looking at these seven
17       things.

18                 Overall protection of human health and

19       environment.   Comply with ARARs which is an acronym,

20       laws and regulations of the state and the federal and

21       the local and the state; long term effectiveness of the

22       alternative; how long term, how effective is it going

23       to be at addressing the problem.   The reduction of the

24       toxicity or mobility or volume which is a method of how

25       aggressive it's really attacking the problem. -The

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            Page 15
 1   short term effectiveness looks at issues of

 2   construction, cause more problems due to release or
 3   dust or other issues.
                                                 #<k
 4             Again the implementability, how easy is it to

 5   construct and then final cost.    Through this analysis,
 6   through this evaluation in the feasibility study we
 7   came up with four alternatives which are viable for

 8   this property.

 9             The first alternative no action which is
10   required by the Superfund Law.
11             The second alternative soil vapor extraction
12   and this would be a degreaser pit and the -- soil vapor

13   extraction is simply placement of wells into the soil

14   and a vapor extraction is put on that to wellfield and

15   the soil vapor is extracted and through that process

16   your full contaminants come out of the soil into a pipe

17   and into a treatment system on site.

18             Alternative three is a combination of SVE of

19   the former degreaser area and then excavation of the

20   soils around the former UST area and off-site disposal

21   which would be a landfill.

22             Alternative four is similar to three, in that

23   the soil formally used will be excavated, but that soil

24   will be treated on site with what's called thermal

25   desorption bake the soil.    The vapors are collected and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 16
 1   then treated on site and then...    Soil vapor
 2   extractions for the degreaser area.

 3             So these are the formal alternatives that's
                                               **••
 4   presented to the DEP.

 5               And these next two slides are basically soil
 6   conceptual plan of how this would work.     This is
 7   alternative two which is soil vapor extraction of both

 8   areas.   This is the former degreaser and the former UST
 9   area.    There are existing vapor wells here; they're to
10   be connected by a header pipe that pipe is for a

11   purpose of this discussion was shown to go through the

12   building.

13               New SVE wells are to be placed in the waste

14   oil UST area and this will be connected by pipe to a

15   treatment building and that's where the blowers would

16   be, and at that point through design you determine
17   whether they have to add a gas treatment, but basically

18   this is where the blowers are to create the vacuum.
19               Alternatives three and four.   Again SVE is

20   common to alternative two and former degreaser area.

21   This is would be piped back to the treatment building,

22   alternative two. In the former UST the soil in this

23   area would be excavated to the extent that it meets the

24   state criteria for soil cleanup, that soil would be

25   excavated, be back stored with alternative three and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 17
  1   that soil would be taken off-site to a landfill.

  2               Alternative four would be treatment of the

- 3   soil on site.    It's not shown in the diagram but an
                                                   <*
  4   area —    this is where you do the treatment. The

  5   equipment is brought in and there's a lot of issues

  6   with that, but basically it's treated on site and that

  7   would have to go off-site basically to a hazardous

  8   landfill.

  9               This is the depiction of the alternatives and
10    real quickly on cost, relative cost of these lots, but

11    if you look at the last column which is really .what the

12    alternatives are. No action, zero dollars.

13                Alternative two, SVE estimated at $720,000

14    for construction and operation.    Alternative three is

15    excavation and at three million dollars; and

16    alternative four was the excavation and on-site

17    treatment we have at $3.2 million.    So that gives you

18    have basically a summary of where these costs sit in

19    all four alternatives.
20                With that I'll turn this back to Donna who

21    will discuss the proposed plan.

22                MS. GAFFIGAN:   The preferred alternative is

23    alternative two which is soil vapor extraction for the

24    former degreasing units and former underground storage

25    area.    This is the least intrusive alternative, and we

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Page 18
 1    feel it will allow for minimum disruption for at the

 2    Denville Technical Park and yet still be protective of

' 3   human health and the environment.
                                                  *fc
 4                The piping for the soil vapor extraction will

 5    be routed underground in the same trenches.     At this

 6    time ground water extraction lines, I'll talk about the

 7    ground water treatment in a little while.    By putting

 8    the vapor and the ground water extraction pipes in the

 9    same trenches it will also allow minimum disruption to
10    the Denville Technical Park.

11                Vapor-phase carbon will be used to treat

12    gases that comes out of the extraction vapor.      The
13    system will be relocated in the same building as the

14    ground water treatment system.    The condensate from the

15    soil vapor extraction, that's the liquid that comes off

16    of it, also that will be treated in the ground water
17    and soil.    Using soil vapor extraction is expected to
18    take three to five years and will cost about $720,000
19    which includes construction and the operation and
20    maintenance for about three to five years.

21                New Jersey DEP and the United States

22    Environmental Protection Agency believe that this

23    Alternative provides the best balance of trade-offs

24    between the four alternatives that were evaluated with

25    respect to the criteria that Steve had discuss-ed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 19
 1                One, the additional criteria community

 2   acceptance will be evaluated as we review comments and

 3   question responses to your comments and questions will
 4   be presented in the Record of Decision which* will

 5   document the selection of the cleanup alternative for

 6   the soils.

 7             Ordinarily we would take your comments now,
 8   but I do want to discuss the proposed changes to the
 9   1993 ground water record.
10             Steve, based on the early investigations of

11   the wellfield contamination a Record of Decision was

12   signed for the ground water in 1993. The Record of

13   Decision required treatment of contaminated ground

14   water nearer to the contaminant sources; it required

15   treatment of the ground water using a stripping and

16   also specified that the treated ground water would be

17   discharged back the into the aquifer ground water with

18   some of the water reused as a drinking water source.
19            As part of the Administrative Consent Order

20   between Thiokol and New Jersey Department of

21   Environmental Protection, Thiokol is required to also

22   implement the soil remedy.    This ground water remedy

23   just as it's required to implement the soil remedy.

24            As I said one of the Record of Decision's

25   required that some of the water be reused as a drinking

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            Page 20
 1   water source.    However, it was determined that, that we

 2   re-thought the issue that we did not like the idea of

 3   using the recovered water directly from the recovered
                                               «*
 4   wells as a drinking water source because it is

 5   inconsistent with our New Jersey Safe Drinking Water

 6   Act.

 7             It was also determined that redirected into

 8   the aquifer at the site is not technically feasible.

 9   It was determined that the ground water extraction

10   rates would be not adversely effect the wetland

11   resources in the area, so the replacing the ground
12   water into the aquifer was not the concern that it had

13   been because in the 1993 Record of Decision of 370

14   gallon per minute pumping rates was assumed.    Current

15   data shows a rate of 50 to a hundred gallons per minute

16   pumping would be sufficient.

17             Another reason for the revision based on

18   these factors the preferred treated water discharge

19   option is the discharge to the surface water of the

20   Beaver Brook; it's treated water will be discharged to

21   the wetland area south of the site using an existing

22   storm water.    The discharge was determined to not

23   adversely effect either wetland hydrology or biota in

24   Beaver Brook.

25             B) This slide is conceptual just like Steve's

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   Page 21
 1     slides were conceptual earlier and it shows potentially
 2     where the pipeline and where the treatment systems
- 3    would be located.  As Steve said before here's the
                                                  «*.
 4     former area of the degreasing units which would have
 5     soil vapor extractions.       There's the soil area for
 6 .   underground oil also soil vapor.       These pipes will come
 7     up here and along to the treatment building down here.
 8                 The recovery wells here, here and here and

 9     the pipeline would come all around here back to this
10     building.    The water would then be discharged to the

11     existing storm sewer line that exists at the Denville

12     Technical Park out into the wetland out here out into

13     Beaver Creek.    Again, this is conceptual it could

14     change, we just want to show that we're trying to
15     combine as many things together to minimize disruption

16     to the operation.
17                 AUDIENCE MEMEBER:     Could you show the

18     relationship of our well source?

19                 MS. GAFFIGAN:     Your well.

20                 MR. VENNER:     Here's the Denville Technical

21     Park, here's the former degreaser, former underground

22     storage ground area.

23                 AUDIENCE MEMBER:     The ground water flows...

24                 MS. GAFFIGAN:    Toward the municipal wells.

25     This is Ford Road.    This is Denville.     This is Rockaway

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Page 22
 1   Township.    Beaver Creek is not shown on the site, but
 2   it's down here by the wetlands.     This line is edge of

 3   the wet —    storm water discharge would be down around
                                                 ««*
 4   here.    That's all that we had to say.

 5               I'll take your questions and comments.
 6               MR. VOSS:   Before we go to that, it's

 7   important to understand that there is a ground water
 8   issue .on Denville Technical Park.     There's also a soil

 9   issue and in order to effectively realistically address
10   the ground water issue soils must be also addressed,
11   and that's the focus of what we talk about tonight.
12               So that the design that was presented on the

13   conceptual plan is when this proce.ss is done it's

14   designed as a system in concert with each other and so

15   it's all intended to stop the flow of contaminants to

16   the wellfield, and right now the wellfield for those of
17   you are —    the wellfield does have a treatment system

18   on it.   There's large air strippers operating since
19   1983 or thereabouts and the intent is to stop the flow

20   from contaminants from this site to the wellfield.

21   That's kind of a summary of what the treatment system

22   is.

23               Counsel, what's the level of the contaminants

24   that are reaching the wellfield as compared to 1993?

25               MR. LEVINSON:   In the wellfield the -levels

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 23
 1   have diminished over the three —      I see one of the

 2   recent reports shows that TCEs is around, which is

 3   probably the most significant compound at about -- if I
                                                   <!.<*.
 4   can find it?     Fifty parts per billion.   Those are

 5   levels were over a hundred several —      about 15 years

 6   ago.

 7                So I think that was the most prevalent.     The

 8   NCO or the NCL is one that the contaminants, one part

 9   per billion, all untreated water which is migrating

10   from this technical park, the local concentration is 50

11   parts per billion.

12                MS. GAFFIGAN:   The contamination starts here

13   and here are flowing toward the wellfield in part

14   because the wellfield is drawing water from that

15   direction.

16             AUDIENCE MEMBER:      If we're to do nothing what

17   is the time limit for degradation for zero?

18             MS. GAFFIGAN:      I'd have to get back to you on

19   that.   I don't know.

20             MR. VOSS:     A lot longer than the treatment

21   system was installed for. Fifteen, 20 years the

22   concentrations are diminished, the concentration at the
23   site generally have not. So it has not been studied,

24   it has not been modeled, so that has not been

25   determined.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 24
 1      . M S .       GAFFIGAN:    Also removing t h e contaminants

 2   from the soil will speed it up because it won't be
 3   getting into the water.
                                                    »'<*
 4             AUDIENCE MEMBER:       Evaluations of the

 5   subsurface that go with the —- culling out a lot of
 6   junk from the soil and we were never —       has anyone
 7   studied those?
 8             MS. GAFFIGAN:       When they do an analysis of
 9   the water using the standard methods they'll come up
10   with a list of tentatively identified compounds we can

11   look at those.
12             MR. LEVINSON:       Initially I know the compound

13   and they conducted voluntary organics, base heavy

14   metals, radio nuke rods, they did add to testing scans.

15   So it was done comprehensively, but essentially what

16   they have determined is the voluntary organics for
17   these industrial sites in particular the -- and the

18   types of compounds I think occurred in two ways:       Once
19   historically they were interviewed to determine what
20   kind of compounds they were used and how they were
21   discharged, and it was indicated by consultants,

22   historically, what they used to do is dump it in the

23   hole, so the underground storage tank that they issued,

24   the UST that they received are these two primary

25   locations where they find high concentrations of these



                  Public Hearing       25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 25
 1   contaminants involving organics in the soils and in the

 2   shallow ground water and in the deeper ground water

 3   holding by our wells.

 4                Also should be a distinction made^between

 5   this initiative and the other problems we're having

 6   with the Shell Oil Company which are unrelated to what

 7   you're discussing here if that's correct.

 8                Your.primary is to discuss this issue.

 9                MS. GAFFIGAN:   I kept it brief, the proposed

10   plan talks about the Shell Station.

11                MR. LEVINSON:   Do you want to address the

12   Shell aspects of this or not?

13             MS. GAFFIGAN:      I can.

14                Shell was also contamination from the Shell

15   gas station, was also contributing contamination to the

16   wellfield.     Shell was the one that was clearly

17   identified as a source of contaminant additives in the

18   gas, try to keep it simple because we're talking about

19   the soil and the technical part tonight.     There's

20   leaking from the underground tanks there so they

21   cleaned it up.

22                In 1994 I think DEP sent the Shell station

23   saying you cleaned up your ground water, they put in a

24   pumping treat system, soil extraction system.       DEP

25   wrote them a letter and said you're done, you're no

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    Page 26
 1        longer contributing contaminants to the wellfield, but

 2       then they had another discharge, a fitting came apart
 3       on a fill line and they spilled how many, many gallons
                                                   '?*
 4       back into the soil, so there treatment plan, again soil
 5       vapor extraction system again.

 6   •                They have two systems one on the site and
 7       then one down in Action Technology Department, so
 8       they're pumping more of a smaller volume of water there
 9       before it hits the wellfield.

10                    MAYOR FEYL:   None of the operations in the

11       technical park are generating contaminants, it's
12       whatever was there before except for the gas station?
13                  MS. GAFFIGAN:     Right.

14                  MAYOR FEYL:     The water originally proposed

15       would be put back into the drinking water supply.      Any

16       proposal storm sewer into the Beaver Brook, how can we

17       be assured of the quality of that quality, ultimately

18       ends up in the Rockaway River, Jersey City Reservoir;
19       it is also a major recharge here for Mountain Lakes, so

20       the question is how can we be assured the quality of

21       that water is discharged and how often is that
22       monitored?

23                  MS. GAFFIGAN:    Well, they're not from the

24       Denville Technical Park.     The system has not been

25       bui-lt —

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 27
 1                  MAYOR FEYL:     Will it by monitored and how can

 2        we be assured?
- 3 .               MS. GAFFIGAN:    They have to get a permit, a

 4        discharge surface water permit from the DEP: and the
 5        permit limitations that they're required to meet take •

 6        into account environmental concerns because the

 7      ' environment of the creatures that live in the water and
 8        sensitive to certain contaminants than we are, so they
 9        need to comply with the permit to discharge the water
10        out there; they'll monitor, it's usually weekly at
11        first and then monthly to ensure that the treatment
12        system is operating properly before they discharge.

13                  MAYOR FEYL:   Because it's not suitable for

14        drinking water we will assume it will remain

15        contaminants.
16                  MR. VENNER:   It's not suitable.   The

17        Department in the late '90s made a change not a formal,
18        but a change in thinking, it's not really appropriate

19        to put water that's been remediated back into a
20        drinking water supply, so the emphasis was placed by

21        putting it back into the environment, but first choice

22        is also to put it back into the ground and the second

23        choice surface.

24                  MAYOR FEYL:   Jersey City Reservoir we're not

25        going to notice it's discharged here.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Page 28
 1       .     MR. VENNER:     The contamination for discharge
 2   as to surface are often times more stringent than
 3   drinking water are standards.
                                                  <*
 4             MAYOR FEYL:     Will the discharge effect at all

 5   even during a drought condition like this —     water

 6   level.

 7             MR. VOSS:     There's quite a bit of destruction
 8   before the permit was issued and we looked at issues,
 9   you know, how effected by other wetland; how it
10   effected the hydrology of the wetland and if it causes

11   any other adverse effects; and the conclusion, the
12   pumping rates that were anticipated, the ground water
13   system are between 15 and a hundred gallons which
14   sounds like a lot of water.    Wetland based is really de

15   minimus, so we looked at the detail.    The State issued

16   the permit, they wanted to know that same answer too,

17   and basically there will be no changes to that.     It is

18   going to be existing storm water sewer.

19             There is a waterway through the wetlands, it
20   does guide its way directly to Beaver Brook, so it's

21   just adding water to existing storm water line.

22             MAYOR FEYL:    The concern is this is hundred

23   gallons a minute, sounds like a minimal amount of water

24   with flooding, fifty to a hundred gallons certainly

25   won't impact but the worse scenarios, a gallon, of water

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 29
  1   has a negative effect on downtown Denville, so I do

 2    have concerns about raising that level during the

• 3   flood.

 4              MR. VOSS:     With that discharge we don't

 5    anticipate a measurable increase in the water levels,

 6    so it won't matter whether it's drought or flood, that

 7    contribution of discharge shouldn't —

 8              MAYOR FEYL:     Can that discharge be           j

 9    interrupted on demand?

10              For example, if we were in a flood condition

11    that we would be asked to suspend pumping?

12              MR. VOSS:     The way the system is and the way

13    the order it's a continuous treatment.      The purpose of

14    the treatment system is to provide basically, if you

15    can picture a hydrology wall here, so there's

16    contaminated water going —     you shut down this system,

17    you let the water through, so you're letting a slug of
18    contaminated water, so there's trade-offs.        But

19    ultimately that's going to have to come from the state

20    on any kind of decision.     Physically, yes it could,

21    it's just a matter of shutting down the system.
22             Also just so there's no confusion over it,

23    the water that's pumped from the Denville Technical

24    Park will be treated.     It's treated by a stripping

25    system it's getting pretty aggressive treatment before

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  Page 30
 1    it is discharged, so it's not a simple pump and

 2    discharge; it's a pump and treatment in treated water
• 3   and that treatment water does have to be treat and
                                                **
 4    discharge sample monthly, sample monthly for that and
 5    it's pretty aggressive samplings.
 6               Sir.

 7               MR. LENCHITZ:    We know we have

 8    trichloroethene in our water supplies and these
 9    molecules are very volatile.
10              Are there efforts being made to determine not

11    that we have oil in our water supply from Exxon,

12    Shell —   have there been any extra efforts made to
13    determine whether we have high molecular halogen

14    compounds in our drinking water?        Should we not put

15    more emphasis on that type of analysis?        In other

16    words, dicholoroethane compounds or benzine.

17              MR. VENNER:     Your name.

18              MR. LENCHITZ:    L-e-n-c-h-i-t-z.

19              MS. GAFFIGAN:     When the township or we do

20    analyses of water we don't just like for TCEs, the list

21    of contaminants it's    very many.     I don't remember how

22    many, there's 20 or 50 compounds on the list that

23    includes different benzine compounds, different

24    chlorinated compounds.

25       -      MR. LENCHITZ:    They do look for that, they

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 31
 1    are able to detect that?
 2                MS. GAFFIGAN:     Yes.

- 3               MR. VENNER:     So initially all of the

 4    compounds would be sampled for, as we focus1 down on the
 5    contaminants a concern for this site and any suspected
 6    contaminants, the analysis would be more covered on
 7    those contaminants.

 8                MS. GAFFIGAN:     As a water provider the

 9    township has to analyze the water on a frequency to
10    ensure that it meets all of our safe drinking water

11    criteria.                              ........

12                MR. LENCHITZ:    The people that analyze our

13    water do a good job?

14                MS. GAFFIGAN:    New Jersey certifies

15    laboratories, so the municipality can only use a New

16    Jersey certified laboratory that shows they can run the

17    analysis accurately and precisely.

18                MR. LEVINSON:    The township also samples the

19    water every two weeks, although we're not required to

20    do that we monitor the well watering conditions; we

21    monitor the post treated conditions and to be candid,

22    we in terms of being well below any rates for

23    contaminants -- undetected in finished water, but again

24    what's being presented today is really the source of

25    the pollution, the source of the contamination; one of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           Page 32
 1   the sources being the technical park and we're finding
 2   primarily the source of the organic compounds

 3   predominant, the other sources, the hydrocarbons. The
                                              «.*
 4   gases essentially have — we've eliminated at least in
 5   our wellfield area in terms of the ground water
 6   conditions which is why I believe the DEP I think has

 7   released Shell Oil Company.

 8              MS. GAFFIGAN:   Right now they're still

 9   pumping water.

10              MR. LEVINSON:   Pump and treat.

11       . M S . GAFFIGAN:      That's being done in our

12   underground storage tank program rather than under

13   Superfund, since it's specifically operating

14   underground storage tanks they're regulating it there,
15   making sure that they all they're systems are running

16   since the Denville particularly partial, there's
17   nothing there any more, this is past contamination

18   under Superfund.

19              MR. LEVINSON:   I have —   I had a couple of

20   other questions regarding the following up on my final
21   comment.

22              The discharge post treatment for your, in
23   terms of your treatment that's being proposed, and I
24   realize there was some discussion about requiring the

25   permit and in the permit process to establish the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 33
 1    discharge limitations, generally are those discharge
 2    limitations which go to the NCL for drinking water

• 3   supplies.
                                                       «*.
 4                 MS. GAFFIGAN:     Sometimes they're lower.

 5                 MR. LEVINSON:     Are they sometimes higher than

 6    that too?
 7                 MS. GAFFIGAN:     Possibly.   In general, they're
 8    usually the same or lower.        I didn't make a direct
 9    comparison of the maximum contaminant limits.
10                 MR. LEVINSON:     Is there a public process

11    where there can be input in terms of those permits?
12                 MR. VENNER:     The way the process works

13    they'll make an announcement in the paper if there's

14    interest they'll hold a public hearing and they follow

15    through that process already.

16                 MR. VOSS:   Approximately two to three years

17    ago we went through the process of, it's called an —

18    and we want to go through that process early on just

19    gaining acceptance of the discharge, so we went through

20    the state.
21                 There is a public process on that and notices
22    were made to quite a few public agencies I believe
23    within a certain radius, all of the businesses within a

24    certain radius and was notified in the paper that there

25    was up for review, and if there's enough public

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Page 34
 1   interest then the state has the ability or has the
 2   option to call a public hearing.    There was —   I don't

 3   believe there's any public input on that current
                                                *#••
 4   process.
 5              A permit was issued by the State.   Again we
 6   have not used a permit or excess permit as the system
 7   is not up, but there were discharge criteria that were
 8   issued on that, and I'm going strictly off of this

 9   written proposed plan I don't have, but the discharge
10   criteria for TCA 5.4 parts per billion as opposed to

11   ground water which is one part per billion.    TCA is 5.4

12   and I believe the state is ten.    And those numbers are

13   slightly higher, but what's taken into consideration

14   and all that is the effects of the receptors, the

15   ground water human health drinking in an environment

16   for a discharge.   Its impact on fisheries and wildlife,
17   and those criteria are set by the State, they're not

18   set by the responsible parties, they're set by the
19   State.   So if proposed plan is correct with these
20   numbers that's what the criteria is set at and these

21   are just a small list.

22             MR. LEVINSON:   Initially the discharge was

23   proposed being injected into the ground water.

24             MR. VOSS:   This Beaver Brook as proposed on

25   the subject matter.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 Page 35
 1             MR. LEVINSON:     There's an expectation that in
 2   fact discharges in this fashion will be aeration and by
 3   degradation in terms of the residual volume to organics
                                                    «4*.
 4   that being discharged.

 5             MR. VOSS:     From an engineering perspective we
 6   don't design the system to meet criteria.        We design

 7   the system for the safety factor and I couldn't tell
 8   you what we usually try to use five or ten fold safety
 9   factor because we don't want to be —       we want to be far
10   below the criteria, so that's how the system is sized,
11   and basically floor rate, how much area produce and
12   then the model is tested and then field tested and the

13   ultimate criteria being below those numbers.

14             MR. VENNER:     Questions?

15             MR. MOFFITT:     Under a hundred gallons, around

16   the building --

17             MR. VENNER:     Your name.

18             MR. MOFFITT:    Moffitt.     I work at Carmatic

19   (phonetic) in Denville.     I also live about a quarter
20   mile from Beaver Brook.

21             MR. VOSS:   I'm sorry, most of whatever size

22   pipe will be bringing the water are six to eight inch

23   and multi-force screening on all of these subsurface,

24   so basically it will be excavated, trenched and then

25   there's -- at this point there's three extraction

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 36
 1   wells, then you have a soil vapor, so it's a bundle of
 2   pipes that will be in the ground and it's all depending
 3   on the size, the length of the size, the size of the
                                                    ":*'•

 4   blowers.

 5               MR. MOFFITT:    The pumping station of blowers

 6   is not letting the noise —

 7               MR. VOSS:     It is when you're inside the

 8   building — the building —        the building'is, right now
 9   we're estimating about I believe it's 12 by 20
10   building, it will be a brick-block type building.

11   Everything will be contained, everything will be

12   contained within the building both the ground water

13   systems.    This is the kind of a depiction of it right

14   here.   The ground water systems, the controls, the

15   blowers, all of the real operational systems will be

16   there with the exception of the ground water pumps

17   which are within the wells,

18               And in terms of noise, the noise are from the
19   blowers, so that will be contained and then the intake
20   blowers do have noise and we already have the intention

21   of putting mufflers on those intakes to quiet it up,

22   and so it doesn't matter really where the system is

23   it's going to be designed with as low a noise as

24   possible.

25     -         MR. VENNER:    Mr. Mayor.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                Page37
 1               MAYOR FEYL:     You can ensure us that the noise

 2   level will not exceed the noise level in the industrial
 3   park now?
 4               MR. VOSS:     That would vary in terms of the

 5   ambient noise —
 6               MAYOR FEYL:     There's a refrigeration plant
 7   nearby on the road that has a very high level of noise;
 8   it impacts the Beaver Brook neighborhood and the other
 9   area concerned is a hotel by Route 80.       There we have
10   to compare the noise to Route 80 versus the industrial

11   park, but I am concerned about the neighboring Beaver
12   Brook area that might be impacted by a high level of

13   noise.

14               MR. VOSS:   In general if you're within 20

15   feet of a building like this you'll probably notice if

16   there's something running.      You get any farther away

17   you're not going to hear it.      They're equivalent of a
18   great size industrial fans, but again the motors, the
19   fans are contained within the building it's just the
20   actual intake.    And then the exhaust, and again we're

21   going to put mufflers to try to minimize that and it's

22   been expressed as a concern of a property owner with

23   W.T. Realty, and it's a legitimate concern but we have,

24   we've designed and constructed systems like this right

25   in residential neighbors and it is a shared concern and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               Page 38
 1    it is one of the design objectives is noise.

 2              So in terms of quantitative I certainly can't
• 3   give you numbers but from a qualitative standpoint
                                                f*
 4    we're minimizing that noise.
 5              MR. VENNER:     We can ensure that as part of
 6    our review of the design also.
 7              MR. BETZIG:     My house is about a thousand

 8    feet from the other side of the Beaver Brook, it's
 9    about 500 feet from the nearest edge of Beaver Brook,
10    but I'm thinking another 500 feet, and if I'm in the

11    back of my patio all I can hear is the traffic coming
12    up and down you Route 80.

13              MR. VENNER:     Your name, sir.

14              MR. BETZIG:     Larry Betzig, B-e-t-z-i-g.

15    Anything you can do to cut down on the noise.

16              MR. LEVINSON:     For the record, Steve

17    Levinson, Township of Rockaway.

18              I just want to confirm also what's being
19    proposed in this hearing or in this meeting
20    modification of the 1993 ROD, Record of Decision,

21    regarding treatment facilities itself and the

22    responsibility of the -- the obligation of the

23    responsible party and what I want to confirm is that

24    the responsible party will continue to be held

25    accountable for obtaining the electrical caution for

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    Page 39
 1       the township's operation of the air stripper and for
 2       the replacement cost of the air stripper as part of the
 3       ROD.     The original ROD of 1993, I believe it was
                                                    <*•
 4       required and this amendment to this ROD in no way
 5       eliminates that obligation.
 6                   MS. GAFFIGAN:     We're not really amending.

 7                   There's administrative differences between
 8       amending the ROD. We're just making a change in the

 9       place where the water is being discharged, so all we're
10       doing instead of putting it back into an infiltration

11       basin or injection well, we're going to discharge it to

12       surface water instead.
13   .               Under a 1994 Administrative Consent Order

14       Thiokol replaced the air stripper one time.       The other

15       Administrative Consent Order that was 1996, that's

16       requiring Thiokol to cleanup the soil to implicate the

17       ground water remedy and to continue to pay for the air

18       stripper.

19                   MR. LEVINSON:     Thank you.

20                   MR. VENNER:     Other questions or comments?

21                   MR. T. MOFFITT:     Todd Moffitt, I'm just a

22       resident who lives on the other side of Morris Avenue,

23       east of Beaver Brook.       This is my brother.

24                   We, part of our concern these blowers, motors

25       or its discharge of exhaust may be coupled with are, we

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              Page 40
 1   are going to have to deal with like some of the MUA
 2   treatment plants where we have rather unpleasant odors
 3   from time to time, nothing of that sort; the motors
                                               •f*
 4   that are exhausting, is that going to create any kind
 5   of, is it electrically run, gasoline run, diesel fuel?

 6             MR. VOSS:   Most is electric driven, so when I

 7   say exhaust it's basically the gas coming off of the
 8   soil and with the air stripper —    how an air stripper
 9   works you pump water to the top of the system, the
10   water trickles, air is moved up and just through that
11   process the air strips the volatiles out of the water;
12   the air keeps going and air goes off the top and that's

13   the exhaust.

14             What is not determined yet, and we'll be

15   going through this in the design process is our
16   estimations on whether that discharge meets the state,

17   federal regulations for air emissions, and if that does

18   not meet the air emissions that air discharge will be
19   run through a vapor-phase carbon and that carbon strips

20   pulls and absorbs all of the volatiles out of the air
21   stream, and when there's been discharge out of the
22   carbon, then that air is devoid of all VOCs.

23             Basically it's yet to be determined what is

24   needed as DP stated, it's likely considering the

25   concentrations we're seeing here.   It may not .be for

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             Page 41
 1   the whole extent of the treatment system, it's likely
 2   we'll have to start off at least with the vapor-phase
 3   carbon.
                                                <*
 4             The odors off the system that these

 5   concentrations, and other requirements are the stack
 6   height, at what level off of the ground is it
 7   discharged and that's based on models which show
 8   natural dispersions of those volatiles, so generally
 9   you won't —   it's not like a gasoline that's dumping
10   .off any kind of gasoline spill generally.    It will not
11   be at the concentration that the state regulates.
12             MR. VENNER:    Other questions or comments?

13             I have some closing remarks then.

14             In closing I'd like to reiterate there might

15   be ongoing community relation outreach program with a

16   two-way communication with you, and if you have not
17   done so already, please sign the attendance sheet on
18   the desk where the handouts are on us, so we can
19   include you in any future mailings regarding this site.
20   After all comments received during the public comment

21   period have been considered, DEP and EPA will select a

22   final remedial plan.    The final selective remedy will
23   be presented in a Record of Decision, copies of the

24   Record of Decision will be available in the same

25   repository listed in the proposed plan announcement of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            Page 42
 1   the decision will be sent to everyone on the mailing

 2   list.
 3             If all goes according to plan the next time
                                               f*
 4   you'll hear from us after receiving notice of the

 5   Record of Decision will probably be in the summer of

 6   2003, at this time when we initiate the construction of
 7   the system at the site.
 8             However, I want to emphasize that your

 9   questions and comments are welcome throughout the

10   remedial process, so please direct any questions or
11   comments to either Donna Gaffigan or relation

12   coordinator Mindy Mumford sitting in the back of the

13   room and written comments will go to Donald Kakas, as I

14   stated earlier his name and addresses is listed in the

15   second page of the proposed plan.
16            Thank you for coming in.

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         Page 43
 1
 2                      C E R T I F I C A T I O N


              I, JOHN D. CASTIGLIONE, C.S.R., License Number
     XI00643, a Certified Shorthand Reporter in and for the
     State of New Jersey, do hereby certify the foregoing to
     be and is a true and accurate non-compressed transcript
 5   to the best of my knowledge and ability.
 6
                                                ^25-02


     JOHN D. CASTIGLIONE, C.S.R.                 Date
     Certified Shorthand Reporter
 9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   Appendix B
Written Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ATK
                                                                 AlliantTechsystems Inc.        Tel 952351-3000
                                                                 5050 Lincoln Drive
August 6, 2002                                                   Edina.MN 55436-1097


Mr. Donald Kakas, Section Chief
NJDEP - Bureau of Community Relations                                                         '•"
Division of Publicly Funded Site Remediation
401 East State Street, 6th Floor
P.O. Box 413
Trenton, New Jersey 08625

Dear Mr. Kakas:

Re:       Comments to Superfund Proposed Plan
          Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination Site
          Rockaway Township
____Mom's County. New Jersey . _____ ..

Alliant Techsystems (ATK), as the responsible party for the Denville Technical Park (DTP) remediation
project, has reviewed the Proposed Plan for the soil remedy at the DTP. The Proposed Plan is generally
acceptable to ATK. However, we would like to present the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) with a few minor comments:

•     Page 7. 2nd Paragraph - In the discussion of the waste oil UST, it should be noted that the
      contaminated soil in the UST excavation was left in-place and the excavation backfilled after
      consultation and approval by NJDEP. As stated in the Proposed Plan, this decision was based upon
      the fact that the area would be addressed during the Superfund remediation.

 •    Page 19. 2nd Paragraph under COSTS - The cost summary for the four alternatives are presented in
      2002 dollars, not 1999.

•     Page 21 - NJPDES Permit - The Proposed Plan states that a NJPDES permit would be required.
      NJPDES Permit Number NJ0133892 was issued by the NJDEP on May 28,1999. Since the
      remediation system has not yet been constructed, no discharge under this permit has been made.
      This permit expires on June 30, 2004. The paragraph also states a effluent standard for 1,1-DCA.
      The NJPDES permit does not contain a specific standard for 1,1-DCA, although there is a specified
      daily maximum effluent standard for chloroform at 11.4 ug/L.

•     Page 21 - Discharge Options 2 and 3 - It should be noted that the estimated costs for the re-injection
      well and infiltration basin options assumed that the area of the site required for these options would be
      made available during the project These cost estimates do not include the cost to purchase or lease
      the required land.

Should you have any questions regarding this matter, please do not hesitate to call.

Yours truly,

ALlJANT TECHSYSTEMS


Jo^matrS^Bode. P.E.
Environmental Engineer

cc:       Diego Garcia; USEPA
          Dave Gosen; Alliant Techsystems
          Craig Huber; Archer & Greiner
          Steven Voss; CRA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                "•*




 Appendix C
Proposed Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Superfund Proposed Plan
                             Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination Site
                             Rockaway Township
                             Morris County, New Jersey

                          New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
PURPOSE OF PROPOSED PLAN                              Action Work Plan (RAWP) dated August 1998,
                                                      which should be consulted for more detailed
This Proposed Plan describes the remedial             information.
alternatives considered for the soils at the
Rockaway Township Welifield Contamination             NJDEP and USEPA encourage the public to
Site and identifies the preferred remedial alterna-   review these and other documents in order to
tives with the rationale for preference. It also      gain a more comprehensive understanding of the
describes the change to the October 5, 1993           site and the remediation activities that have been
Record of Decision (ROD) regarding the                conducted there.
discharge of treated ground water from the site.
This Proposed Plan was developed by the New           This Proposed Plan is being provided as a
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection         supplement to the Soil RI/FS and the Ground
(NJDEP), as lead agency, with support from the        Water RAWP to inform the public of NJDEP's
United States Environmental Protection Agency         and USEPA's preferred remedies for soil, to
(USEPA). The NJDEP is issuing this Proposed           solicit public comments pertaining to all the
Plan as part of its public participation              remedial alternatives evaluated, as well as the
responsibilities under Section 117(a) of the          preferred alternative, and to document the
Comprehensive        Environmental     Response,      proposed modification to the 1993 ground water
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) of           ROD.
1980, as amended, and Section 300.430(f) of the
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution       This Proposed Plan describes the preferred
Contingency Plan (NCP).                               remedy for the soils for the Rockaway Township
                                                      Wellfield Contamination Site. This Proposed
The       Rockaway         Township       Wellfield   Plan also documents the proposed modification
Contamination Site has been divided into two          for the discharge of the treated ground water
Operable Units (OUs) to facilitate cleanup. The       from the Rockaway Township Wellfield
first OU (OU1) addresses the contaminated             Contamination Site. Changes to the preferred
ground water that is impacting the Rockaway           soil remedy, a change from the preferred soil
Township Wellfield and was the subject of the         remedy to another remedy, and/or a change to the
1993 ROD. The second OU (OU2) addresses the           proposed modification of the 1993 ROD may be
contaminated soil that is impacting the ground        made if public comments or additional data
water and is the subject of this Proposed Plan.       indicate that such changes will result in more
The proposed change to the remedy previously          appropriate remedial actions. The final decision
selected for OU1 is discussed in a separate           regarding the selected remedies will be made
section at the end of this Proposed Plan.             after NJDEP and USEPA have taken into
                                                      consideration all public comments.
This Proposed Plan is based on the Soil Remedial
Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) dated
July 1999 and the Ground Water Remedial

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 COMMUNITY ROLE IN SELECTION                                                                                     and the supporting documentation in -the
 PROCESS                                                                                                         administrative record. Upon timely request, the
                                                                                                                 public comment period will be extended by a
NJDEP and USEPA rely on public input to                                                                          minimum of 30 additional days.
ensure that the concerns of the community are
considered in selecting an effective remedy for
each Superfund site. To this end, the Soil RI/FS,                                                                   MARK YOUR CALENDAR
the Ground Water RAWP, the Proposed Plan and                                                                                                 *t*-
supporting documentation have been made                                                                            July 16 through August 14,2002
available to the public for a public comment                                                                       Public comment period on the Soil Remedial
period which begins on July 16, 2002 and                                                                           Investigation/Feasibility Study, the Ground
concludes on August 14,2002.                                                                                       Water Remedial Action Work Plan, the Proposed
                                                                                                                   Plan, and all remedies considered.

Copies      of the Soil Remedial Investigation/
  *• ' *• ••siV'V-*feJ»*te;%4 *;^ iV;-' -• .-•.-.••".•:'•*-.• ••.•.-•-." • '~ - - = - . . - . , ' :" - .-...-
                                                                                                                   July 23,2002 at 7:00 p.m.
                                                                                                                   Public meeting at the Rockaway Township
                                            Plan and other                                                         Municipal Complex, 65 Mount Hope Road.
                      r & ^sdocuments  comprising        the
                          M|®5' '
                         ive^Kt          -r£i : at
                                      available     the ffol-
                                                 •* *u     i
                                                                                                                All written comments on the Proposed Plan must
                                                                                                                be sent to:

                                                                                                                Donald Kakas, Section Chief
                                                                                                                NJDEP - Bureau of Community Relations
                                                                                                                Division of Publicly Funded Site Remediation
                                                                                                                401 East State Street, 6th Floor
                                                                                                                P.O. Box 413
                                                                                                                Trenton, NJ 08625
                                                                    ic Library                                  Comments received at the public meeting, as
65 Mount Hppe Rdad                                                                                              well as written comments, will be documented in
                                                                                                                the Responsiveness Summary Section of the
Phone:                                                                                                          ROD, the document that formalizes the selection
Hours:                                                          AMito 9:00 PM                                   of the remedy. Based on the comments received,
                                                                           j.                                   NJDEP and USEPA will issue a final ROD
                                                                                                                formalizing the selection of the remedy.

A public meeting to discuss the Proposed Plan                                                                   SITE BACKGROUND
will be held during the public comment period at                                                                LOCATION
7:00 p.m. on July 23, 2002 at the Rockaway                                                                      The      Rockaway         Township     Wellfield
Township Municipal Complex, 65 Mount Hope                                                                       Contamination Site is located in both Rockaway
Road. At this meeting, NJDEP will present the                                                                   and Denville Townships in Morris County, New
conclusions of the Soil RI/FS, will elaborate                                                                   Jersey. Rockaway and Denville Townships are
further on the reasons for recommending the                                                                     situated in the center of Morris County,
preferred    remedial    alternative and      the                                                               approximately 10 miles north of Morristown
modification to the discharge of treated ground                                                                 and 20 miles northwest of Newark in the north-
water, and will receive public comments.                                                                        central portion of the state.
CERCLA requires a reasonable opportunity, of
not less than 30 calendar days, for submission of                                                               The Site, located north of Interstate 80, is an
written and oral comments on the Proposed Plan                                                                  area of approximately 185 acres, which lies in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 the'center of a Y-shaped valley in an otherwise        Rockaway and Denville Townships overlie the
 hilly area of the New Jersey Highlands, Figure         Rockaway River Basin Area Sole Source
 1. The area has been developed by commercial           Aquifer. The USEPA designates areas as sole
 businesses and light industries including service      source aquifers under the Safe Drinking Water
 stations,   restaurants,   a     hotel,    plastic   . Act to protect principal drinking water sources.
 manufacturers, truck/transit companies, and
 commercial office complexes. The Denville            SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
 Technical Park is located within the site.                                   **
                                                      This section is divided into four (4) subsections
  Near the center of the site is the Rockaway         for ease of discussion. The first section
  Township Wellfield, which serves as the source      discusses the Rockaway Township Wellfield
  of potable water for approximately 14,000           Contamination Site.- The remaining sections
  residents in Rockaway Township. The wellfield       discuss other sites that are potential sources of
* originally consisted of municipal wells PW4,        contamination of the wellfield. These are gas
  PW6 and PW7 which are located on the                stations owned and/or operated by Town and
  northeast side of Green Pond Road, south of         Country Gasoline/Exxon and Shell Oil
  White Meadow Brook, and west of the New             Company, and the Denville Technical Park
  Jersey Transit railroad tracks, Figure 2. PW4       Figure 2. Because of property ownership and
  was sealed in approximately 1983. At present,       corporate changes, brief corporate histories for
  PW6 and PW7 are intermittently pumped at an         Town and Country Gasoline and Thiokol
  average rate of approximately 1.3 million           Corporation (former owner/operator of the
  gallons per day, and a maximum of                   Denville Technical Park) are provided in Table
  approximately 1.8 million gallons per day.          1.

 The municipal wells are situated in glacial          Rockaway Township Wcllfield
 sediments, which have been deposited in a large
 bedrock valley. The "valley fill" has a thickness     Water samples collected from the Rockaway
 of up to 200 feet near the center of the Beaver      Township Wellfield in late 1979 and early 1980
 Brook valley and primarily consists of sands          indicated the presence of trichloroethene (TCE)
 and gravels, with abundant cobbles and               and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs).
 boulders.    Within the sands and gravels,           The Township installed an activated carbon
 prominent clay lenses and boulder zones occur.       adsorption treatment system in response to this
 The municipal wells are screened in sand and         contamination. In October 1980, the treated
 gravel deposits at a depth of 130 feet to 160 feet   water developed an unpleasant taste and odor.
 below the ground surface.                            Analysis showed it to be contaminated with di-
                                                      isopropyl ether (DIPE) and methyl tertiary butyl
 Prior to the construction of the municipal wells     ether (MTBE), both gasoline additives. On
 in the mid to late 1960s, the predominant            October 10, 1980, the Township declared a
 direction of ground water flow in the aquifer        water emergency and advised residents to avoid
 was thought to be south-southwest. However,          consumption of the water until an air stripping
 water levels measured in monitoring wells            unit was installed for additional treatment of the
 throughout the area indicate that the influences     water prior to distribution. An air stripping unit
 from the wellfield dominate local ground water       was subsequently installed.             Currently,
flow. Within the local area, ground water flows       Rockaway Township uses only the air stripping
toward the wellfield and is thought to be             unit for water treatment. The water treated with
recharged by natural precipitation falling on the     the air stripping unit meets the New Jersey and
area, ground water drainage along the valley          Federal Safe Drinking Water Act requirements
walls, ground water flowing from areas                without the need for supplementary treatment
upgradient of the site, and infiltration from         using carbon adsorption. However, to ensure a
surface streams.                                      safe drinking water supply, Rockaway

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Township uses the carbon adsorption treatment       Corporation, Morton International Incorporated
 system whenever the air stripping unit is taken     and Shell Oil Company requiring payment to
 out of operation for maintenance or repair.         NJDEP to conduct the Phase II RI/FS, and
                                                     payment to Rockaway Township for the
In 1982, NJDEP requested that USEPA consider         continued operation and maintenance of the air
this site for inclusion on the National Priorities   stripping unit. The Phase II RI Report was
List (NPL) of Superfund sites because a public       finalized in September 1992. The FS Report
water supply was impacted and the source of the      was finalized in December 1992.
contamination to the wellfield was unknown.
USEPA placed the site on the NPL on                  From April 1988 through April 1995, Thiokol
September 1,1983.                                    Corporation and Shell Oil Company split the
                                                     operation and maintenance costs of the air
Following the discovery of contamination in the      stripping unit. In 1995, NJDEP notified Shell
wellfield, NJDEP conducted an area-wide              Oil Company that it had satisfied its obligation
industrial survey to identify potential sources of   since gasoline related contaminants were no
these hazardous substances. The survey, along        longer being detected in the Rockaway
with additional information," revealed that,         Township wellfield. Thiokol Corporation and
hydrocarbon products were present in the             its successors continue to pay the operation and
ground water at the Shell Gas Station and the        maintenance costs of the air stripping unit.
Town and Country Gas Station, which are both         Additional information is provided in the
located on Green Pond Road to the west of the        appropriate sections, below.
wellfield, Figure 2. Chlorinated VOCs were
present in ground water .at the Denville             Based on the RI and FS Reports, the USEPA
Technical Park.                                      signed, and NJDEP concurred with, a ROD on
                                                     October 5, 1993. The 1993 ROD documents the
In June 1986, NJDEP issued Directives to             selection of the ground water remedy for the
Morton Thiokol Incorporated (then owner of the       Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination
Denville Technical Park property), Shell Oil         Site. The major components of the selected
Company and the Town and Country Gas                 remedy include:
Station requiring payment to NJDEP to conduct
an RI/FS, and payment to Rockaway Township           • Extraction, treatment, and re-injection or
for the operation and maintenance of the air           utilization of the treated water for potable
stripping unit. In May 1987, NJDEP entered             purposes,
into an Administrative Consent Order (AGO)           • Monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the
with Morton Thiokol Incorporated and Shell Oil         remedy, and
Company in which the two companies agreed to         • Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping
make the above payments. The RI Report was             unit on the Rockaway Township potable
finalized in November 1988. The Town and               wells.
Country Gas Station never complied with the
Directive.                                           In addition, the 1993 ROD stated that a
                                                     subsequent decision document was planned to
Based on the information from the 1988 RI            evaluate the need for remediation of soils and
Report, NJDEP determined that additional             contaminant sources. This Proposed Plan was
studies were necessary and began a Phase II RI.      developed for that purpose.
In April 1989, NJDEP issued Directive II to the
Town and Country Gas Station requiring               Town and Country Gasoline Station
payment to NJDEP to conduct the Phase II
RI/FS. The Town and Country Gas Station              Town and Country Gas Station operated on
never complied with Directive II. In September       Green Pond Road in Rockaway Township. In
1989, NJDEP issued Directive III to Thiokol

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Junfe 1984, the property was leased to Exxon         contamination present at the Town and Country
Company, U.S.A. (Exxon).                             Gas Station has been addressed under New
                                                     Jersey rules and regulations, including the
In January 1984, Exxon installed four (4)            regulations implementing      the   Underground
monitoring wells on the property as a condition      Storage of Hazardous Substances Act, N.J.A.G.
imposed by Rockaway Township on Exxon's              7:14B-l, and because gasoline related
application for site plan approval. The results of   contaminants are no longer being detected in the
the monitoring showed the presence in the            municipal wells, the Town 1Snd Country Gas
ground water of hazardous substances including       Station will not be discussed further in this
benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene, xylene and          Proposed Plan.
petroleum hydrocarbons.             Water level
measurements showed that the ground water            Shell Oil Company Gasoline Station
flow was towards the Rockaway Township
wellfield, as influenced by the pumping of the       Shell Oil Company (Shell) operates a gas station
wellfield.                                           on Green Pond Road in Rockaway Township.

In April 1984, Exxon removed three (3)               In 1979, approximately 1,000 gallons of
underground storage tanks (USTs) on the              unleaded gasoline were- discharged to the
property. Exxon also collected soil samples that     subsurface as a result of UST failure. The
indicated   the    presence     of    petroleum      leaking UST was replaced in 1980. In 1980-
hydrocarbons. On July 17,1984, NJDEP issued          1981, Shell installed eleven (11) monitoring
a letter to Town and Country Gas Station             wells on and around the property. The results of
requiring a complete hydrogeologic study and         the monitoring indicated the presence of
remedial measures for soil and ground water.         hazardous substances including benzene,
Town and Country Gas Station never complied          toluene, TCE, DIPE and MTBE. Water level
with the NJDEP requirements.                         measurements showed that ground water flow
                                                     was towards the wellfield, as influenced by the
In June 1985, Exxon removed 2,500 cubic yards        pumping of the wellfield. As discussed above,
of contaminated soil from the property in            Shell contributed money towards the installation
accordance with New Jersey regulations in            and operation and maintenance of the air
effect at that time. Exxon then installed five (5)   stripping unit installed on the Rockaway
new 10,000 gallon fiberglass reinforced plastic      Township wellfield.
USTs for the storage of gasoline, medium diesel
fuel and waste oil. Exxon also installed a storm     In 1991, Shell installed and activated a soil
water collection system. The storm water flows       vapor extraction (SVE) system to address the
across the facility into a catch basin connected     contamination present in the soil at its gas
to an oil-water separator. Oil from the oil-water    station in accordance with NJDEP rules and
separator is pumped into the waste oil UST and       regulations.
disposed of at a licensed facility, while the
water is discharged to the municipal storm           On March 2, 1995, NJDEP informed Shell that,
sewer in accordance with a NJDEP discharge to        pursuant to Paragraph 38 of Directive III, it was
surface water permit (No. 0061816). The USTs         no longer required to pay Rockaway Township
were upgraded in 1992 to meet regulatory             for the operation and maintenance of the air
requirements. According to NJDEP records,            stripping unit since the on-site contamination
there have been no documented releases from          appeared to be under control and gasoline
the five USTs, and the storm water collection        related contaminants are no longer being
system is currently in compliance with the           detected in the municipal wells.
permit.
                                                     Shortly after, however, monitoring well data
Because    the    soil   and    ground     water     from the Shell site began to again show

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   increasing concentrations of MTBE.             In    Gas Station are being addressed under New
   December 1996, it was discovered that the            Jersey rules and regulations, including the
   remote fill and vent lines at the gas station had    regulations implementing the Underground
   separated from the tanks at the joints, resulting    Storage of Hazardous Substances Act, N.J.A.C.
   in another release of gasoline. The remote fill      7:14B-1, the Shell Oil Company Gas Station
   and vent lines were repaired at that time.           will not be discussed further in this Proposed
   NJDEP's Underground Storage Tank Program             Plan.
   required Shell to reactivate the SVE system in
  December 1996, which Shell had deactivated in         Denville Technical Park
   1994 without NJDEP's approval. The SVE
  system operates in accordance with a NJDEP            In 1953, the United States government
  Air Pollution Discharge Permit. Shell also            purchased 52.7 acres of property in the
  installed and activated a ground water pump and       Township of Denville and established the Naval
* treat system on-site and a second ground water        Industrial Reserve Plant.       A number of
  pump and treat system off-site. The off-site          buildings, including Buildings 1, 2 and 3, were
  system was activated in September 1997 at 130        constructed and utilized for the research,
  gallons per minute and the on-site system was .      development and manufacture of rocket engines
  activated in December 1997 at 30 gallons per         and associated components. In that same year,
  minute. Both ground water systems operate in         the United States government leased the site to
  accordance with a NJDEP Discharge to Surface         Reaction Motors Company who continued the
  Water Permit. The treated ground water from          same operations.       In 1958, the Thiokol
  both systems are combined prior to discharge to      Chemical Corporation (Thiokol) purchased the
  the drainage ditch, which flows to White             Reaction Motors Company and continued the
  Meadow Brook, which in turn flows into Beaver        operations at the site pursuant to government
  Brook.                                               contracts.      In 1964, The United States
                                                       government sold the property, including Block
 The on-site ground water extraction system has        62101, Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 and all buildings to
 a similar treatment train to the off-site system,     Thiokol, Figure 3. In 1968, Thiokol began to
 including an air stripping unit, total dissolved      close down its operation at the site and started
 solids filters and granular activated carbon          leasing portions of the buildings to various
 treatment units.     In March 2000, NJDEP             businesses.
 approved Shell's request to deactivate the on-
 site system because the concentrations of             In 1973, Thiokol sold Lots 2 and 4, including
 contaminants in the ground water were below           Building 7 to the International Paper Realty
 the New Jersey Ground Water Quality Criteria,         Company. W.P. Realty acquired Lots 2 and 4
 NJ.A.G. 7:9-6.                                        and Building 7 from International Paper in
                                                       1977. W.P. Realty purchased from Thiokol the
 Rockaway Township conducts biweekly                   buildings on Lots 1, 3 and 5 in 1978 and the
 monitoring of municipal wells PW-6 and PW-7           property in 1996, operating as the Denville
 for MTBE. The concentration of MTBE in the            Technical Park.
 wells has been mostly non-detect. When MTBE
 has been detected, it has been significantly          Thiokol describes some of the tenants, which
 below the New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act          operated or currently operate at the Denville
 Maximum Contaminant Level of 70 ppb,                  Technical Park, in the Preliminary Assessment
 NJ.A.C. 7:10-1 et, seq. The concentration of          dated September 1996. The locations of the
 benzene and toluene in the wells has been non-        historical process operations are shown on
 detect.                                               Figure 4. Many of the tenants were and are
                                                       subject to the requirements of the New Jersey
 Because the soil and ground water                     Industrial Site Recovery Act, N.J.S.A. 13K-1 et.
 contamination present at the Shell Oil Company               Remedial actions completed pursuant to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

this Act are described in the On-Going or               pay for the full cost of the operation and
Completed Remedial Actions section, below.              maintenance of the Rockaway Township air
                                                        stripper, to implement the ground water remedy
In December 1989, Thiokol removed seven                 required in the 1993 ROD, and to investigate
USTs from the Denville Technical Park. The              and remediate contaminant sources at the
US.Ts contained gasoline, No. 2 and No. 6 fuel          Denville Technical Park.
oils, waste oil and ammonia. A description of
the removed USTs is presented in Table 2. The           REMEDIAL INVESTIGA T/^N SUMMARY
locations of the USTs are shown on Figure 4.
Several of the USTs had leaked so contaminated       The RI for the Rockaway Township Wellfield
soil was removed along with the USTs. As             Contamination Site was initiated in December
required by NJDEP, Thiokol performed a               1986 to identify the source and extent of ground
subsurface investigation associated with the        water contamination. Field investigations span-
leaking USTs in 1990 in accordance with the         ning 1987 to 1988 included the installation of 23
New Jersey regulations in effect at that time. As   monitoring wells and the sampling of soil,
part of this investigation, five shallow            sediment, surface water and ground water within
monitoring wells (MW-1 through MW-5) were           the site area. The RI Report was finalized in
installed near the former UST locations.            November 1988 and concluded that within the
Ground water sampling results showed elevated       site area volatile organic compounds had been
levels of VOCs at each of the well locations.       detected in the ground water beneath the Shell
                                                    Gas Station, the Denville Technical Park and the
In June 1995, Thiokol removed a 1,000-gallon        Keuffel and Esser Company (K&E) property
waste oil UST (Waste Oil) located between           (located north of the Denville Technical Park),
Buildings 1 and 2. No soil delineation or           Figure 2. The RI Report recommended further
remediation was conducted during the UST            investigation to further delineate the ground
excavation since it was located in an area of       water contamination and to identify contaminant
known soil contamination, which was to be           sources.
addressed as part of the Superfund action. The
excavated soil was returned to the excavation       The Phase II RI was initiated in 1990. Field
that had been lined with polyethylene sheeting      investigations spanning from 1990 to 1991
prior to backfilling. Base and sidewall soil        included the installation of nine additional
samples indicated elevated levels of petroleum      monitoring wells, sampling of all monitoring
hydrocarbons ranging from 490 ppm to 16,400         wells installed in Phases I and II, one soil boring
ppm. A variety of VOCs were also detected in        and an investigation of the "degreasing pits"
the soil samples at levels ranging from less than   located within Building 2 at the Denville
0.3 ppm to 2,000 ppm.                               Technical Park. The Phase II RI Report was
                                                    finalized in September 1992 and concluded the
With the signing of the October 5, 1993 ROD,        following:
NJDEP determined that the replacement of the
deteriorating air stripping unit at the Rockaway    •     The "deep aquifer" is a sole source aquifer
Township Wellfield should be implemented in               that provides potable water to the residents of
an expedited time frame. In April 1994, NJDEP             Rockaway Township.               TCE, 1,1,1-
entered into an ACO with Thiokol, in which                tricholorethane (TCA), 1,1-dicholoroethane
Thiokol agreed to replace the air stripping unit.         (1,1-DCA), MTBE and DIPE have been
The air stripping unit was replaced and has been          detected in the Rockaway Township
operational since May 1995.                               Wellfield in the past.
                                                    •     A perched "shallow aquifer" occurs in some
In March 1996, NJDEP centered into a second               areas of the site but it is not used as a water
ACO with Thiokol, in which Thiokol agreed to              supply. The shallow aquifer is contaminated

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    with several contaminants.               These         possible sources of VOCs to the ground wa^er.
    contaminants have a local effect on ground             These were the Site Investigation, the
    water quality and, if not attenuated by natural        Preliminary Assessment and the Soil RI/FS. The
    means, may eventually move to the deep                 investigations are summarized below with all
    aquifer or to the streams.                             sampling locations shown on Figures 5 and 6.

•   The major sources of TCE, TCA and related          In 1992, Thiokol performed a two-phased Site
    contaminants in the Rockaway Township              Investigation for soil. The first phase consisted
    Wellfield appear to be located within the area     of collecting nine (9) subsurface soil samples
    of the Denville Technical Park. One or more        from monitoring well drilling locations that were
    sources of TCE are located somewhere near          outside of suspected source areas. The second
    Building 2. Additional sources of TCE,             phase focused on possible sources of ground
    TCA,     tetrachloroethene (PCE), their            water contamination. Five (5) areas of concern
    breakdown products and carbon tetrachloride        were identified:
    are located in the vicinity of Building 1,
    possibly within Building 1, between                • Area between Buildings I and 2, which
    Buildings 1 and 3, behind and/or adjacent to         included three former USTs (A-3, A-4 and
    Building 1, including Building 3,4,5, and 7.         Waste Oil),            - '
                                                       • Former degreaser area inside Building 2,
•    It is likely that the TCE, TCA and related        • Former sand filter bed/grease trap south of
    contaminants detected in the deep aquifer on         Building 2,
    the K&E property are attributable to sources       • Two former fuel oil USTs south of Building
    on the Denville Technical Park, where most           4 (A-5 and A-6), and
    of the same contaminants were detected in          • Former gasoline UST south of Building 2 (A-
    the deep aquifer upgradient of K&E.                  1).
•   TCE and TCA were detected in a surface             The second phase of work included 12 soil
    water sample collected near the outfall of a       borings (BH-1 through BH-12), 20 soil samples,
    drainage pipe at the southeast side of the         3 soil gas wells (VW-1 through VW-3), 3 soil
    Denville Technical Park. TCE and TCA               gas probes (VP-1 through VP-3), and 10 soil gas
    were also detected in a sediment sample            samples. The soil and soil gas samples were
    collected in this area. The drainage pipe          collected at various depths.         The Site
    conducts runoff from the Denville Technical        Investigation Report was submitted to NJDEP in
    Park and it is likely that the technical park is   February 1993.
    the source of the TCE and TCA detected.
                                                       In 1996, Thiokol conducted the Preliminary
Based on the Phase I and Phase IIRI Reports, the       Assessment, which identified two main areas of
Final FS for ground water was completed in             concern that warranted further investigation as
December 1992. On October 5, 1993, the                 potential sources of VOCs:
USEPA signed, and NJDEP concurred with, a
ROD for ground water. The 1993 ROD stated              •     Area between Buildings 1 and 2, which
that the remediation of contaminant source areas             included three USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste
would be presented in a subsequent decision                  Oil) and the flush tank, and
document.                                              •     Southwest corner of Building 5 which
                                                             formerly contained two degreaser units and a
Thiokol began investigating the Denville                     drum distribution business.
Technical Park prior to the signing of the 1993
ROD, as discussed below. Three investigations          In 1997, Thiokol implemented its Soil RI Work
were conducted for the purpose of identifying          Plan in accordance with the 1996 AGO. The Soil

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RI'included a subsurface soil study to further           concentrations of VOCs that were below all of
investigate three (3) of the potential source areas      the NJSCC. Five of the samples exhibited
of ground water contamination, which were                VOCs above the Impact to Ground Water
identified through the previous investigations.          NJSCC. These five samples were collected at
The three areas were:                                    various depths from BH-12, BH-14, and BH-15.
                                                         Of these five samples, one also exceeded the
•    Building 1 Area,                                    Residential Direct Contact NJSCC and three
•    Area between Buildings 1 and 2, which               also exceeded both the Residential and Non-
     included three USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste             Residential Direct Contact NJSCC for the same
     Oil) and the flush tank, and                        contaminant. The contaminants found above
•    Southwest comer of Building 5 which                 the NJSCC Impact to Ground Water criteria
     formerly contained two degreaser units and a        were TCA, PCE, TCE, 1,1-DC A and
     drum distribution business.                         cis-1,2-dichloroethene (cis 1,2-DCE).

The 1997 Soil RI included 10 soil gas probes             Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected.
(SG-1 through SG-10), 7 soil gas samples, 3 soil
borings (BH-13 through BH-15) and 9 soil                 Based on the exceedences of the NJSCC Impact
samples. The soil gas samples were collected at          to Ground Water criteria, this area is considered
a depth of 4 to 6 feet below the ground surface.         to be a source of ground water contamination
The soil samples were collected at various               and direct contact risk that warrants
depths.                                                  remediation.     In addition to the soil
                                                         contamination, ground water contamination
The three investigations identified a total of           exists in this area.       The ground water
seven (7) areas of concern at the Denville               contamination will be addressed by the ground
Technical Park. The results of the soil and soil         water recovery system that is being designed as
gas investigations are discussed below. The              partofOUl.
analytical results for the soil samples are
compared to the New Jersey Soil Cleanup                  2.     Former Degreaser Area - Building 2
Criteria (NJSCC), including those for Residential
Direct Contact, Non-Residential Direct Contact           This area of concern includes the former
and Impact to Ground Water. Since no standards           degreaser units located inside Building 2.
or criteria for soil gas exist, the analytical results
for the soil gas samples are simply reported.             Soil Samples - Phase II RI data from a soil
                                                          sample collected from soil boring B-4 exhibited
1.      Former UST Area - Building 2                      a TCE concentration of 51 ppm which exceeds
                                                         the NJSCC for TCE. This boring was planned
This area of concern includes the area between           to be drilled through one of the degreasing pits
Buildings 1 and 2 which included the three                located inside of Building 2, but it proved
former USTs (A-3, A-4 and Waste Oil), the                difficult logistically. Instead, B-4 was drilled
Flush Tank and the Former Chemical Storage               just outside of Building 2 as shown on Figure 6.
Area.                                                    As part of the 1997 Soil RI, seven soil samples
                                                         were collected at various depths from VP-1, VP-
Soil Samples- A total of 24 soil samples,                2, VP-3, VW-1 and VW-2 for VOC analysis.
including duplicates, were collected at various          Soil sampling results from the 1997 Soil RI are
depths from borings BH-1, BH-2, BH-3, BH-4,              presented in Table 4 and shown on Figure 5.
BH-5, BH-8, BH-9, BH-12, BH-13, BH-14 and                None of these seven soil samples exhibited
BH-15 for VOC analysis. Soil sampling results            VOCs above any of the NJSCC.
are presented in Table 3 and shown on Figure 5.
Nineteen soil samples exhibited non-detect or            Soil Gas - Ten soil gas samples were collected
                                                         from three soil vapor probes (VP-1, VP-2 and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

VP-3) and three soil vapor wells (VW-1, VW-2              Soil Samples - Three soil samples were
and VW-3) for VOC analysis.            Soil gas           collected at various depths from boreholes BH-6
sampling results are presented in Table 5 and             and BH-7 for VOC analysis. Soil sample results
shown on Figure 6. VOCs were detected in all              are presented in Table 6 and shown on Figure 5.
ten soil gas samples. The majority of VOCs                None of the three samples collected in this area
detected were chlorinated VOCs, particularly              exhibited detectable concentrations of VOCs.
TCE.      Total VOC (TVOC) concentrations
ranged from 5.21 ppm/v to 293.42 ppm/v. TCE               Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected.
accounted for up to 90 percent of the TVOCs
detected. These concentrations were the highest           Based on the soil data, this area is not
of all soil gas samples collected as part of the          considered to be a continuing source of ground
1997 Soil RI.                                             water contamination.

Based on the elevated soil and soil gas data, this        5.     Former Gasoline UST A-l
area is considered to be a continuing source of
ground water contamination. The ground water              This area includes the former gasoline UST (A-
contamination will be addressed by the ground             1) located to the south of Building 2.
water recovery system that is being designed as
partofOUl.                                                Soil Samples - Based on previous sampling data
                                                          two samples were collected at various depths
3.     Former Sand Filter Bed South of                    from borehole BH-10 for VOC analysis. Soil
       Building 2                                         sampling results are presented in Table 3 and
                                                          shown on Figure 5. None of the three samples
This area includes the sand filter bed, the grease        collected in this area exhibited detectable
trap and a former UST (C-2) that are located in           concentrations of VOCs.
close proximity south of Building 2. The sand
filter was part of the treatment system for acid-         Soil Gas - No soil gas samples were collected.
chromate metal plating wastewater.
                                                          Based on the soil data, this area is not
Soil Samples- Based on previous sampling data             considered to be a continuing source of ground
results, one sample was collected from borehole           water contamination.
B-l I for VOC analysis. Soil sampling results are
presented in Table 3 and shown on Figure 5.               6.     Building 1 Area
The sample contained extremely low
concentrations of VOCs at concentrations below            This area includes the area in and around the
alloftheNJSCC.                                            western side of Building 1.

Soil Gas- No soil gas samples were collected.             Soil Samples - A total of four soil samples were
                                                          collected at various depths from soil gas probe
Based on the soil data, this area is not                  locations SG-2, SG-3, SG-4, and SG-5 for VOC
considered to be a continuing source of ground            analysis. Soil sampling results are presented in
water contamination.                                      Table 7 and shown on Figure 5. The VOCs
4.     Building 4 Area                                    detected included chlorinated and petroleum
                                                          hydrocarbons, but at concentrations below all of
This area includes the two former fuel oil USTs           theNJSCC.
(A-5 and A-6) located to the south of Building 4
(between Buildings 3 and 4).                              Soil Gas - Thirteen soil gas samples were
                                                          collected from five soil gas probes (SG-1

                                                     10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

through SG-5) for VOC analysis. Soil gas                  Soil RI, only two of the seven areas of concern
sampling results are presented in Table 8 and             require soil remediation based on exceedances of
shown on Figure 6. VOC were not detected in               the NJSCC and/or elevated concentrations of
ten of the soil gas samples. Soil gas samples             contaminants in soil gas samples. These areas of
collected from SG-2 exhibited TCE at each                 concern are the Former UST Area adjacent to
sample depth. TCE was detected at the 5-foot              Building 2, and the Former Degreaser Area in
(h62ug/L), 10-foot (0.84 ug/L). and 15-foot               Building 2. These areas are shown on Figure 7.
(0.61 ug/L) depth sample intervals.                       Various alternatives for addressing these two
                                                          areas were evaluated in the FS. These are
The very low levels of VOCs detected in soil              described later in this Proposed Plan.
and soil gas do not indicate a clearly defined
continuing    source      of   ground     water           ON-GOING OR COMPLETED REMEDIAL
contamination or a direct contact risk in or              PROGRAMS
around Building 1. Despite the lack of a source           Completed Programs
of contamination in the soil, ground water
contamination does exist in this area. The               Eight USTs were removed from the Denville
ground water contamination will be addressed             Technical Park site as described in the Site
by the ground water recovery system that is              History and Enforcement Activities Section. The
being designed as part of OU1.                           soil contamination that resulted from the leaking
                                                         USTs is being addressed in this Proposed Plan.
7.      Former Degreaser Area - Building 5               The resulting ground water contamination is
                                                         being addressed by the 1993 ROD and the
This area includes the area in and around                modification also described in this Proposed
Building 5, which formerly contained two                 Plan.
degreaser units and a drum distribution business.
                                                          Several industrial establishments that operated or
Soil Samples - Three soil samples were                    currently operate at the Denville Technical Park
collected from soil gas probes SG-8, SG-9 and             were subject to regulation pursuant to .the New
SG-10 for VOC analysis. Soil sampling results             Jersey Industrial Site Recovery Act, N.J.S.A.
are presented in Table 9 and on Figure 5. Two              13K-1    et. seq.. which requires the
samples detected chlorinated and petroleum                owner/operator to clean up environmental
hydrocarbons, but at concentrations below all of          contamination prior to the sale of the business or
the NJSCC.                                                property. A list of the industrial establishments
                                                          can be obtained from NJDEP, although many
Soil Gas - Thirteen soil gas samples were                 were identified in the 1996 Preliminary
collected from five soil gas probes (SG-6                 Assessment. For the majority of the industrial
through SG-10) for VOC analysis. Soil gas                 establishments NJDEP issued Non-Applicability
sampling results are presented in Table and              •Determinations or Negative Declarations
shown on Figure 6. VOCs were not detected in              indicating that remedial actions were not
twelve of the soil gas samples. The 10-foot               required. Two industrial establishments, Avionic
interval sample collected from SG-10 exhibited            Products Company (Avionics) and Lockheed
TCE at a concentration of 1.27 ug/L.                      Electronics Company (LEG), however, were
                                                          required by NJDEP to conduct remediation as
Based on the soil and soil gas data, this area is         follows.
not considered to be a continuing source of
ground water contamination.                              Avionics (Case No. 86540) was required to
                                                         investigate its drum storage area adjacent to
Conclusions                                              Building 2. The location of the Avionics Drum
Based on the results of the Phase II RI, Site            Storage Area is shown on Figure 4. In 1987-
Investigation, Preliminary Assessment and 1997           1988, Avionics investigated the soil and found it
                                                    11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  to be contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbons,          USEPA, including sampling data, and a find/ng
  cadmium and silver. Sediments in a nearby catch          that the low levels of hazardous substances
  basin were contaminated with the same                    detected on these lots have not resulted in or
  hazardous substances. Approximately 39 cubic             threaten to result in a release or a threatened
  yards of contaminated soil and sediment were             release of hazardous substances, pollutants -or
  excavated and disposed of at a licensed disposal         contaminants under CERCLA which would
  facility. Upon final inspection of the remedial          require response action at the property.
  action, NJDEP issued a letter requiring No                                              <<*
  Further Action to Avionics in April 1988.                On-going Programs

  LEG (Case No. 89846) was required to                     The design of the OU1 ground water remediation
  investigate its Raw Materials Storage Area,              system is on-going pursuant to the 1993 ROD
  Hazardous Material Storage Area and Empty                and the modification described in this Proposed
» Drum Storage Area. These areas are shown on              Plan.
  Figure 4. Two samples were collected beneath
  the Raw Materials Storage Area, and one sample           SUMMARY OF EXISTING SITE RISK
  was collected' from each of the Hazardous
  Materials Storage Area and the Empty Drum                 A Baseline Risk Assessment was conducted as
  Storage Area. Samples were collected at a depth           part of the Phase IIRI Report in September 1992.
  of one foot below the surface.        Chemical            The Baseline Risk Assessment addressed the
  analyses of the soil samples detected only one            potential human health and environmental
  hazardous substance, TCE. It was found in a               impacts associated with chemicals detected in
  sample collected from the Hazardous Material            . ground water and other media at the Rockaway
  Storage Area at a concentration well below the            Township Wellfield Contamination Site.
  NJSCC.
                                                           The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment stated that
  LEG was also required to investigate its air             the domestic use of untreated ground water was
  handling unit located in the eastern side of             considered unlikely under both current and future
. Building 2. The location of the Air Handling             land use scenarios because the ground water is
  Unit is shown on Figure 4. Two surface soil              treated at the wellfield prior to distribution to the
  samples were collected below drainage valves on          public. However, human health risks associated
  the unit      Analytical results indicated the           with the hypothetical use of untreated ground
  presence of elevated levels of petroleum                 water in selected source areas and from the
  hydrocarbons and zinc. Approximately 24 tons             municipal wellfield were evaluated. The human
  of contaminated soil were excavated from this            health exposure pathways evaluated were:
  area and disposed of at a licensed disposal
  facility. Upon final inspection of the remedial          •   Ingestion of untreated ground water by
  action, NJDEP issued a letter requiring No                   hypothetical residents; and
  Further Action to LEC in January 1992.                   •   Inhalation exposures of hypothetical
                                                               residents to chemicals that may volatilize
 In response to a request by the property owner of             during showering.
 the Denville Technical Park, USEPA issued an
 Administrative Determination in 1997 that Block          The potential for adverse ecological impacts
 62101, Lot 4 and a portion of Lot 1 were not             from chemicals detected at the Rockaway
 considered to be part of the Rockaway Township           Township Wellfield Contamination Site was
 Wellfield Contamination Superfund Site. In               evaluated using approaches similar to those used
 1998, USEPA issued a second Administrative               in the human health risk assessment.
 Determination that Block 62101, Lot 2 was not
 part of the Site. Both Determinations were made          The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment indicated
 based on information and conditions known to
                                                     12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

human health risk above acceptable limits for the      that would be representative of site risks. Soil
hypothetical scenarios identified above involving      and soil gas were evaluated separately based on
exposure to untreated ground water. These              different exposure scenarios. The contaminant
human health risks are addressed by the remedial       selection criteria for soil was based on frequency
action presented in the 1993 Record of Decision        of detection and whether the detected
for OU1. The 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment             concentration was greater than the Impact to
also indicated that adverse impacts to ecological      Ground Water NJSCC.              The contaminant
receptors were unlikely.                               selection criteria for soil gas was based on
                                                       frequency of detection. The Focused Risk
To specifically estimate the risks associated with     Assessment identified a total of 5 soil and 14 soil
the contaminated soils at the Denville Technical       gas contaminants of concern for the Denville
Park, a Focused Risk Assessment was completed          Technical Park. The contaminants of concern are
in 1997. The Focused Risk Assessment                   listed in Table 10. The majority of the
estimated the human health and ecological risks        contaminants of concern are chlorinated VOCs.
presented by the soil contamination at the site if     Four of the contaminants of concern were
no remedial actions were taken and addressed           identified for both soil and soil gas. They are
exposures to soil and to soil gas at the site. It      TCE, PCE, TCA, and cisl,2-DCE. TCE and
also addressed the protection of the ground water      PCE are probable (Group B2) human
in response to the unacceptable risk identified for    carcinogens according to the USEPA Carcinogen
the hypothetical ground water use scenarios in         Assessment Group classification system.
the 1992 Baseline Risk Assessment The results
of the Focused Risk Assessment were reported in        The property is currently used for
the July 1999 Soil RI/FS and are discussed             industrial/commercial purposes and for the risk
below.                                                 assessment it was assumed that this use would
                                                       continue into the future. Based on this, the
HUMAN HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT                           potentially exposed populations were assumed
                                                       to     be     industrial/commercial       workers,.
A four-step process is utilized for assessing site-    construction workers and trespassers. These
related human health risks for a reasonable            populations may be exposed to the contaminants
maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identifica-          in soil, in ambient (outside) air and/or in indoor
tion—identifies the contaminants of concern at         air through dermal (skin) contact, incidental
the site, based on several factors such as toxicity,   ingestion     (swallowing),       or    inhalation
frequency of occurrence, and detected levels.          (breathing).     Therefore, potential exposures
Exposure Assessment—estimates the magnitude            under current and future land use are
of actual and/or potential human exposures, the        summarized as follows:
frequency and duration of these exposures and
the pathways (e.g., ingesting contaminated well-       Media           Exposure        Receptor        j Current/
water) by which humans are potentially exposed.                        Pathway        Population       i Future '
Toxicity Assessment—determines the types of            Soil          Dermal        Industrial/Commer \ Future
adverse health effects associated with chemical                      Contact,      cial Workers,
exposures and the relationship between                               Incidental    Construction
magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of                         Ingestion     Workers,
                                                                                   Trespassers
adverse effects (response). Risk Characteriza-         Am-           Inhalation    Industrial/Commer   Future
tion—summarizes and combines outputs of the            bient                       cial Workers,
exposure and toxicity assessments to provide a         Air                         Construction
quantitative (e.g., one-in-a-million excess cancer                                 Workers,
risk) assessment of site-related risks.                       . .
                                                                                                         Future/
                                                       Indoor       : Inhalation   Industrial/Commer
                                                       Air                         cial Workers, -       Current
As a first step in the Focused Risk Assessment,                                    Construction
contaminants of potential concern were selected                                    Workers

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Protection of ground water was addressed by                  does not exceed USEPA's acceptable risk range
comparing the data to the -Impact to Ground                  of 1x10^ to IxlO"6. The calculated Hazard
Water NJSCC.                                                 Indices ranged between 0.298 to 0.000117,
                                                             which do not exceed USEPA's Hazard Index
SUMMARY OF HUMAN HEALTH RISKS                                limit of 1.0. The calculations are presented in
                                                             Table 11.
Through an assessment of exposure pathways for
the contaminants of concern, specific health risk           The New Jersey Brownfield «and Contaminated
levels were calculated for each significant                 Site Remediation Act, NJ.S.A. 58:IOB-1 et. seg.,
exposure pathway to enable a quantitative                   has set the acceptable cancer risk for human
evaluation of health risks for human receptors.             carcinogens at IxlO"6 (one-in-one-million) and
                                                            acceptable non-carcinogenic risk for. any given
Current USEPA guidelines for acceptable                     effect to a value not to exceed a Hazard Index of
exposures are individual lifetime excess                     1.0. These established acceptable risk values are
carcinogenic risk in the approximate range of 1 x           for any particular contaminant and not for the
10"4 to 1 x 10"6. This can.be interpreted to mean           cumulative effects of more than one contaminant
that an individual may have a one in 10,000 to a            at a site. The Impact to Ground Water NJSCC
one in 1,000,000 increased chance of developing             were developed to protect ground water from
cancer as a result of a site-related exposure to a          exceeding the risk-based New Jersey Ground
carcinogen under specific exposure conditions.              Water Quality Criteria due to the leaching of
Current federal guidelines for acceptable expo-             contaminants from the soil.
sures for non-carcinogenic risk allow a maximum
Hazard Index of 1.0. The Hazard Index is                    Soil samples collected from the Former UST
defined as the sum of the Hazard Quotients for              Area indicate the presence of VOCs at elevated
all contaminants of concern within a particular             levels which exceed the Impact to Ground Water
exposure pathway that have a similar mechanism              NJSCC. Because these VOCs act as a continuing
of action or end point A Hazard Quotient                    source of contaminants to the ground water, soil
greater than 1.0 indicates that the exposure level          remediation is required.
exceeds the protective level for that particular
chemical.                                                   Qualitative ecological risk assessment

The Focused Risk Assessment provided an                     The Focused Risk Assessment did not include a
assessment of the potential human health risks              qualitative ecological risk assessment because
posed by existing site conditions. A quantitative           the Denville Technical Park is highly industrial
risk assessment was completed for affected                  and thus lacking in ecological habitat and
media for which a completed human exposure                  subsequent ecological exposure, although the
pathway exists.        The potential risks were             Beaver Brook lies approximately 300 feet to the
evaluated based on an integrated analysis of three          south. However, evaluations will be made as
factors: contaminant concentration, toxicity, and           part of the remedial design process to address
exposure potential. In order for an exposure                measures that will be taken to ensure that the
event to occur, a complete exposure pathway                 treatment systems are adequately protected
would be required.          A complete exposure             during flood events.
pathway would consist of a contaminant source
and release mechanism, a retention or transport             SCOPE AND ROLE OF ACTION
medium, a point of potential receptor contact
with the contaminated medium, and an exposure               This is the second of two OUs for this site. OU1
route (e.g., ingestion or inhalation) at the contact        addresses the contaminated ground water. OU2,
point. The calculated additional lifetime cancer            which is the main subject of this Proposed Plan,
risk for the potentially - exposed populations              addresses the remediation of two X2) identified
ranged between 1.08x10 to 5.90x10 , which                   contaminant sources in the soil at the Denville
                                                       14

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Technical Park that are adversely impacting the             to Ground Water NJSCC for VOC contamination
ground water, and ultimately the Rockaway                   present in the soil at the Denville Technical Park
Township Wellfield.                                         are more conservative than the Direct Contact
                                                            NJSCC, compliance with the former will address
In addition, this Proposed Plan includes                  . both the protection of ground water and the direct
proposed changes to the 1993 ROD for OU1                   contact risks.
regarding the discharge of treated ground water
from the site. It is proposed to discharge the            SUMMARY    OF           REMEDIAL         ACTION
treated ground water to the surface water (Beaver         ALTERNATIVES
Brook) instead of re-injecting or reusing treated                                                       - • ' •*'« _ -

water as a potable source. This proposed                  The FS for the Denville Technical Park was
change is discussed in a separate section at the          completed in July 1999. In it many different
end of this Proposed Plan.                                remediation technologies were evaluated for
                                                          potential use at the site. From the evaluation,
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                                four (4) remedial action alternatives were
                                                          developed as discussed below.
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to
protect human health and the environment. These           Soil Alternative 1 —No Action
objectives are based on available information,
criteria and standards such as applicable or              The No Action alternative is required by the
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs).            NCP. This alternative entails no site actions and
                                                          no remedial efforts. No reduction in site risk or
The remedial action objectives for the soil are:          impact to ground water would be afforded.

•   To provide protection for the Rockaway                Total Cost: $0
    Township Wellfield, and                               Estimated Construction Timeframe: None
•   Remediate the contaminant source areas in
    the soil at the Denville Technical Park to            Soil Alternative 2 — Soil Vapor Extraction for
    meet the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC                 Both Areas

Two (2) areas in the Denville Technical Park, the         Alternative 2 involves implementing soil vapor
Former UST Area adjacent to Building 2 and the            extraction (SVE) treatment to remove the VOCs
Former Degreaser Area in Building 2, were                 from the soils at both the Former Degreaser and
identified as having soil contamination that is           Former UST Areas.             This includes the
continuing to contribute contamination to the             installation of vapor recovery wells in the Former
ground water. Contaminants in these areas                 UST Area and vacuum pumps to extract the
exceed the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC                   VOCs from the soil. The three existing vapor
and/or exhibit elevated concentrations of                 extraction wells in the Building 2 Former
contaminants in soil gas samples. The ground              Degreaser Area will be used. The extracted
water contamination from the Denville Technical           vapors (off-gas) may require treatment prior to
Park is being drawn into the Rockaway                     release to the environment. The need for off-gas
Township Wells. The Township must treat the               treatment will be evaluated in the design phase of
ground water using an air stripping unit prior to         the remediation.        If required, the off-gas
distributing the water to the public. The remedial        treatment unit will likely be located within the
action objective of removing the source of                same building as the OU1 ground water
ground      water    contamination      will   be         treatment unit. Institutional controls, in the form
accomplished through the remediation of the soil          of a deed notice, will be required for the Former
to the Impact to Ground _ Water NJSCC in the              UST Area until the concentrations of soil
Former UST Area. In addition, since the Impact            contamination are below the Residential Direct
                                                          Contact NJSCC. Approximately 3 to 5 years of
                                                     15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

operation will be required for the Former UST              will be evaluated in the design phase of tiie
Area to attain the Impact to Ground Water                  remediation. The volatilized contaminants will
NJSCC.                                                     be condensed and collected for off-site disposal.
                                                           The treated soil would be backfilled into the
 Estimated Capital Costs: $477,000                       . excavation.
 Estimated O&M Costs: S55.000
 Estimated Construction Timcframe: 1-2 years              Like Alternative 2, this alternative includes SVE
                                                          treatment of soil in the Building 2 Former
Soil Alternative 3 — Excavation and Off-Site              Degreaser Area since it exists beneath Building 2
Landfilling of Soil from the Former Waste Oil             and is not amenable to excavation. The extracted
UST Area and Soil Vapor Extraction in the                 vapors (off-gas) from the SVE unit may require
Building 2 Former Pcgrcascr Area                          treatment prior to release to the environment and
                                                          will be evaluated in the design phase of the
Alternative 3 involves the excavation of                  remediation.
approximately 3000 cubic yards of VOC-
contaminated soil from the Former UST Area                 Estimated Capital Costs: $2,957,000
and off-site landfilling of the excavated soil. The .    ' Estimated O&M Costs: $47,000
soil contamination in the Former UST Area will             Estimated Construction Timeframe: 2-3 years
be excavated to meet the Impact to Ground
Water NJSCC. The excavated soil will require              EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES
characterization to determine if pretreatment .will
be required prior to off-site landfilling.                During the detailed evaluation of remedial
                                                          alternatives, each alternative for each category
Like Alternative 2, this alternative includes SVE         was assessed against the nine CERCLA
treatment of soil in the Building 2 Former                evaluation criteria.
Degreaser Area since it exists beneath Building 2
and is not amenable to excavation. The extracted          A summary of the comparative analysis is
vapors (off-gas) from the SVE unit may require            provided below:
treatment prior to release to the environment and
will be evaluated in the design phase of the              OVERALL PROTECTION OF HUMAN HEALTH
remediation.
                                                         This criterion addresses whether or not a
Estimated Capital Costs: $2,812,000                      remedy provides adequate protection and
Estimated O&M Costs: $47,000                             describes how risks are eliminated, reduced
Estimated Construction Timeframe: 1-2 years              or controlled through treatment, engineering
                                                         controls or institutional controls.
Soil Alternative 4 — Excavation and On-Site
Low-Temperature       Thermal    Desorption              Alternative 1 does not mitigate site risk.
Treatment of Soil from the Former Waste Oil
UST Area and Soil Vapor Extraction of Soil in            Alternative 2 would reduce the site risk by
the Building 2 Former Dcgreaser Area                     extraction and treatment of VOCs from the soil,
                                                         especially in the Former UST Area, thus
Alternative 4 involves the excavation of                 eliminating the potential for direct contact and
approximately 3000 cubic yards of VOC-                   for continued releases to the ground water
contaminated soil from the Former UST Area to            which is impacting the Rockaway Township
attain the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC then             Wellfield.
on-site low-temperature thermal desorption
(LTTD) treatment of the excavated soil. The              Alternatives 3 and 4 would reduce the site risk
off-gas from the LTTD unit may require                   since the contaminated soils in the-Former UST
treatment prior to release to the environment and        Area would be excavated and either disposed of
                                                    16

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

off-site or treated on-site. Using SVE in the                emissions from the LTTD unit (Alternative 4) or
Building 2 Former Degreaser Area would                       the pre-treatment unit (Alternative 3).
reduce the site risk by extraction and treatment
of VOCs from the soil thus eliminating the                   Compliance with location-specific ARARs
potential continued releases to the ground water,            would be achieved with Alternatives 2, 3 and 4.
which is impacting the Rockaway Township                     The       location-specific  ARARs       include
Well field.                                                  restrictions on activities taking place in the
                                                             wetlands, flood plain and flood hazard areas
COMPLIANCE WITH ARARs                                       associated with the Beaver Brook, a tributary of
                                                            the Rockaway River. Since the contaminated
This criterion addresses whether or not a                   soils in the Former UST Area and the Building
remedy will meet all of the ARARs of other                  2 Former Degreaser Area are not located within
environmental statutes and/or provides                      the wetlands or the 500-year floodplain (Figure
grounds for invoking a waiver.          It also             8), the location-specific ARARs are not
addresses whether or not a remedy will meet                 applicable to the excavation or vapor extraction
non-promulgated criteria that are "to be                    components of Alternatives 2, 3 or 4. However,
considered." The chemical-specific, location-               the location of any treatment unit for either the
specific and action-specific ARARs and                      soil vapors (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4) or the soil
criteria for the alternatives developed for the             (Alternatives 3 and 4) will be sited and
Denville Technical Park are listed in the Soil              constructed in accordance with all wetland,
RI/FS.                                                      floodplain and flood hazard ARARs. It is
                                                            possible for a soil vapor treatment unit
The Impact to Ground Water NJSCC were                       (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4) to be located in the
selected as the cleanup criteria for the soil at the        same building as the ground water treatment
Denville Technical Park.                                    unit, currently being designed. That building
                                                            will comply with the location-specific ARARs.
Alternative 1 will not comply with the selected
cleanup criteria, including ARARs, since no                  Compliance with different action-specific
remediation would be implemented.                           ARARs would be achieved by Alternatives 2, 3,
                                                            and 4, depending on the components of the
 Compliance with chemical-specific cleanup                  alternative. All remedial actions taken at the
criteria, including ARARs, would be achieved                site will comply with applicable sections of the
with Alternatives 2, 3, and 4 through removal,              New Jersey Technical Requirements for Site
containment, and treatment. The soil vapor                  Remediation, such as post-remediation soil
extraction component of Alternative 2 would                 sampling to ensure the success of the remedial
result in the containment and subsequent                    action.     The soil vapor treatment unit
removal of the contaminants from the soil. The              (Alternatives 2, 3 and 4), the LTTD unit
soil excavation components of Alternatives 3                (Alternative 4), and the soil pre-treatment unit,
and 4 would result in the removal of                        if necessary, (Alternative 3) would comply with
contaminated soil from the ground. All three                the operational requirements for protection of
alternatives would result in the remaining soil             ambient air quality.       Alternative 3 would
meeting the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC.                   comply with the requirements for the solid
The excavated soils would be either treated to              and/or hazardous waste transportation and off-
meet the Impact to Ground Water NJSCC                       site disposal. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4 would
before on-site reuse (Alternative 4) or pre-                comply with the requirements for residuals
treated before off-site landfilling (Alternative 3).        treatment and disposal. Alternatives 2, 3 and 4
The extracted soil gases (Alternatives 2, 3 and             would comply with             well    installation
4) would be treated, if necessary, to meet New              requirements, and then, after the soil attains the
Jersey air emission regulations prior to                    Impact to Ground Water NJSCC and the vapor
discharge to the atmosphere, as would the                   extraction system is turned off, well
                                                       17

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

abandonment requirements,                                Alternative 1 would not provide reduction in the
                                                         toxicity, mobility, or volume of contaminants
LONG-TERM EFFECTIVENESS AND PERMANENCE                   since no remedial actions would be
                                                         implemented.
This criterion refers to the ability of the
remedy to maintain reliable protection of                 Alternative 2 would provide reduction in the
human health and the environment over time               toxicity, mobility and volume of VOC
once cleanup goals have been met.                        contamination in soils in both* areas of concern
                                                         through VOC removal and treatment. However,
Alternative 1 would not provide long-term                since the VOC removal will be conducted with
effectiveness and permanence since no remedial           the soil remaining in place, a very small volume
actions would be implemented. The long-term              of contaminants may be left in the soil after
residual risk would be greatest for this                 treatment, but only at concentrations below the
alternative, as compared to the other three              Impact to Ground Water NJSCC.
alternatives, since the risk of protection of
ground water would not be addressed.                     Alternatives 3 and 4 would provide a greater
                                                         reduction in toxicity, mobility and volume than
Alternative 2 includes SVE, which is a                   Alternative 2 since, in addition to SVE in the
well-proven method of effectively removing               Building 2 Former Degreaser Area, the
VOCs from contaminated soil. SVE would                   contaminated soil in the Former UST Area
provide for reduction of VOCs contaminants in            would be excavated and either landfilled off-site
soil which subsequently reduces the impacts of           (Alternative 3) or treated using a LTTD unit and
future releases of contaminants to ground water.         reused on-site (Alternative 4). Pre-treatment
                                                         may also be required prior to off-site landfilling
Alternatives 3 and 4 provide additional                  that would further reduce toxicity, mobility and
long-term effectiveness since the contaminated           volume.
soil in the Former UST Area would be
excavated and replaced by clean fill material.           SHORT-TERM EFFECTIVENESS
The excavation would be backfilled with
material from an off-site location or with the           This criterion considers the period of time
treated soil from the excavation. In either              needed to achieve protection and any adverse
scenario, the backfill material would meet the           impacts on human health and the
Impact to Ground Water NJSCC prior to                    environment that may be posed during the
replacement in the excavation.               The         construction and implementation period until
effectiveness of these alternatives could be             cleanup goals are achieved.
diminished should the soil contamination extend
to inaccessible areas beneath existing structures        Alternative 1 would not provide any increased
or to inaccessible depths. Both alternatives             short-term impacts since no remedial measures
would provide the same long-term effectiveness           would be implemented.
as Alternative 2 in the Building 2 Former
Degreaser Area.                                          Alternative 2 involves the installation of SVE
                                                         wells and short-term impacts would be due to
REDUCTION OF TOXICITY, MOBILITY, OR VOL-                 construction activities. Impacts associated with
UME THROUGH TREATMENT                                    construction would be minimized by employing
                                                         proper dust control and health and safety
This criterion addresses the degree to which             procedures.     Off-gas treatment would be
a remedy utilizes treatment technologies to              implemented, if necessary, to meet air emission
reduce toxicity, mobility or volume of                   requirements and regulations.
contaminants.
                                                         Alternatives 3 and 4 both involve excavation, so
                                                    18

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

' releases of fugitive dusts may occur during                      Alternative ; Alternative j Alternative , Alternative
  construction, but would be minimized by
  employing proper dust control and health and          Capital    SO
                                                                        I • !         2_ __  i      3      i      4
                                                                                 $477,000 T $2,812,000 ] $2,957,000 \
  safety procedures. The SVE component of
  Alternatives 3 and 4 will also have short-term        -O&M      ' $0            $55,000    $47,000     [S47.000
  effectiveness issues similar to those in
  Alternative 2.                                                              :
                                                        Present    $0             $721,000 143,621,060 ^ $3,167,000
                                                        Worth
 IMPLEMENTABILITY
                                                        USEPA ACCEPTANCE
   This criterion examines the technical and
   administrative feasibility of a remedy,
                                                        This criterion indicates whether, based on its.
.% including availability of materials and
                                                        review of the RI/FS and Proposed Plan, the
   services needed to implement the chosen
                                                        USEPA concurs with, opposes, or has no.
   solution.
                                                        comment on the proposed alternative(s).
 Alternative 1 would require no implementation
                                                        USEPA supports the selection of the Preferred
 effort since no remedial actions would be              Alternative.
 implemented.

 Alternative 2 would be readily implemented
                                                        COMMUNITY ACCEPTANCE
 with conventional equipment, methods, and
                                                        This criterion addresses whether, based on
 materials. A pilot study would be required to
                                                        comments received, the community accepts
 determine system configuration.
                                                        the proposed alternative(s).
 The SVE portion of Alternatives 3 and 4 is
                                                        This criterion will be addressed in the ROD
 readily implementable, as discussed for
                                                        after the public meeting and public comment
 Alternative 2.    The excavation portion of            period.
 Alternatives 3 and 4 is also implementable, but
 with some difficulties since it involves
                                                        PREFERRED ALTERNATIVE
 excavation in an area surrounded by buildings,
 and which has numerous underground utilities.
                                                        Based on the evaluation of remedial alternatives
 Shoring would also be required.
                                                        that was presented in the previous section,
                                                        NJDEP prefers and USEPA supports the
 Alternative 4 is considered the most complex           selection of Alternative 2, Soil Vapor Extraction
 alternative to implement because of permitting         for Both Areas. This alternative involves SVE
 and community acceptance issues for the LTTD           treatment to remove the VOCs from the soils at
 unit, although it is an available technology.
                                                        both the Former UST Area and the Building 2
                                                        Former Degreaser Area. Should the extracted
 COST                                                   vapors require treatment prior to release to the
                                                        atmosphere, the treatment unit would be housed
This criterion includes capital as well as
                                                        in the same building as the ground water
operation     and      maintenance      costs
                                                        treatment system, which is currently being
representing 30-year present worth value.
                                                        designed.
A comparison of the estimated capital costs,
                                                        The preferred alternative satisfies the remedial
annual O&M costs, and total present worth in
                                                        action objectives and the requirements of CERC-
1999 for each of the four alternatives is
                                                        LA, as amended; the NCP, and the 1996 AGO. It
presented below:
                                                        will require 3-5 years of operation for the remedy

                                                   19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

to meet the cleanup criteria.                             of the dewatering of the aquifer since the ground
                                                          water is recharged in part from infiltration from
The preferred alternative would provide the best          surface water. The 1993 ROD assumed a
balance of trade-offs among alternatives with             pumping rate of 370 gallons per minute to
respect to the nine CERCLA evaluation criteria.           capture the ground water contamination. Current
NJDEP and USEPA recommend the preferred                   data shows that a rate of between 50 and 100
alternative because it would be protective of             gallons per minute would be effective for the
human health and the environment, comply with             remediation of the ground water contamination
ARARs, be cost-effective, and use permanent               from the Denville Technical Park.
solutions and alternative treatment technologies
or resource recovery technologies to the                  Among the disposal options evaluated in the
maximum extent practicable. The preferred                  1992 Feasibility Study was the option to
remedy also meets the statutory preference for            discharge the treated ground water directly to the
the use of treatment as a principal element to the        Beaver Brook (Disposal Option 5: Treated Water
maximum extent practicable.                               Pumped to Surface Water). The option was not
                                                          selected because, at the time, it did not represent
•**************************************                   the best balance of trade-offs among the options
                                                          with respect to the nine CERCLA Evaluation
PROPOSED CHANGE TO THE 1993                               Criteria. However, technical considerations and
GROUND WATER RECORD OF DECISION                           changes in NJDEP's policy towards the
                                                          distribution of treated ground water from
The 1993 ROD documents the selection of the               contaminated sites through the public water
ground water remedy for the Rockaway                      supply required the re-evaluation of this option.
Township Wellfield Contamination Site. The
major components of the selected remedy                   In a letter dated February 11, 1998, Thiokbl
include:                                                  presented a technical comparison of four
                                                          discharge options:
•   Extraction, treatment, and re-injection or
    utilization of the treated water for potable          •   Discharge to surface water,
    purposes,                                             •   Discharge to ground water via re-injection
•   Monitoring to ensure the effectiveness of the             wells,
    remedy, and                                           •   Discharge to ground water via an infiltration
•   Replacement of the deteriorated air stripping             basin, and
    unit on the Rockaway Township potable                 •   Beneficial reuse.
    wells.
                                                          The four discharge options are described below.
NJDEP is seeking comments on the proposal to
change the method of disposal of the treated              Option 1 - Discharge to Surface Water
ground water. Based on the 1992 FS, the 1993
ROD specifies re-injection of the treated ground          Discharge to surface water would involve
water back into the ground through a recharge             pumping the treated water to a new discharge
basin, with an unspecified amount to be                   pipe constructed for this purpose or to an
distributed through the public potable water              existing storm water pipe that drains into the
distribution system. NJDEP is proposing that all          wetland area adjacent to Beaver Brook. The
of the treated ground water be discharged to the          potential discharge point is located near
surface water of Beaver Brook. The 1993 ROD               monitoring wells NJDEP-3S and NJDEP-3D,
did allow for the discharge of some of the treated        shown on Figure 3.
ground water to the adjacent wetland areas of the
Beaver Brook, if appropriate, to help offset some         Beaver Brook and its associated- wetlands lie

                                                     20

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

' approximately 300 feet south of the Denville             Implementation of this option will require the
  Technical Park. It flows towards the west                responsible party to obtain a NJPDES-
  where it eventually enters the Rockaway River.           Discharge to Ground Water permit.            For
  Beaver Brook is classified as a FW2-NT stream,           discharge to ground water, NJDEP requires
  which is a freshwater non-trout production               treatment to the least stringent of 95% removal
  waterway.                                                of individual compounds or the Ground Water
                                                           Quality Standards, which are:
 Implementation of this option will require the                    TCE            1 ug/L *
 responsible party to obtain a New Jersey                          TCA            30 ug/L
 Pollutant Discharge Elimination System                            1,1-DCA        50 ug/L
 (NJPDES) - Discharge to Surface Water Permit.             The cost of the Discharge to Ground Water via
 The permit will likely include the daily                  Injection Wells Option is approximately
 maximum Effluent Standards for Remediation                $110,000 for the installation of the piping and
 Projects. For the contaminants associated with            injection wells. The cost was developed for'
 the Denville Technical Park, the daily maximum            comparison purposes, and therefore, does riot
 effluent standards are:                                 . include effluent monitoring since all discharge'
         TCE             5.4ug/L                           options will require monitoring.
         TCA             54 ug/L
         1,1-DCA         59 ug/L                         Option 3 - Discharge to Ground Water via an
 Compliance with the requirements of the New             Infiltration Basin
 Jersey Wetlands Protection rules and regulations
 will also be required should a new discharge            For the discharge of treated ground water back
 pipe be constructed.                                    into the aquifer through an infiltration basin, an
                                                         area capable of receiving approximately 50 -
 The cost of the Discharge to Surface Water               100 gallons per minute would be required. The
 Option is approximately $56,000 for the                 size of the required area would be based on the
 installation of the new discharge pipe. The cost        underlying soil properties (e.g,. permeability).
 was developed for comparison purposes, and              Treated ground water would be pumped into a
 therefore, does not include effluent monitoring         series of drain pipes within the infiltration basin.
 since all discharge options will require                The treated ground water would percolate
 monitoring.                                             through the soil back into the aquifer. The
                                                         infiltration basin would be constructed near the
 Option 2 - Discharge to Ground Water via                southern boundary of the Denville Technical
 Re-injection Wells                                      Park, which is hydraulically upgradient of the
                                                         contaminant source areas.
 Direct discharge to ground water would require
 the design and construction of a re-injection           Implementation of this option will require the
 well system. The number and location of re-             responsible party to obtain a NJPDES-
 injection wells would be based on the results of        Discharge to Ground Water permit. Again, for
 aquifer hydraulic testing. Conceptually, two to         discharge to ground water, NJDEP requires
 four re-injection wells would be capable of             treatment to the least stringent of 95% removal
 discharging the approximate 50-100 gallons per          of individual compounds or the Ground Water
 minute of treated ground water back into the            Quality Standards.
 aquifer.    Because the depth to the low
 permeability bedrock is shallow (less than 50           The cost of the Discharge to Ground Water via
 feet) on the eastern portion of the Denville            an Infiltration Basin Option is approximately
 Technical Park, the re-injection wells would            $85,000 for the installation of the piping and the
 have to be installed on the western side of the         infiltration basin. The cost was developed for
 Denville Technical Park along the southern              comparison purposes, and therefore, does not
 property boundary.                                      include effluent monitoring since all discharge
                                                    21

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 options will require monitoring.                          permit. Beyond the required monitoring, ve/y
                                                           little operation and maintenance would be
 Option 4 - Beneficial Reuse                               necessary.

   Beneficial reuse would entail distributing the          The cost for this option, $56,000, is less than the
   treated ground water into the municipal water           costs for the discharge to ground water options.
   supply system of Rockaway Township and/or
   Denville Township. The cost to construct a             Both of the discharge to ground water options
  pipeline from the ground water treatment plant          would require more detailed designs. Both
  to the municipal water mains would be                   include the scheduled monitoring of the treated
  approximately $85,000. However, the New                 effluent that would be required as part of the
  Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, N.J.A.C. 7:10-          NJPDES permit.
   11.7(b), requires that "[a] public community
» water system shall acquire and control all land          Re-injection wells would be placed in a
  within at least a 50 foot radius of any ground           hydraulically upgradient area to minimize
  water source used for its water supply. Major           disruption to ground water flow patterns. The
  and minor pollutant sources and non-water               re-injection wells would be installed in a thicker
  system related activities shall be prohibited           portion of the aquifer because a longer screen
  within the specified area." A ground water              length is required, typically 1.5 to 2 times longer
  remediation system, by its very nature, in order        than an extraction well screen. The depth to
  to be effective, would have to be located at a          bedrock limits the re-injection to the western
  point of heaviest contaminant concentration.            third of the Denville Technical Park. The re-
  This conflicts with the requirements of the Safe        injection wells would need to be placed several
  Drinking Water Act.                                     hundred feet apart, away from existing
                                                          businesses, and sufficiently upgradient from the
 Because of potentially negative consequences of          proposed ground water extraction system.
 allowing the discharge of treated effluent from a        Other considerations would include piping from
 contaminated site into a public water system, the        the treatment building to the re-injection wells
 beneficial reuse option has been eliminated from         and installing additional wells for hydraulic
 consideration.                                           monitoring.

 DISCHARGE OPTION COMPARISON                               Re-injection wells typically have an operational
                                                          life of 10 years before they need to be replaced.
 The three remaining discharge options are                Clogging of the re-injection well screen by
 compared in this section.                                minerals or bacterial growth will likely occur
                                                          and the well screens will require replacement
The discharge to surface water option would               This would increase operation and maintenance
only require the construction of a new pipe or            costs of the system.         Also, maintenance
more likely, the connection to an existing storm          activities for the injection well system would
water pipe. The actual length of the discharge            require shutting down the ground water
pipe and its route would depend on where the              treatment system for periods of time, reducing
treatment unit is located. This type of design is         the effectiveness of the recovery system.
relatively simple and would require minimal
disruption of existing businesses at the Denville         The disadvantages associated with re-injection
Technical Park or to the wetlands around the              wells are the high capital and operation and
Beaver Brook. Therefore, it is relatively easy to         maintenance costs, implementability with
implement and would be effective for long-term            respect to disruption of businesses at the
operation because of its simple design.                   Denville Technical Park, and long-term
Scheduled monitoring of- the treated effluent             effectiveness.    The cost for .this option,
would be required as part of the NJPDES                   $110,000 is the highest of the three options.
                                                     22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

' The major disadvantage of an infiltration basin            The flood plain will not be affected since the
  is the large area required to accommodate the              ground water extraction wells, forcemains,
  volume of treated ground water to be discharged            treatment building and treated water discharge
  back into the aquifer. Based on the conservative           pipe will all be constructed in established and
  discharge rate of 50 gallons per minute and                developed areas of the site. The treated water
  other factors, the infiltration basin would require        discharge pipe will be connected to the existing
  an area of approximately 67,000 ft2, which is              storm water discharge pipe that leads to the
  approximately 250 ft by 250 ft. The infiltration           wetlands and the Beaver Brdolc. There will be
  basin would require hydraulic monitoring and a             no construction activities, permanent or
  detailed operation and maintenance program                 temporary, in any undeveloped areas of the site.
  similar to that for re-injection wells would be
  needed to prevent clogging.                                In addition, the ground water treatment system
                                                             will be designed with fail-safe controls such that
 The cost for this option, $85,000, is more than             if the air stripper fails, the ground water
 the cost for discharge to surface water, but less           extraction pumps will be shut off. This will
 than the cost for re-injection wells. However,              prevent the discharge of untreated water into the
 because the basin would require the dedication              brook. In the event the entire system fails (i.e.,
 of a large singular area of the Denville                    power outage), the ground water extraction
 Technical Park, substantial disruption to                   wells will be either shut off automatically or
 existing businesses would occur making this                 will, themselves, be without power. Either way,
 option the least implementable.                             there would be no discharge of untreated ground
                                                             water to the wetlands or the Beaver Brook.
 SUMMARY
                                                             Finally, implementing the discharge to surface
 A comparison of the three discharge options                 water option will result in minimal disruption to
 showed that discharge to surface water is the               the activities at the Denville Technical Park.
 most technically feasible and cost effective
 option. Both of the discharge to ground water               ***************************************
 options were determined to have significant
 disadvantages.                                              GLOSSARY

 The discharge to surface water option includes              Administrative Consent Order (AGO): A
 discharging the effluent from the ground water              binding legal agreement between a government
 treatment plant into a new discharge pipe or into           agency and a responsible party. An AGO is
 the existing 24-inch diameter, reinforced                   voluntarily entered into by the responsible party
 concrete storm water sewer pipe. The existing               and it specifies the actions or obligations of the
 pipe drains into a small defined watercourse in             responsible party, which may include site
 the wetlands which flows directly into Beaver               remediation.
 Brook without much lateral flow. The relatively
 low volume of the treated effluent flowing                  Air Stripping: A process by which volatile
 through the watercourse should not cause                    organic compounds are removed from
 erosion or increased water levels in the wetlands           contaminated water, by forcing a stream of air
 or in the brook.                                            through the water in a pressurized vessel. The
                                                             contaminants from the water are evaporated into
 There should be no adverse hydraulic effects to             the stream of air. The air stream may require
 the wetlands or to the Beaver Brook from the                further treatment, depending on the contaminant
 discharge of 50 - 100 gallons per minute of                 concentrations, before it is released into the
 treated ground water. There should also be no               atmosphere.
 adverse effects to the flora or fauna in either of
 these habitats.                                             Aquifer: An underground layer of rock, sand,
                                                        23

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

or gravel capable of storing water within cracks          interim remedial measure performed at a         *
and pore spaces, or between grains. When                  contaminated site.
water contained within an aquifer is of sufficient
quantity and quality, it can be tapped and used           Deed Notice: A notification placed on a deed
for drinking or other purposes. The water                 when concentrations of soil contaminants are
contained in the aquifer is called ground water.          greater than the New Jersey Residential Direct
                                                          Contact Soil Cleanup Criteria. A Deed Notice
ARAR: Acronym for Applicable or Relevant                  documents the location and concentration of
and Appropriate Requirement. An ARAR is a                 those contaminants and how they must be
federal or state promulgated standard,                    controlled, maintained, and monitored. A Deed
requirement, criterion or limitation that must be         Notice requires the property owner's written
met during the cleanup of a particular site.              consent.
Applicable requirements address a hazardous
substance, pollutant, contaminant, remedial               Directive: An enforcement document issued by
action, location or other circumstance                    NJDEP.to notify the recipient that NJDEP has
specifically found at the Superfund site.                 determined that it is necessary to remove or to
Relevant and appropriate requirements do not              arrange for the removal of a discharge of
directly and fully apply to the site conditions,          hazardous substances, pollutants or
but address problems or situations sufficiently           contaminants and that NJDEP believes the
similar to those encountered at the Superfund             recipient is a person who may be subject to
site that their use is well suited to that site.          liability for the discharge.

Carbon Adsorption/Carbon Treatment: A                     Downgradient: A downward hydrologic slope
treatment system in which contaminants are                that causes ground water to move toward lower
removed from ground water and surface water               elevations. Wells downgradient of a
by forcing the water through tanks containing             contaminated ground water source are prone to
activated carbon, a specially treated material            receiving pollutants.
that attracts and retains contaminants.
                                                          Effluent: Wastewater, treated or untreated, that
Carcinogen: A substance that produces cancer.             flows out of a treatment plant, sewer, or
                                                          industrial outfall. The term generally refers to
CERCLA/SARA: The federal Comprehensive                    wastes discharged into surface waters.
Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act, as amended. The act created a              Extraction Well: A well from which
special tax that goes into a trust fund, commonly         contaminated groundwater or vapors are
known as "the Superfund," that is used to                 pumped.
investigate and clean up abandoned or
uncontrolled hazardous waste sites. Under the             Feasibility Study (FS): A study that evaluates
program, USEPA can either pay for site cleanup            a variety of remedial action alternatives from
when responsible parties cannot be located or             technical, environmental and cost perspectives
are unwilling or unable to perform the work, or           and recommends the most effective remedy for
take legal action to force parties responsible for        protection of human health and the
site contamination to clean up the site or pay            environment. Together with the Remedial
back the government for the cost of the cleanup.          Investigation it establishes the cleanup criteria
                                                          and identifies Remedial Action Alternatives.
Cleanup: Actions taken to deal with a release
or threatened release of hazardous substances,            Hazard Index: A numerical measurement of
pollutants and contaminants that could affect             the risks from human exposure to non-
public health or the environment. The term is             carcinogenic chemicals.
often used to describe a remedial action or
                                                     24

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

' Hazardous Substance: Any material that                    New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria (NJSCC):
  poses a threat to human health and/or the                  The published criteria to be used for soil
  environment. Typical hazardous substances are              remediation in New Jersey. The criteria are
  toxic, corrosive, ignitable, explosive or                  based on a. carcinogenic risk of one in one
  chemically reactive.                                     . million and a Hazard Index of less than one.
                                                             Criteria were developed for Residential Direct
 ISRA: The New Jersey Industrial Site                        Contact, Non-Residential Direct Contact and
 Recovery Act which requires the                             Impact to Ground Water sceriairios. The more
 owner/operator of certain industrial                        stringent of the Direct Contact or Impact to
 establishments to cleanup environmental                     Ground Water criteria must be attained.
 contamination prior to the sale of the business or
 property.                                                  Operable Unit (OU):    A portion of ah overall
                                                            site cleanup. Operable units usually proceed on
 Migration: The movement of contaminants,                   different schedules. A number of OUs may be
 water, or other liquids through porous and                 implemented during the course of a site cleanup.
 permeable rock.
                                                            Operation and Maintenance (O&M):
 Monitoring Well: A well installed under strict             Activities conducted at a site usually after a
 design specifications that, when sampled, will             remedial action or interim remedial measure has
 reveal hydrogeologic data at its point of                  been completed to ensure that the action is
 installation. Monitoring wells are installed at            effective and that at any treatment systems in
 predetermined locations, usually in groups, to             place are operating properly. O&M also
 gain knowledge of site conditions including,               includes the continued monitoring of site
 extent and type of contamination, soil types,              conditions.
 depth to ground water and direction of ground
 water flow.                                                Potable Water: Water that is safe for drinking
                                                            and cooking from either a private well or a
 National Oil and Hazardous Substance                       public supply provided through a water line.
 Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP): Also
 known as the National Contingency Plan, it is             Preferred Alternative: After a thorough
 the basic regulations for federal response actions        evaluation of remedial action alternatives in the
 under CERCLA and SARA. It sets forth the                  Feasibility Study, it is the alternative that
 procedures and standards for responding to                NJDEP and USEPA believes represents the best
 releases of hazardous substances.                         balance of trade-offs for protection of human
                                                           health and the environment.
 National Priorities List (NPL): A list of sites
 based upon NJDEP's and USEPA's submissions                Proposed Plan: A public participation
 of candidate sites that are determined by the             requirement of CERCLA, it is a document
 federal government to have the highest priority           which summarizes the Remedial Action
 for cleanup based upon a hazard ranking system.           Alternatives that were evaluated for a Superfund
 A site listed on the NPL is eligible for federal          Site and which documents NJDEP's rationale
 funding under CERCLA. Published by the                    for selecting a preferred alternative. Public
 USEPA, the NPL is updated periodically. Sites             review and comment is actively solicited for all
 on the NPL are commonly called Superfund                  of the Remedial Action Alternatives evaluated
 sites.                                                    as well as for the Preferred Alternative.

 New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination                Receptor: Any human, ecosystem or part
 System (NJPDES): The state program that                   thereof, surface water, well (other than a
 regulates discharges to the ground water or               monitoring well) or structure which is or may be
 surface water.                                            affected by a contaminant from a contaminated
                                                      25

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     site.                                                   Record of Decision.

     Record of Decision (ROD): A formal record              Risk Assessment: The qualitative and
     documenting the reasons and process for                quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to
     selecting a remedy for a Superfund site. The           define the risk posed to human health and/or the
     ROD is based on the Remedial Investigation             environment by hazardous substances,
     and Feasibility Study taking into consideration        pollutants and contaminants.
     all public comments and community concerns.
                                                            Sediment: The layer of soil and minerals at the
    Re-injection: Recharge to the ground, usually           bottom of surface waters, such as streams, lakes
    through specially designed wells, of ground             and rivers that absorb contaminants.
    water that has been extracted and treated to
    remove contaminants.                                    Soil Vapor Extraction (SVE): Process of
k
                                                            extracting Volatile Organic Compounds from
    Remedial Action: See Cleanup.                           the unsaturated soils by creating a vacuum
                                                            within the soil. Vertical or horizontal vents are
    Remedial Action Alternatives: Combinations              installed in the soil and a vacuum is created by a
    of technologies that may be used to cleanup a           vacuum blower connected to the vents. The
    contaminated site. A number of Remedial                 vacuum extraction unit creates a flow of air
    Action Alternatives are evaluated during the            through the soil and into the vents. The
    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study. The           extracted vapors are then treated, if necessary,
    Record of Decision documents the selection of           prior to release to the atmosphere.
    the Preferred Alternative.
                                                            Superfund: The common name for the
    Remedial Design (RD): Normally following a              Comprehensive Environmental Response,
    Feasibility Study, it is the engineering                Compensation and Liability Act. See CERCLA.
    specifications developed to implement the
    selected remedy.                                        Underground Storage Tank (UST): A tank
                                                            located completely or partially underground that
    Remedial Investigation (RI): The gathering of           is designed to hold gasoline or other petroleum
    the data necessary to determine the nature and          products or chemical solutions.
    extent of contamination at the site. Together
    with the Feasibility Study it establishes the           Volatile Organic Compound (VOC): VOCs
    cleanup criteria and identifies remedial action         are organic (carbon-containing) compounds that
    alternatives.                                           evaporate readily at room temperature. They
                                                            are used as solvents, degreasers, paints thinners
    Responsible Party: Any person, company or               and fuels. Due to their low water solubilities,
    entity who is in anyway responsible for a               environmental persistence and widespread
    hazardous substance that has been discharged            industrial use, they are commonly found in soil
    pursuant to the New Jersey Spill Compensation           and ground water. VOCs at the site include
    and Control Act or who is responsible for a             trichloroethene and tricholorethane.
    release of hazardous substances pursuant to
    CERCLA. The Spill Act has a broader
    definition of responsible parties than CERCLA.

    Rcsponsivcncss Summary: A summary of all
    oral and written public comments received by
    NJDEP during a comment period on a Proposed
    Plan and NJDEP's responses to those comments.
    The Responsiveness Summary is part of a
                                                       26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       N




                                                      ROCKAWAY TOWNSHIP
                                                      WELLFIELD

            INVESTIGATION




BASE   MAPS    ARE    U.S.G.S    7l/2~ MINUTE
                                                                           2OOO
QUADRANGLE     MAPS,     DOVER    AND                                       J
BOONTON,    DATED : I95< , PHOTOREVISED: (966.                 SCALE IN   FEET

                                                                             | FIGURE     I
              NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT Of
        ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND ENERGY   .
 ROCKAWAY TWP. WEUflEU) SHE. MORRIS CO.. NEW JERSEY
                                                                 LOCATION MAP

        ICF KAISER ENGINEERS                           DATE:MAY 27, 1992         OR.: 0. BRENT
                PITTSBURGH, PA.                         SCALE:AS NOTED           OWG. NO.:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       >  ///>^:========^==!l-L
       //r//        v           \     _v   —   \-*-^\
                       -




^f^W
.//   xx   H




                                xfT ^^I__rpir7y>' \
                                 j f\ ? i s / / - '
                                    Ji^LxL-F//,- -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         .<&*  ^?M IT JB
                                           ifcV %?'; •//
                                           fe^/> ' -/ .//
                                                 • ./. M


         »   WETLANDS
     2       LOT NUMBER
     •       SHALLOW MONrroRme wot
     •       OCEP MONfTORlftO WEU.
                        WELL                                   figure 3
                                                             SITE PLAN
 NOTE: LOCATIONS ARC APPROXIMATE.    \      DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
 CRA
                                                  Denville, New Jersey
0<Oia-S«(GAfF030)GN~SP001 APR 11/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

— - — PROPERTY UNE
——X —         rtNCE LINE
— • — DRAINAGE             ,.Ndt5£P-^2'
 J>       *   WETLANDS
      2       LOT NUMBER
      •       SHALLOW MONITORING WELL
      «       DEEP MONITORING WELL
      a       EXTRACTION WELL
              NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE         'HISTORICAL PROCESS OPERATIONS
                    APPROXIMATE.                 DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
 CRA                                                 Danville, Hew Jersey
04318-56(GAff050)GN-SP002 APR 13/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

—— <—         FENCE LINE
——        —— DRAINACt

 •M       A   WCTLANOS

      A       son. CAS PROBE LOCATION
      •       SOIL BORING LOCATION
      0       VAPOR WELL LOCATION
      •       VAPOR PROBE LOCATION
                                                                               .     *    figure 5
                                        1.26(21.8) DUPLICATE SAMPLES
                                                                                 TOTAL VOC SOIL
              NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE           NO    NOT DETECTED
                                                                               SAMPLING RESULTS
                    APPROXIMATE.                                       DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
                                            NS    NOT SAMPLED                Deny ill6, Hew Jersey
 CRA
04318-S6(CAfrOSO)ON-SP003 APR 13/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          FORMER CHEMICAL FC»MER
                                                                          STORAGE. AREA OECfiEASER
                                                                                               pir
                                                                                AREA 2

                                                 UAC^;.. i
                                                      I
                                                    ^

   // Wft-163* o
  // /  .    MIA;—mna


        FENCE UNE
        DRAINAGE
        WETLANDS
        SHAUOW MONITORING WELL
        DEEP MONITORING WELL
        EXTRACTION WELL            0     VAPOR WELL LOCATION      \
        SOIL GAS PROBE LOCATION    •     VAPOR PROBE LOCATION   ,\'   "
        SOIL, BORING LOCATION     1.27   TVOC SOIL CAS RESULT
                                         IN ujA OR                                                   SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS
        NOTE: LOCATIONS ARE                                                                            DENV1LLE TECHNICAL PARK
              APPROXIMATE.
                                                                                                             Denvflle, New Jersey
04318-56(GAfT050)GN-SP004 APR 15/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         lEGEND
     -—     PROPERTY LINE

            fENCE LINE
 —       — DRAINAGE
            WETLANDS

            LOT NUMBER

            SHALLOW MONITORING WELL
            DEEP MONITORING WELL
     a     fXTRACTION WELL                                      figure 8
            WETLAND 80RINO LOCATION      WETLAND DELINEATION RESULTS
NOTE! LOCATIONS ARE APPROXIMATE.
                                             DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK
CRA
                                                   Denvflle, New Jersey
     —56(CAfr050)GN-SPOOfl APR 15/2002

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                             Table I
                                    Corporate Histories

Thiokoi                                                                         **

1958 - Thiokoi Chemical Corporation purchased Reaction Motors Company (RM) and
merged RM into itself.

1982 - Thiokoi Chemical Corporation, an existing corporation, merged with Motion
Norwich in form Morton Thiokoi, Inc.

1989 - Morton International, Inc. was spun off as a separate corporation and Morton
Thiokoi, Inc. changed its name to Thiokoi Corporation.

1999 - Thiokoi changed its name to Cordant Technologies, Inc (Cordant).

2000 - Alcoa Inc. acquired all of the common stock of Cordant. As a wholly owned
corporation, .Cordant maintained its name.

2001 - Alcoa Inc. sold the stock related to the Cordant rocket propulsion operations to
Alliant Techsystems, Inc (ATK).


Town & Country Gas

Pre-1984 - Robert S. Brower owned the property and operated it as the Town and
Country Gas Station.

1984 - Brower leased the property to Exxon Exxon Company, U.S. A. a division of Exxon
Corporation. The site began operation as an Exxon service station

1986 - Exxon Company, U.S.A. purchased the property and continues to operate the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        TABLE 2

                                SUMMARY OF UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS REMOVED
                                  DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                     UST Facility                         Tank Capacity                        Age       Date
  Designation          Number           Tank Location       (gallons)       Contents •       (years)   Removed

         Al             87771             Building 2          4,000         Gasoline           33      12/27/1989

         C2             87771             Building 2          7,000       No. 2 Fuel Oil •    . 18     12/27/1989

         A3             87771             Building 2          1,000         Gasoline           33      12/27/1989

         A4             87771             Building 2          1,000         Waste Oil          33      12/15/1989

          —              30550            Building 2          1,000         Waste Oil        Unknown   6/13/1995
                  (Closure #C94-2273)

         AS             87771             Building 3          10,000      No. 6 Fuel Oil       33      12/27/1989

         A6             87771             Building 3          10,000      No. 6 Fuel Oil        33     12/27/1989

          ..              —               Building 7           550         Ammonia              30      7/7/1989




CRA43HGAFF50-T2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 TABLES                                                                  Page 1 of 4

                                                             SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                        FORMER UST AREA • BUILDING 2
                                                               DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                     BH-1               BH-2                        BH-3                              BH-4                  New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria.
Compound                            (8-10ft)          (18-20/r)           (2-4/t)          (12-14/t)      (6-8/r)   (8-10/r)   (12-14/t)    Res.       Non-Res.         GW

1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                 ND                ND                ND          0.002 J(ND)          ND        ND          ND          210         1,000          50
1.1.2-Trichloroe thane                 ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND           22          420            1
1,1-Dichloroethane                     ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND          570         1,000          10
1.1-Dichloroethene                     ND'-     .         ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND         •ND            8           ISO          10
1.2-Dichloroethene (total)             ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND        0.004 J      79 w        1000 <"         !«.
1,2-Dichloroethane                     ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND         •ND             6           24           1
2-Butanone                             ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND      .ND           ND         1,000        1,000          50
Acetone                                ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND         1,000        1,000          100
Benzene                                ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND            3            13           1
Chloroform                             ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND         .ND            19           28           1
Ethylbenzene                           ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND         1,000        1,000          100
Methylene Chloride                     ND                .ND              .ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND            49          210           1
Tetrachloroethene                      ND                 ND               ND          . NDfND)             ND        ND          ND             4            6         • 1
Toluene                                ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND       ' 1,000        1,000          500
Trkhloroethene                         ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND        0.008 J         23           54            1
Vinyl Chloride                         ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND             2            7           10
Xylenes                                ND                 ND               ND            ND(ND)            0.018     0.014        ND           410        1,000        . 10
TICs                                   ND                ND                 ND             ND(ND)          0.805      1.164       ND
Notes:
All valuta given in mg/kg
J • The associated value Is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
ND • Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
01
   NJSCCforcls-l,2-DlcWoroethen«
ro
   Actual result for ds-l,2-Diehloroethene
Res. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
Non. Res. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
GW • Impact to Groundwater Criteria
N^V-.:il Soil concentration above NJSCC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 TABLES.                                                                Pag* 2 of 4

                                                 SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                            FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                   DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                       BH-5                         BH-8                             BH-9            New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
Compound                             (18-20/t)         (10-12 ft)          (20-22 ft)      (2-4/t)      (20-22 ft)   Res.       Non-Res.         GW
1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                   ND                ND                0.048          0.120           ND       210          1,000          50
1.1.2-Trichloroe thane                   ND                ND                 ND            0.002         0.003 J      22           420            1
1,1-Dichloroe thane                      ND                ND               0.001 J        0.009 J          ND        570          1,000          10
1.1-Dichloroethene                       ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND          8           ISO           10
1.2-Dichloroethene (total)             0.002 J             ND                 ND             ND             ND       79(1)        1000 (1)       l">
1,2-Dichloroethane                       ND                ND                 ND             ND •           ND          6            24            1
2-Butanone                               ND               0.012               ND             ND •          0.013     1,000         1,000          50
Acetone                                  ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND       1,000         1,000         100
Benzene                                  ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND         3             13            1
Chloroform                               ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND         19            28            1
Ethylbenzene                             ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND       1,000         1,000         100
Methylene Chloride                       ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND         49           210            1
Tetrachloroethene                        ND                ND                 ND            0.031           ND         4              6            1
Toluene                                  ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND       1,000         1,000         500
Trlchloroethene                        0.006 J             ND                 ND           0.005 J      .- ND          23            54            1
Vinyl Chloride                           ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND          2             7           10
Xylenes                                  ND                ND                 ND             ND             ND        410          1,000          10
TICs                                    ND                 ND                 ND            3.830           ND
Notts:
All values given In mg/kg
J • The associated value Is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
ND • Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
m
     NJSCCfords-U-Dichloroethene
p)
    Actual result for cis-14-Dichloroethene
Res. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
Non. Res. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
CW - Impact to Croundwater Criteria
h-SlliJ 5°'' concentration above NJSCC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                               TABLES                                                     Page 3 of 4

                                                              SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SO IL
                                                                           FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                  DENV1LLE TECHNICAL PARK • DENVILLB, NEW JERSEY

                                                                 JBH-10                     BH-11 BH-12 New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
                 Compound                            (13-lSfl)         (21-23/r)           (8-lOft) (6-8ft) (20-22 /r) Res. Non-Res. GW
                 1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                  ND               ND               0.00006 J   llPlSiil        1.4         210      1,000   50
                 1.1.2-Trichloroethane                   ND               ND                  ND         0.066 •      0.013         22       420     1
                 1,1-Dlchloroethane                      ND               ND                  ND         0.041       0.005 J       570      1,000   10
                 1.1-Dichloroethene                      ND               ND                  ND          0.028        ND      • 8           150    10
                 1.2-Dlchloroethene (total)              ND               ND                  ND         0.003 J       ND         79 <i>   1000 «   1("
                 1,2-Dichloroe thane                     ND               ND                  ND           ND        0.001 J    • 6           24     1
                 2-Butanone                              ND               ND                  ND           ND          ND'        1,000     1,000   50
                 Acetone                                 ND               ND                  ND           ND          ND         1,000     1,000   100
                 Benzene                                 ND               ND                  ND         0.001 J :     ND            3        13     1
                 Chloroform                              ND               ND                0.0002 J       ND          ND        • 19         28     1
                 Ethylbenzene                            ND              'ND                  ND         0.006 J     0.001 J      1,000     1,000   100
                 Methylene Chloride                      ND               ND                  ND           ND          ND           49       210      1
                 Tetrachloroethene                       ND               ND                  ND       Mi$$i$lii$     0.065          4     . 6        1
                 Toluene                                 ND               ND               0.00008 J      10 J        0.026       1,000     1,000   500
                 Trlchloroethene                         ND               ND                  ND         0.065       0.002 J        23       54       1
                 Vinyl Chloride                          ND               ND                  ND          ND           ND            2        7      10
                 Xylenes                                 ND               ND                  ND         0.029       0.006 J       410     1,000     10
                 TICs                                    ND               ND                 ND           5.780       14.26
                 Notes:
                 All value* given In mg/kg
                 ] • The associated value Is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
                  ND • Not Detected
                  ( ) Duplicate sample
                 TICs • Tentatively Identified Compounds
                 '" NJSCCfords-U-Dlchloroethene
                 m
                     Actual result for cls-l>Dlchloroethene
                 Rea. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
                   NoaRes. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
                 . CW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
                 I'.iUWfeJ Soil concentration above NJSCC




CRA4)1KAFnO>T)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                     TABLES                                                                  Page 4 of 4

                                                                    SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                               FORMER UST AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                                      DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY

                                               BH-13                          BH-14              .                      BH-15                        New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
Compound                            (8-10ft)           (10-12 ft)   (6-8ft)        (8-10ft)                         (10-12 ft) <16-18ft)             Res.       Non-Res.         GW
1.1.1-Trichloroe thane                 ND                 ND                                            ND             ND                   ND        210          1,000           50 '
1.1.2-Trkhloroe thane                  ND                 ND          ND          ND(ND)                ND      0.0322 J (0.0633 J)         ND         22           420             1
1,1-Dichloroe thane                    ND                 ND          ND          ND(ND)                ND                                 0.546      570          1,000           10
1.1-Dichloroethene                     ND                 ND          ND            ND                  ND             ND                   ND          8           ISO            10
1.2-Dichloroethene (total)             ND                 ND          ND      \^M^fy^^^                 ND     0.0083 J (0.0324 J)ro   ^^53MV^       79 (D        1000 (1>
1,2-Dichloroe thane                    ND                 ND          ND             ND                 ND             ND                   ND   •      6            24              1
2-Butanone                             ND                 ND        . ND           ND(ND)               ND         ND (0.212)            ' ND        1,000         1,000           SO
Acetone                                ND                 ND          ND         0.251 (0.332)          ND         0.986 (0.973)            ND       1,000         1,000           100
Benzene                                ND                 ND          ND              ND                ND             ND                   ND          3             13             1
Chloroform                            0.0253              ND          ND           ND(ND)               ND          ND(ND)                  ND         19            28             1
Ethylbenzene                           ND                 ND          ND             ND                 ND             ND                   ND       1,000         1,000           100
Methylene Chloride                      ND                ND          ND          ND(ND)                ND         ND (0.0112)              ND         49           210              1
Tetrachloroethene                      ND                 ND          ND          ND(ND)         l^pspjl            ND(ND)                 0.181        4             6              1
Toluene                                ND                 ND          ND         ND (0.0107)        ND              ND(ND)                 0.215     1,000         1,000 '         500
Trichloroethene                       0.0029              ND        0.0259     0.0936 J (0.0151)                 0.237 J (0.507 J)                     23            54              1
Vinyl Chloride                         ND                 ND          ND        0.0535 J(ND)        ND              ND(ND)                 ND           2             7             10
Xylenes                                ND                 ND          ND         ND (0.0089)        ND              ND(ND)                 ND         410          1,000            10
Total VOCs                            0.0282              ND        0.0259       9.828 (0.638)         360.2      1.264 (21.799)          31.242
Notes;
All values given In mg/kg
J • The associated value Is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
ND - Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
 TlCs • Tentatively Identified Compounds
 w
    NJSCC for cis-l,2-Dlchloroethene
 01
    Actual result for cls-l,2-Dlchloroethene
 Res. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
 Non. Re«. • Non-resldenrlal Direct Contact Criteria
 CW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
l%:MEl So" concentration above NJSCC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 4

                                                             SUMMARY OF Dfc 1 hC I'KU ORGANIC CO!
                                                                    FORMER DEGRBASER AREA - B1
                                                               DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVI


                                 VP-1           VP-2                            VP-3                       VW-1         VW-2            New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
Compound                        (6-8ft)        (6-8ft)        (4-6ft)        (6-8ft)          (12-14fi)   (6-8ft)                       Res.       Mm. Ret.         GW

1.1.1-Trichloroe thane            ND             ND             ND            ND(ND)             ND        ND          ND(ND)           210          1,000           50
1.1.2-Trichloroe thane            ND             ND             ND          0.002 J(ND) '        ND        ND         0.0021 (ND)        22           420             1
Chloroform                      0.002 BJ       0.001 BJ         ND        0.001 J (0.003 J)      ND        ND       0.001 J (0.003 J)    19            28             1
Trichlonoethene                   ND             ND             ND        0.002 J (0.033 J)      ND        ND       0.002 J (0.033 J)    23            54 .           1

Total VOCs                        0.002         0.001           ND         0.005(0.036)          ND         ND       0.005(0.036)




Notes;
All values given In mg/kg
8 - Analyte was found In the associated blank as well as In the sample
1 • The associated value Is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
ND • Not Detected
( ) Duplicate sample
Res. • Residential Direct Contact Criteria
Non. Res. - Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLES

                                                     SUMMARY OF SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS'
                                                       FORMER DEGREASER AREA - BUILDING 2
                                                  DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                                                     Location
  Compound Name                           VP-M       VP-1B    VP-2A     VP-2B    VP-3A VP-3A DUP   VP-3B    VW-1     VW-2     WV-3

  Trichlorofluoromethane                  ND          ND       ND       ND       ND       ND        ND      ND       ND       0.26
  1,1-Dichloroethene                       0.70       1.00     1.10     1.50     1.90     2.10     2.50     0.66     0.98     ND
  l,l,2-Trichloro-l,2,2-trifluoroethane    2.30       3.10     3.30     4.20     6.60     8.00     7.80     2.30     2.90     4.80
  1.1-Dichloroethane                       0.50       0.67     0.70     0.90     1.30     1.50      1.50    0.54     0.62     ND
  ds-l,2-Dichloroethene                    1.80       1.00     1.00     1.30     2.20     2.60      2.20    1.60     1.10     ND
  Chloroform                              ND          ND       ND       ND       0.21     0.24      0.18    ND       ND       ND
  1.2-Dichloroethane                      ND          ND       ND'      ND       ND       ND        ND '    0.23     ND       ND
  1.1.1-Trichloroethane                    1.20       4.10     4.30     7.30     5.60     5.10     11.00    1.70     1.90     ND
  Trichloroethene                           78         110      120      140     230      270       230      140      120     0.15
  1.1.2-Trichloroethane                    0.19       ND       ND       ND       ND       0.18      0.17    ND       ND       ND
  Tetrachloroethene                       .1.60       1.30     1.60      1.70    2.90     3.70      2.70    1.60     1.00     ND
  m,p-Xylene                              ND          0.21     ND       ND       ND       ND        ND      ND       ND       ND
  1,2,4-Trimethylbenzene                  ND          0.16     ND       ND       ND       ND        ND      ND        ND       ND
  Hexachlorobutadiene                     ND          0.16     ND       ND       ND       ND        ND      ND        ND      ND

  Total VOCs                              86.29      121.70   132.00    156.90   250.71   293.42   258.05   148.63   128.50    5.21




  All values in ppm/v




CRA43UGAFFSO-TS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   TABLE 6

                                                      SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                      BUILDING 4 AREA
                                                        DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                              BH-6                         BH-7              New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
                 Compound                          (2-4ft.)          (20-22 ft.)         (20-22ft.)   Res.              Non. Res.             GW

    1,1',1-Trichloroethane                           ND                 ND                   ND        210                1,000              50
    1,1,2-Trichloroethane                            ND                 ND                   ND         22                 420                1
    1,1-Dichloroethane                               ND                 ND                   ND        570                1,000              10
    1.1-Dichloroethene                               ND                 ND                   ND          8                 150 .             10
    1.2-Dlchloroethene (total)                       ND                 ND                   ND         79                1,000               1
    1,2-Dichloroe thane                              ND                 ND                   ND          6                  24                1 .
    2-Butanone                                       ND                 ND                   ND       1,000               1,000              50
    Benzene                                          ND                 ND                   ND          3                  13                1
    Chloroform                                       ND '               ND                   ND         19                  28                1
    Ethylbenzene                                     ND                 ND                   ND       1,000               1,000             100
    Tetrachloroethene                                ND                 ND                   ND          4                   6                1
    Toluene                                          ND                 ND                   ND       1,000               1,000             500.,
    Trichloroethene                                 'NO                 ND                   ND         23                  54                1
    Xylene                                           ND                 ND                   ND        410                1,000              10

    TICs                                             ND                 ND                   ND


    Notes;
    All values given In mg/kg
    ND • Not Detected
    TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
    Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
    Non. Res. - Non-resldentfal Direct Contact Criteria
    GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
    01
       ,NJSCC for cis-l,2-Dichloroethene




CUMJUCAfFSVM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                   TABLE?

                                                              SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                              BUILDING 1 AREA
                                                                DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                           SG-2                    SG-3          SG-4           :SG-S                    New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
 Compound                                (8-10 ft)               (18-20ft)      (2-4ft)         (6-8ft)          Res.               Non.Res.              GVf

1,1,2-Trichloroethane                      ND                      ND             ND              ND               22                 420    1
1.1-Dichloroethane                         ND                      ND             ND                ND            570                 1,000 10'
1.2-Dichloroethylene (total)               ND                      ND             ND                ND             79                 1,000 1
2-Butano'he                                ND                      ND             ND                ND           1,000                1,000 50
Acetone                                    ND                      ND             ND                ND           1,000                1,000 100
Benzene                                    ND                      ND             ND                ND              3                  13    l
Chloroform                                 ND                      ND             ND                ND             19                  28    1
Methylene Chloride                        0.0122                . 0.0047         0.0054         . ND               49                 210      50
                                                                                                :
Tetrachloroethene                          ND                      ND              ND               ND              4                   6       1
Toluene                                    ND                      ND              ND             0.0017         1,000                1,000 . 500
Trichloroethene                           0.0312                   ND              ND               ND             23                  54 •     1
Vinyl Chloride                             ND                      ND              ND               ND              2                   7      10
Xylenes                                    ND                      ND             ND                ND            410                 1,000 10

Total VOCs                                0.0434                   0.0047        O.OOS4         0.0017




 Notes:
 All values given In mg/kg
 J • The associated value is an estimated quantity for detected analytes
 ND - Not Detected
 ( ) Duplicate sample
 TICs - Tentatively Identified Compounds
 Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
 Non. Res. • Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
 GW - Impact to Groundwater Criteria
IliSiSlii S°U concentration above NJSCC
(1)
      NJSCC'forcis-l,2-Dlchloroethene




      CRA«liCAFfJO-T?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         TABLES

                                                SUMMARY OF SOIL GAS SAMPLING RESULTS
                                                    BUILDING 1 AND BUILDING 5 AREAS
                                             DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK.- DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                                                             Location
                                     SG-1 ___         SG-2                          SG-3                      __________
                                                                                                                SG-4          ______________
                                                                                                                                     SG-S
Compound Name                        5 feet 5 feet   10 feet   IS feet    5 feet   10 feet    15 feet   5 feet 10 feet ISfeet  Sfeet lOfeet ISfeet

Building I Area
Trichloroethene                       ND      1.62 0.84 0.61 ND                     ND •       ND       ND          ND      ND      ND       ND       ND




                                     SG-6             SG-7                          SG-S                            SG-9                    SG-10
Compound Name                        Sfeet   Sfeet   10 feet   ISfeet     Sfeet    10 feet   ISfeet     Sfeet   10 feet    ISfeet   Sfeet   10 feet   ISfeet

Former Defreaser Area - Buildinz 5                                                       .                      '
Trichloroethene                       ND      ND      ND        ND         ND       ND         ND       ND          ND      ND      ND       1.27 ND




Notea:
All values in ng/L
ND - Not detected



  CRA43UCAFT50-TS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              TABLE 9.

                                                          SUMMARY OF DETECTED ORGANIC COMPOUNDS IN SOIL
                                                                FORMER DEGREASER AREA • BUILDING S
                                                           DENV1LLE TECHNICAL PARK - DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY


                                                 SG-8                SG-9           SG-10                    New Jersey Soil Cleanup Criteria
        Compound                                (4-6ft)             (4-6fl)         (4-6ft)          Res.               Non. Res.             GW

        1,1,2-Trichloroethane                     ND                 ND               ND               22                  420                1
        1.1-Dichloroethane                        ND                 ND               ND              570                 1,000              10
        1.2-Dichloroethylene (total)              ND                  ND              ND               79                 1,000               1
        2-Butanone                                ND                  ND               ND            1,000                1,000             50
        Acetone                                   ND                  ND               ND            1,000                1,000             100
        Chloroform                                ND                  ND               ND              19                   28                1
        Methylene Chloride                        ND                0.0034             ND              49                  210                1
        Tetrachloroethene                         ND                  ND               ND               4.                   6                1
        Toluene                                   ND                  ND             0.0034          1,000                1,000             500
        Trichloroethene                          .ND                  ND              ND               23                   54                1
        Vinyl Chloride                            ND                  ND               ND               2                    7               10
        Xylenes                                   ND                  ND              ND              410                 1,000              10

        Total VOCs                                ND                0.0034           0.0034




        All values given in mg/kg
        ND - Not Detected
        Res. - Residential Direct Contact Criteria
        Non. Res. - Non-residential Direct Contact Criteria
        GW • Impact to Groundwater Criteria
        01
         NJSCCforcls-l,2-D!chloroethene




CM, «t»CAPr»-T9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                Table 10
                   Contaminants of Potential Concern
                       Denville Technical Park
                                                                ft*.

      Building 2                Outdoor                  Soil
       Soil Gas                 Soil Gas
                                  <^
        Chloroform           Trichloroethene   1,2-DichIoroethene (Total)
   1,1 -Dichloroethane                           cis-1,2-Dichloroethene
   1,1 -Dichloroethene                              Tetrachloroethene
   1,2-Dichloroethane                             1,1,1-Trichloroethane
cis-1 ,2-Dichloroethene                              Trichloroethene
 Hexachlorobutadiene
   Tetrachloroethene
 1,1,1 -Trichloroethane
 1,1,2-Trichloroethane
     Trichloroethene
Trichlorofluoromethane
 l,l,2-Trichloro-l,2,2-
     trifluoroethane
   Trimethylbenzene
    m- and p-Xylene

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             TABLE 11

                                                SUMMARY OF ADDITIONAL LIFETIME ADDED CANCER RISKS
                                                              AND HAZARD INDICES
                                                            DENVILLE TECHNICAL PARK    .
                                                              DENVILLE, NEW JERSEY



                                                                                          Additional Lifetime
                                                                                          Added Cancer Risk             Hazard Index
         Scenario                                        Medium                          Mean             .RME      Mean            RME


          CURRENT/FUTURE EXPOSURE •,
          Indoor Industrial/Commercial Worker      Soil Gas to Indoor Air               1.08E-06        1.08E-06   1.17E-04.       1.17E-04



         FUTURE EXPOSURE;
         Outdoor Industrial Worker                            Soil                      3.91E-07        3.58E-06   3.25E-02        2.98E-01
                                                  Soil .Gas to Ambient Air              4.61E-07        4.61E-07   O.OOE+00        O.OOE+00
                                                                             Totals:    852E-07         4.04E-06   3.2SE-02        2.98E-01


         Construction Worker                                 Soil                       1.25E-09        4.75E-08   2.60E-03        9.87E-02
                                                  Soil Gas to Ambient Air               1.48E-09        5.90E-09   O.OOE+00        O.OOE400
                                                                             Totals:    2.73E-09        5.34E-08   2.60E-03        9.87E-02


         Trespasser                                         Soil                        2.25E-08        3.18E-07   4.68E-03        6.61 E-02
                                                  Soil Gas to Ambient Air               1.41E-09        1.17B-08   O.OOE+00    .   O.OOE+00    .
                                                                             Totals:    2.39E-08        3.30E-07   4.68E-03        6.61 E-02




CRA«1»GAFfSO-T11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Appendix D
Public Notice

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Public Meeting and Comment Period
                         For the Proposed Plan for Remediation of Soils at the
  Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination Superfund Site
                           Rockaway Township, Morris County, New Jersey

Public Meeting:                   Tuesday, July 23, 2002 at 7:00 p.m.
                                  Rockaway Township Municipal Complex
                                  65 Mount Hope Road
                                  Rockaway, New Jersey

Comment Period:                   July 16, 2002 through August 14, 2002

Site Background and Current Status
The Rockaway Township Wellfield Contamination site is located in both Rockaway and Denville Townships in Morris
County. The site, located north of Interstate 80, is approximately 185 acres. The area has been developed by
commercial businesses and light industries including service stations, restaurants, a hotel, plastic manufacturers,
truck/transit companies, and commercial office complexes. The Denville Technical Park is located within the site.
Near the center of the site is the Rockaway Township Wellfield, which serves as the source of potable water for
approximately 14,000 residents of Rockaway Township.

The site has been divided into two operable units. Operable Unit 1 addresses the contaminated ground water that is
impacting the Rockaway Township Wellfield and was the subject of a 1993 Record of Decision (ROD). This ROD
called for the extraction, treatment and re-injection of the treated ground water back into the ground through a
recharge basin for potable purposes. Operable Unit 2 addresses the contaminated soil that is impacting the ground
water and is the subject of a Proposed Plan to be discussed during the comment period and at the public meeting.
A proposed change to the remedy selected for OU1 is also discussed in a separate section of the Proposed Plan
and may also be commented on.

In an effort to identify possible sources of contamination to the ground water, 3 investigations were performed,
identifying seven areas of concern at the Denville Technical Park. Of the seven areas it was determined that only
two areas of concern require soil remediation based on contaminant levels exceeding the New Jersey Soil Cleanup
Criteria and/or elevated concentrations of contaminants in soil gas samples. The Proposed Plan, based on the
Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study reports, describes the remedial alternatives considered and identifies
the preferred remedial alternative along with the rationale for this preference. The remedial alternative preferred by
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) is so/7 vapor extraction (SVE) for the two areas
requiring soil remediation. This alternative includes the following components:

         * SVE treatment to remove the volatile organic compounds from the soils;
         * treatment of extracted vapors (if needed);
         * deed notice
NJDEP is also seeking comments on the proposal to discharge treated ground water into the surface water of
Beaver Brook. A comparison of three discharge options showed this option to be the most technically feasible and
cost effective option. A more detailed discussion of this proposal is available in the Proposed Plan and will be
discussed at the public meeting.

  New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
                          Site Remediation Program
____________BureauofCommunityRelations

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 168 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  APPENDIX            V
Administrative Record Index

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 169 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Rockaway Township Wells Site
                              Administrative Record
                   Technical Documents for Soil Operable Unit
Items indicated thus * are also available at the Document Repository located in the Rockaway
Township Free Public Library, 61 Mount Hope Road, Rockaway Township.

       DATE                       DOCUMENT TITLE                            SUBMITTED BY
*     11/88     Phase I Remedial Investigation Report for Rockaway         ICF/SRW
                Township Wellfield Site                                    Associates, Inc.
      9/27/90   Final Draft Site Inspection Report for Morton              NUS Corporation,
                Thiokol/Dcnville Technical Park                            Superrund Division
*     9/92      Phase II Remedial Investigation Report for Rockaway        ICF Kaiser
                Township Wellfield Site                                    Engineers
*     12/92     Final Feasibility Study Report for Rockaway                ICF Kaiser
                Township Wellfield Site                                    Engineers
*    9/17/96    Preliminary Assessment for Denville Technical Park         Conestoga-Rovers &
                [for Block 62101, Lots 1, 3 and 5] Submitted for NJDEP's   Associates
                ISRA Program
      10/3/97   Soil Remedial Investigation Work Plan/Quality              Conestoga-Rovers &
                Assurance Project Plan                                     Associates
      10/3/97   Site Health and Safety Plan                                Conestoga-Rovers &
                                                                           Associates
      10/3/97   Site Investigation                                         Conestoga-Rovers &
                                                                           Associates
     4/14/98    Phase 1A Cultural Resource Reconnaissance for              The Cultural
                Proposed Ground Water Remediation at Denville              Resource Consulting
                Technical Park                                             Group
*    2/11/98    Justification for Treated Ground Water Discharge to        Conestoga-Rovers &
                Surface Water                                              Associates
*    5/1 1/98   NJDEP received Site Investigation Report for Denville      Republic
                Technical Park, UST # 0305507, TMS# C94-2273               Environmental
                dated October 1997 from Conestoga-Rovers &                 Systems
                Associates [for one 1,000 gallon waste oil underground
                storage tank]
*    8/7/98     Ground Water Remedial Action Work Plan                   Conestoga-Rovers &
                                                                         Associates
*    9/3/98     Site Investigation [revised pages were inserted into the Conestoga-Rovers &
                 10/3/97 version]                                        Associates
*    9/3/98     Soil Remedial Investigation Work Plan/Quality            Conestoga-Rovers &
                Assurance Project Plan [revised pages were inserted into Associates
                the 10/3/97 version]
     9/24/98    Approval Letter for Soil Remediation Work                NJDEP
                Plan/Quality Assurance Project Plan and Site
                Investigation

July 1,2002
Page 1 of2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 170 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      4/28/99  Soil Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for        Conestoga-Rovers &
               Denville Technical Park                                  Associates
 *    7/27/99 Soil Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study for         Conestoga-Rovers &
               Denville Technical Park [revised pages were inserted     Associates
               into the 4/28/99 version]
      8/4/99   Approval letter for Site Investigation Report            NJDEP
      8/5/99   Approval letter for 4/28/99 Soil Remedial                NJDEP
               Investigation/Feasibility Study for Denville Technical
               Park
      7/29/99 Preliminary (30%) Design Report for Denville              Conestoga-Rovers &
               Technical Park                                           Associates
 *    11/28/00 Response to Comments on Wetland Issues                   Conestoga-Rovers &
                                                                        Associates
*     7/3/02    Proposed Plan                                           NJDEP
*     7/3/02    Public Meeting and Comment Period Notice                NJDEP
                Sole Source Aquifer Information                         USEPA
                www.epa.gov/safewater/swp/ssa.html


NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
USEPA - United Stated Environmental Protection Agency




July 1,2002
Page 2 of2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 171 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         Rockaway Township Wells Site
                            Administrative Record
                         NJDEP Enforcement Documents
Items indicated thus * are also available at the Document Repository located in the Rockaway
Township Free Public Library, 61 Mount Hope Road, Rockaway Township.

   DATE                         ENFORCMENT DOCUMENT TITLE
   6/4/86  Directive [I] - Requiring Morton Thiokol Inc., Shell Oil Co, and Robert S.
           Brower, d/b/a Town and Country Gas Station to pay NJDEP for the publicly
           funded RI/FS and to pay Rockaway Township for operation and maintenance of
           air stripping unit._________._________________________
   5/5/87  Administrative Consent Order - Requiring Morton Thiokol Inc. and Shell Oil
           Co to pay NJDEP for the publicly funded RI/FS and to pay Rockaway Township
           for operation and maintenance of air stripping unit.'_______________
   4/29/89 Directive II and Notice to Insurers - Requiring Robert S. Brower, d/b/a Town
           and Country Gas Station and Hartford Accident and Indemnity Co. to pay for
           Phase II RI/FS.
   9/21/89 Directive III - Requiring Morton International Inc.,Thiokol Corp. and Shell Oil
           Company to pay for Phase II RI/FS and continue to pay for operation and
           maintenance of air stripping unit.__________________________
   10/5/93 Record of Decision for Ground Water
   4/20/94 Administrative Consent Order — Requiring Thiokol Corp. to replace the aging
           air stripping unit.____________________________________
   3/13/96 Administrative Consent Order - Requiring Thiokol Corp. to 1. continue to pay
           for the operation and maintenance of Rockaway Township air stripper, 2. design
           and implement a ground water remedy, and 3. conduct a remedial investigation/
           feasibility study, and design and implement a soil remedy._____________


NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
USEPA - United States Environmental Protection Agency

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 172 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   APPENDIX            VI
USEPA's Letter of Concurrence

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 173 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     UNITED^ .^TES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.                                  .cNCY
                                          REGION2
                                       290 BROADWAY
                                   NEW YORK. NY 10007-1866
                                                                                                                      QCT05-


Bradley M. Campbell, Commissioner                                                                            '*•
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
401 East State Street, P.O. Box 402
Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0402
Dear Commissioner Campbell:
     The United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region II
(EPA) has reviewed the Final Record of Decision (ROD) for Soils,
with a modification to the 1993 Ground Water ROD for the Rockaway
Township Wells Superfund Site located in Rockaway and Denville
Townships, Morris County, New Jersey.
     EPA concurs with the selected remedy presented in this ROD
and with the modification to the 1993 Ground Water ROD. EPA's
concurrence is based upon the determination that the remedy will
provide for the protection of human health and the environment
through the use of Soil Vapor Extraction to treat the
contaminated soil that is impacting the ground water. The remedy
will satisfy the applicable or relevant and appropriate
requirements (ARARs) of federal and state environmental statutes.
Please note that while EPA concurs with the use of the New Jersey
Impact to Ground Water numbers as the cleanup criteria for the
remedy, EPA does not recognize these numbers as ARARs.
In addition, EPA concurs with modifying the 1993 ground water
remedy by discharging the treated ground water.,to surface water
instead of reinjecting or reusing it as potable water.
EPA looks forward to working with your staff on this site.

                                                                   Sincerely,


                                                                              luszynski, P . E .
                                                                   Deputy/Regional Administrator




                                    Internet Address (URL) • http://www.epa.gov
   Recycled/Recyclable • Printed with Vegetable Oil Based Inks on Recycled Paper (Minimum 50% Postooraumer content)
