LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/86310
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 0aef8dddfde31f503949e8da6e5a3949f84e6c4dd19919c00351155f5fd8ba70
Source PDF pages: 10
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     86310
                   EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES

                VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SUPERFUND SITE

 Site Name and Location

Vineland Chemical Company
1611 West Wheat Road
Vineland, New Jersey

Introduction

The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) presents this Explanation of
Significant Differences (BSD) to explain the change made to the remedy selected in the
September 28, 1989 Record of Decision (ROD) for the Vineland Chemical Company
Superfund site. This change from soil flushing to soil washing relates to the portion of the
remedy which address the remediation of arsenic-contaminated soils on the plant site (Operable
Unit 1). The change resulted from information obtained or developed subsequent to the 1989
ROD.

This ESD is issued in accordance with Section 117(c) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C.
9617(c), and Section 300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP), 40 CFR 300.435(c)(2)(i), which contain provisions for addressing
and documenting changes that occur to a remedy after a ROD is signed. The ESD and
documents which form the basis for the decision to change the response action will be
incorporated into the Administrative Record for the site hi accordance with Section
300.825(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is available for review during normal
business hours at EPA Region II, 290 Broadway, New York, New York 10007, and at the
City of Vineland Health Department at the Vineland City Hall, 7th and Wood Streets,
Vineland, New Jersey 08360.

Summary of Site History, Contamination Problems, and Selected Remedy

The Vineland Chemical Company plant was located at 1611 West Wheat Road in the northwest
part of the City of Vineland. Vineland is in Cumberland County, approximately 25 miles from
Delaware Bay in south-central New Jersey. The site is located in a mixed residential and
agricultural area. There were twelve buildings and five abandoned chicken coops on the plant
site. Some of these structures were used by the Vineland Chemical Company for various
manufacturing purposes. Four of the buildings were used for product manufacturing, one was
a laboratory, two were used for vehicle storage and/or maintenance, two were used for
treatment of the process waste waters and one was a boiler/heating plant. The Vineland
Chemical Company ceased operations in 1994.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

As early as 1966, the New Jersey Department of Health observed untreated wastewater being
discharged into unlined lagoons at the Vineland site. This wastewater was contaminated with
arsenic at concentrations up to 67,000 parts per billion (ppb). Waste salts containing 1-2
percent arsenic were stored outside in uncovered piles. Precipitation dissolved some of these
salts and carried them into the ground water and eventually into nearby surface water bodies.

In 1988, EPA conducted a Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) to determine
the nature and extent of the contamination and to develop remedial alternatives to address the
contamination. The RI/FS findings are documented below.

Because of Vineland Chemical's improper handling, storage and disposal of arsenic-based salts
and process wastewater since 1949, the soils, sediments and nearby surface waters are
contaminated with arsenic. Sampling conducted during the remedial investigation and the
design investigations showed that plant site soils under and around the manufacturing buildings
and the floors of the buildings themselves are heavily contaminated. Soils in the lagoon area
are also heavily contaminated where process wastewater was allowed to percolate into the
subsurface. Precipitation carries the arsenic through the porous soil into the shallow aquifer.
Heavily-contaminated ground water flows into the Blackwater Branch, then 1.5 miles
downstream into the Maurice River, and subsequently, 7.5 miles into Union Lake. Since the
arsenic is associated with the fine particles suspended in surface water, areas of high arsenic
concentration are being redistributed downstream in the river bottoms and Union Lake.
The Remedial Investigation revealed elevated arsenic concentrations in the soils and sediments
as far south as Delaware Bay. Arsenic concentrations in the Maurice River were above the
Federal Drinking Water Standard, i.e., 50 ppb, 26.5 miles downstream from the Vineland
Chemical Company site.

On September 28, 1989, a Record of Decision was signed for the Vineland Chemical Company
site. The site is complex, with multiple contamination areas: the plant site, the Blackwater
Branch and Maurice River, and Union Lake. This complexity and the interrelationship of the
areas necessitated a cleanup approach involving discrete phases or Operable Units. The
remedy selected for the site includes the following phases:

        Operable Unit 1 - Plant Site Source Control

Plant site soils will be cleaned to health-based levels using in-situ soil flushing to accelerate the
washing of arsenic into the shallow aquifer. This aquifer is already contaminated and is to be
remediated as part of Operable Unit 2.

       Operable Unit 2 - Plant Site Management of Migration

Concurrent with the Operable Unit 1 source control action, plant site ground water will be
pumped at a high rate, treated to meet drinking water standards, and reinjected into the aquifer
at the maximum practicable rate. The remainder will be discharged to the river.

                                                 -2-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Operable Unit 3 - River Areas

Once the Operable Unit 2 action is underway and arsenic flow from the plant site is stopped,
cleanup of the river areas can begin. Contaminated sediments in the Blackwater Branch
floodplain will be excavated, treated to remove arsenic, and redeposited. Submerged
contaminated sediments in the Blackwater Branch will also be dredged subject to an
Environmental Assessment of the effects of dredging.

If, after a three-year natural flushing period, contaminants are still present above action levels
in the sediments of the Maurice River, and subject to an Environmental Assessment of the
effects of dredging on the river system, the Maurice River sediments will be dredged, treated
and deposited on the plant site.

       Operable Unit 4 - Union Lake Sediments

Removal and treatment of arsenic-contaminated sediments around the shores of Union Lake
will be performed after the above three-year flushing period, and after remediation, if any, hi
the Maurice River.


Description of the Significant Differences and the Basis for Those Differences

Site Summary of Response Actions

The differences between the remedy selected in the 1989 ROD and the actions described hi this
BSD relate to Operable Unit 1, Plant Site Source Control.

EPA selected In-Situ Soil Flushing in the ROD because it was considered a permanent remedy;
it offered the most cost-effective treatment with minimal impacts on the environment; and it
would be easily implementable. The remedy was also expected to achieve the 20 parts per
million (ppm) arsenic cleanup standard for the soils.

The remedy selected in the 1989 ROD involved excavation of approximately 54,000 cubic
yards of contaminated plant site soils and the consolidation of these soils with approximately
72,000 cubic yards of undisturbed contaminated soils into two active flushing areas. On the
attached Figure 1, Zones 1, 3, 4 and 5 would have been consolidated into one flushing area.
Zone 2 would be another flushing area. These two flushing areas would be bermed and
continuously flooded with water. The water would dissolve and carry arsenic from the soil to
the underlying ground water.




                                               -3-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The groundwater pump and treat system, as provided in Operable Unit 2, would collect all of
the contaminated ground water and treat it to below the 50 ppb cleanup standard. Under the
1989 ROD, it was estimated that approximately 400 gallons per minute (gpm) of the 2,800
gpm total flow would be utilized for flushing. The in-situ flushing alternative would have
operated simultaneously with the groundwater pumping alternative.

Although it was indicated in the 1989 ROD that some arsenic had seeped through the floors of
the process buildings since 1949, only those soils under one building (No. 9) were sampled at
that time. Arsenic was found at 471 parts per million eight feet below the building floor in the
unsaturated zone, suggesting that further contamination might exist in the soils beneath other
buildings or paved areas.

In the 1989 ROD, remediation of the contaminated soils directly under the plant site buildings
and surrounding paved areas was not considered. The Feasibility Study proposed that since the
area around the buildings was paved, soil contamination was not considered a potential human
health threat. The buildings and paved areas are shown on the attached Figure 1. It was
thought that any arsenic under the buildings would be fairly immobile except from a fluctuating
water table, usually ten to fifteen feet beneath the surface. It was also assumed that the
Vineland Chemical Company would stay in business and continue to use the plant site
buildings and paved areas.

Following the death of the owner in October 1990, operations at the Vineland Chemical facility
began to diminish. In 1992, EPA assessed the plant site conditions after being informed by the
plant manager that the Vineland Chemical Company site would be abandoned. There were
thousands of gallons of arsenic solutions stored in tanks and containers on the site. In June
1992, EPA secured the buildings and installed fences around soil areas containing high levels
of arsenic. In addition, a fence was installed around the plant site to restrict trespassers.
Removal of the hazardous materials stored in tanks and containers began in the fall of 1992.
The Vineland Chemical Company ceased operations and the plant site buildings were
abandoned in early 1994.

During the design investigations phase, borings were advanced through the floors of all the
plant site buildings and paved areas. Samples were also collected from inside the buildings
including the walls, floors, ceilings and equipment. Significant amounts of arsenic were
discovered in some of the buildings and in the soils at depths down to the water table. Arsenic
was found at a level of 2,530 ppm in the concrete floors below Building 3, 158 ppm in the
subsurface soils under Building 7 (laboratory), 1,530 ppm hi the floors below Building 8,
11,100 ppm hi the brick floors below Building 9, 5,650 ppm in the concrete floors below
Building 10, 334 ppm in the concrete floors below the wastewater treatment plant, and 508
ppm in the wood framing of Chicken Coop 3. Arsenic was also found at 72 ppm in the
subsurface soils beneath Building 5 (boiler plant).



                                              .4-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Based on these findings, EPA decided to demolish and dispose of eight plant site buildings that
 were themselves contaminated with arsenic or constructed over contaminated soils. Because
 the arsenic had permeated the building materials, decontamination was not considered an
 effective approach. By remediating the contaminated buildings, the human health risk
 associated with exposure to contaminated building interiors was eliminated. The floors of the
 buildings and the pavement remained in place to temporarily protect against mobilization of
 the contamination in these soils. An estimated 55,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil are
 under the buildings and the paved areas.

On June 26, 1997, EPA's Regional Administrator approved an BSD which included the
demolition and disposal of the plant site buildings and debris. The building demolition work,
designed and managed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (COE), cost approximately $2.7
million. The BSD also included an increase in volume of the contaminated plant site soils and
changes in the groundwater treatment plant size and treatment process. The COE continues to
provide EPA design and construction management assistance through numerous Interagency
Agreements.

Groundwater Remediation

In September 1997, a contract was awarded to Black and Veatch for the construction and
prove-out of the groundwater remediation system. The groundwater treatment plant was
designed to handle a flow of 2.0 million gallons per day (mgd). It was also designed to handle
both organic and inorganic arsenic flows. In addition to the treatment plant, the system
includes 13 extraction wells and an effluent pipeline to the nearby Blackwater Branch.

The COE managed the construction of the new facility, which was completed in the Spring of
2000. Startup and prove-out of the new facility also began in the Spring. The facility was
successful in treating the arsenic-contaminated ground water to a level below the 50 ppb
standard as required by the surface water discharge permit equivalence. The system, which
pumps about 1.0 mgd, has been operating over a year and has been successfully capturing the
groundwater plume and treating the arsenic-contaminated water consistently to a level of about
25 ppb prior to its discharge to the Blackwater Branch.

Design of Site Soils Remediation

As previously mentioned, the Record of Decision envisioned flushing of the site soils. During
the remedial design, column leaching tests were performed involving the plant site soils.
These tests were undertaken to demonstrate the effectiveness of soil flushing. The results of
the testing revealed that it would take 17 to 20 years of flushing to reduce the arsenic to the
cleanup goal of 20 ppm based on contaminated soil with an arsenic concentration of 178 ppm.
In addition, it would take 38 to 43 years of flushing to reduce the level of arsenic in more
highly-contaminated soil (1,720 ppm) to the cleanup goal.


                                              -5-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 Because of the extremely long remediation time periods and the possibility of failure to achieve
 the 20 ppm arsenic cleanup goal associated with the in-situ flushing remedy, EPA decided to
 perform further testing to evaluate the plant site soil remediation approach. Additional testing
 revealed that 15 pore volumes or flushes of water reduced the level of arsenic in the soils to
 27 ppm. However, it required 460 flushes to reach the arsenic cleanup goal (i.e., 20 ppm).
 As a result, EPA decided to evaluate soil washing as a possible alternative technology for the
 remediation of the site soils. Soil washing was already believed to the appropriate remedial
 technology for the stream sediments.

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of soil washing for the plant site soils, four vendors were
selected to perform treatability studies. Two of the soil washing processes showed that they
could effectively reduce the arsenic levels in over 90 percent of the site soils to below the
cleanup goal of 20 ppm. The estimated cost of remediating the plant site soils via a soil
washing process is $33.6 million (see attached cost estimate). Comparison of this cost to that
for soil flushing is difficult because of the uncertainties associated with flushing of the soils.
As indicated above, it may take as many as 460 flushes to reach the 20 ppm cleanup goal for
arsenic. This could extend the operation of the groundwater treatment plant by a significant
period of time (up to 43 years) at a projected cost of $2 to $3 million a year. As a result, the
cost of soil flushing may exceed that of soil washing, even assuming that the arsenic cleanup
goal could be achieved via the flushing process.

The above cost estimate for soil washing (i.e., $33.6 million) includes disposal of untreated
material as hazardous waste (approximately 10 percent of the soils), and restoration of the site.
Waste streams resulting from the soil washing process would be handled at the existing
treatment facility to the maximum extent practicable. These treatability studies demonstrate
the effectiveness of soil washing compared to soil flushing, leading EPA to believe that a
revision to the remedy is appropriate.

This BSD documents the change in the Plant Site Soils remedy selected in the 1989 ROD from
in-situ soil flushing to ex-situ soil washing, The reasons for this change are summarized
below.

Treatability studies demonstrate that soil washing is far more effective than soil flushing in
reducing arsenic to the cleanup goal of 20 ppm. Based on column leaching tests, the in-situ
soil flushing remedy would not be effective in reducing the arsenic levels of all of the
unsaturated zone soils in the plant site area. Further, bench-scale testing shows that the soil
flushing remedy would take much longer than was estimated in the ROD, up to 43 years
instead of 8 years. In contrast, the soil washing process is expected to achieve the cleanup
goals in about 2 years.




                                               -6-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The additional flow of arsenic into the ground water, which would result from in-situ soil
flushing, would make plume capture more difficult and even uncertain. Further, the operation
of the groundwater treatment facility itself would be more complex due to the recovery of slugs
of arsenic from the pumping wells. The additional arsenic loading, in turn, would make the
achievement of effluent requirements more difficult.

Support Agency Comments

The State of New Jersey supports EPA's revision to the remedy for the plant site soils and the
decision to issue this ESD.

Affirmation of Statutory Determinations

Considering the new information that has been developed and the change made to the selected
remedy, EPA and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection believe that the remedy
remains protective of human health and the environment, complies with federal and state
requirements that were identified in the ROD and this ESD as applicable or relevant and
appropriate to this remedial action, and is cost effective. In addition, the revised remedy
utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent
practicable for this site.

Public Participation Activities

EPA routinely meets with local officials, residents and interested parties to update them on the
status of site activities. In accordance with the requirements of CERCLA, EPA will publish a
notice of this ESD in the local newspaper, The Daily Journal. The ESD has been placed hi the
Administrative Record for the site, which is available at the information repositories for public
review. In addition, the technical reports supporting this remedy modification on the attached
list will also be added to the administrative record.




William J. MHszynslo^/P.E.                                        Date
Acting Regional Administrator




                                              -7-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 COST ESTIMATE
                         REMEDIATION OF PLANT SITE SOILS
                              USING SOIL WASHING


TASKS                                                      COST
Key Work Plan Preparation                                  $     34,125
Mobilization - Support Area Preparation                    $   621,291
Work Plan Preparation                                      $     96,581
Home Office Support - Overhead                             $    177,882
Field Office Support - Overhead                            $ 3,279,205
Pre - excavation Sampling Plant Site                       $     63,527
Site Preparation Building Demolition                       $   806,839
Plant Site Excavation, Sampling, Restoration               $ 8,686,388
Soil Washing                                               $ 9,920,026
Demobilization and Closeout                                $      4,013


Direct Cost Subtotal                                       $23,689,877


Administrative - Profit Multiplier (0.42)                  $ 9,916,345


TOTAL COST                                                 $ 33,606,222




                                               -8-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             DESIGN DOCUMENTS USED TO SUPPORT SOIL WASHING


Malcolm Pirnie Inc., September 1994, 65% Remedial Design Plans and Specifications
Part A - Operable Unit (OU) 1 - Plant Site, and O.U. 3 -Blackwater Branch

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., September 1994,65% Design Analysis Report

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., January 1995, Alternative Design Scenarios Report

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., May 1995, Re-Evaluation of Plant Site Source Control Alternatives

Malcolm Pirnie, Inc., April 1998, Preliminary Design Activities Report for the Vineland
Chemical Company Superfund Site, Remedial Action Design for Operable Units 1 and 3.

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., December 1998, 95% Design Plans and Specifications for the Source
Control Remedial Action (O.U. 1 and 3)

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., December 1998, 95% Design Analysis Report for the Source Control
Remedial Action (O.U. 1 and 3)

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., February 2000, 100% Design Plans and Specifications for the Source
Control Remedial Design (O.U. 1 and 3)

Malcolm Pirnie Inc., February 2000, 100% Design Analysis Report for the Source Control
Remedial Design (O.U. 1 and 3).

Surbec-Art Environmental, L.L.C, September 2000, Proposal for Soil Washing Services for
Vineland Chemical Company Superfund Site, RFP No. SWPS-802258, 4 vols.

IT Corporation, September 2000, Proposal for Soil Washing - Vineland Chemical Company
Superfund Site, Proposal No. 802258 under contract DACW41-94-D-9013-0010,4 vols.




                                             -9-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

DONALD T. DlFRANCbSCO                       Department of Environmental Protection                                Robert C. Shinn. Ji
    Acting Governor                                                                                                 Commissioner

                                                               August 29, 2001



              William J. Muszynski, Acting Regional Administrator
              United States Environmental Protection Agency
              Region 2
              290 Broadway
              New York, New York 10007-1866

              Re:     Vineland Chemical Company
                      Explanation of Significant Difference

              Dear Mr. Muszynski:

              The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) has reviewed the
              Explanation of Significant Difference for the Vineland Chemical Site located in Vineland,
              Cumberland County, New Jersey. The NJDEP concurs with the USEPA change to the
              selected remedy from in-situ soil flushing to ex-situ soil washing

              The NJDEP's concurrence to the ESD is also based on the fact that the 10 year
              Operation and Maintenance time period for the groundwater treatment system does not
              start until the completion of this soil remedy.

             The State of New Jersey appreciated the^portunijy to participate in-the decision
             making process and looks forward to futurebQOp^ation with the USEPA".'




                                                                 rt C. Shinn, Jr.
                                                              Commissioner




                                                                  Post-It * brand fax transminal memo 7671 # of paves
                                                                                                 From




                                                                                                 TMlf
