LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, RECORD OF DECISION, LIPARI LANDFILL
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/98496
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 87614bd20e2d85922de2d8aca2a1017f76fbf01dc1e986565505fc72dd75c0cb
Source PDF pages: 11
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             SDMS Document
              EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES
                        RECORD OF DECISION
                          LIPARI LANDFILL


Site Name and Location

Lipari Landfill
Mantua Township, Gloucester County, New Jersey

Statement of Purpose

This document presents a summary of the significant differences
between the remedial action selected for the Lipari Landfill site
in the 1988 Record of Decision (ROD) and the remedial action as
designed. A summary of the information upon which the
differences are based is presented herein.
The following documents were reviewed for these decisions:
  - Record of Decision, July 11, 1988
  - Administrative Record file
  - Lipari Landfill Off-Site Remedial Action Construction Plans
    and Specifications, Step One of Two Step Sealed Bidding,
    November 1992
Record of Decision and Significant Differences
On July 11, 1988, a Record of Decision was signed for the Lipari
Landfill site covering the cleanup of the off-site areas impacted
by contaminant migration from the landfill.

The selected remedy included:
  -   Excavation of contaminated soils in Chestnut Branch marsh
      and dredging of contaminated sediments in Alcyon Lake,
      Chestnut Branch and Rabbit Run streams, followed by thermal
      treatment to remove organic contaminants and placement as a
      non-hazardous material.
  -   Construction and operation of a drainage system in
      Chestnut Branch marsh to collect leachate seepage from the
      landfill containment system during on-site batch flushing,
      for on-site treatment of the collected leachate.
  -   Connection of existing wells in the Kirkwood aquifer to the
      on-site treatment plant, and pumping of the aquifer during
      the on-site batch flushing period and later, if needed.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Following the 1988 ROD and as a result of the virtually completed
remedial design, which included field testing, treatability
studies and modeling studies, the following findings were made:
  -   The volume of contaminated soil in Chestnut Branch marsh may
      be as high as 57,500 cubic yards instead of the 30,000 cubic
      yards indicated in the 1988 ROD.
  -   The volume of contaminated sediment in Chestnut Branch and
      Rabbit Run streams is approximately 600 cubic yards instead
      of the 1,250 cubic yards estimated in the ROD.
  -   Treatability studies demonstrate that thermal treatment can
      reduce bis(2-chloroethyl) ether (BCEE), and other organic
      contaminants including volatile organic compounds (VOCs), to
      acceptable levels for placement on Alcyon Racetrack. They
      further show that removing BCEE to non-detectable levels
      (utilizing a detection limit of 11 parts per billion) will
      ensure that the levels of VOCs and other organic
      contaminants in treated Chestnut Branch marsh soils are
      suitable for placement at the racetrack.
  -   Alcyon Lake sediments and Chestnut Branch and Rabbit Run
      stream sediments containing concentrations of BCEE less than
      or equal to 180 parts per billion (ppb) may be placed,
      without thermal treatment, as non-hazardous material at
      Alcyon Racetrack. This BCEE level results from calculations
      that model the transport of BCEE from Alcyon Racetrack to
      the underlying ground water flowing into Alcyon Lake; it is
      based on the average concentration of BCEE in this ground
      water being no more than the Federal Surface Water Quality
      Criterion (1.36 ppb). In contrast to the soils in the
      marsh, the levels of VOCs and organic contaminants other
      than BCEE in the sediments of Alcyon Lake and the streams
      are insignificant; therefore, thermal treatment for these
      compounds is not necessary.
  -   Sediment removal from Alcyon Lake by excavation following
      lake drainage is more feasible and more cost effective than
      hydraulic dredging.
  -   The volume of contaminated sediment in Alcyon Lake requiring
      removal is approximately 97,500 cubic yards instead of the
      140,000 cubic yards estimated in the ROD, and contamination
      levels, although lower, remain significant.
  -   The estimate of wastewater flow from the off-site cleanup
      activities, including the collected leachate seepage and
      Kirkwood aquifer water, ranges up to 120 gallons per minute
      compared to 40 gallons per minute indicated in the ROD.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 -    The estimated unit cost for thermal treatment of
      contaminated soils/sediments is approximately two to four
      times higher than the estimate used in the ROD.
  -   A temporary collection system for leachate seepage from the
      landfill will be needed to allow the on-site remediation to
      proceed before the permanent drainage system is installed.
  -   The remedy will cost an estimated $50 million to $75
      million(1), compared to the ROD estimate of $21 million.

Decisions Concerning Significant Differences
After review of the foregoing information, the following
decisions were made:
  -   The remedy selected in the 1988 ROD is still the most
      appropriate means of protecting human health and the
      environment.
  - The overall volume of soils/sediments to be excavated at
    Chestnut Branch marsh and Chestnut Branch and Rabbit Run
    streams should be increased from the 31,250 cubic yards
    estimated in the ROD to 58,100 cubic yards.
  -   Chestnut Branch marsh soils are to be thermally treated to
      remove BCEE, and VOCs and other organic contaminants to
      levels acceptable for placement on Alcyon Racetrack.
      Establishing a treatment standard of non-detect for BCEE,
      which has lower volatility and is more difficult to remove
      than the more volatile contaminants, will ensure that the
      levels of VOCs and other organic contaminants in the treated
      soils are suitable for placement on the racetrack.
  - Alcyon Lake sediments continue to threaten surface water
    quality and must be removed to their interface with clean
    lake sand.
  - Alcyon Lake sediments are to be removed by draining the lake
    and excavation rather than by hydraulic dredging, as
    described in the ROD.




(1) Thie range will b* used throughout this document because disclosure of the
design-based estimate would jeopardize the bidding of the remedial action
contract. A privileged Appendix to this document contains the actual cost
estimate, which will remain privileged until either EPA selects a remedial
action contractor or EPA reaches a settlement with the responsible parties to
perform the work.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 - Alcyon Lake sediments and Chestnut Branch and Rabbit Run
   stream sediments are to be placed directly as non-hazardous
   material at Alcyon Racetrack except for any sediments
   containing average BCEE levels greater than 180 ppb, which
   would require thermal treatment before placement. Ground
   water wells located between Alcyon Racetrack and Alcyon
   Lake will be monitored in accordance with a monitoring
   program that is jointly prepared by the U.S. Environmental
   Protection Agency and the New Jersey Department of
   Environmental Protection and Energy.
  - The estimate of wastewater flow from off-site activities
    requiring on-site treatment should be increased from 40
    gallons per minute to approximately 120 gallons per minute.
  - A temporary wellpoint interception system is to be installed
    alongside the future alignment of the permanent drainage
    system to collect leachate seepage and allow the on-site
    cleanup to proceed without delay.
Statutory Determination
The results of this evaluation have shown that although there
are significant differences between the remedy as currently
designed and the remedy described in the 1988 Record of Decision,
including a significant increase in the cost for implementing the
remedy from about $21 million to approximately $50 to 75 million,
the remedy selected in the Record of Decision is not functionally
changed, and remains the most environmentally protective and
appropriate action.
Therefore, in accordance with the requirements of Section 117(c)
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980, as amended, this document presents an
Explanation of Significant Differences which will be published
in accordance with the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan at 40 CFR 300.825(a)(2). This
document will become part of the Administrative Record file
for the Lipari Landfill site.




William jyMusjVnsJjff^ P.E.        Date
Acting Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  -2-
estiraated in the ROD. In addition, the design studies show that
expected wastewater flow generated from the off-site activities
and requiring treatment is approximately two to three times that
identified in the ROD.
Based on design field investigations, the estimated volume of
sediments to be removed from Alcyon Lake is reduced to 97,500
cubic yards from the 140,000 cubic yards estimated in the ROD.
Further, it was found that probably all of the sediments could be
placed as non-hazardous material at Alcyon Racetrack without
treatment.
The overall effect of the findings of the investigations is an
increase in the remedy cost to an estimated $50 to $75 million'"
compared to $21 million in the ROD. A portion of the increased
remedy cost relates to the necessity of constructing a temporary
system to collect landfill leachate seeping into Chestnut Branch
marsh (Cohansey aquifer) until completion of the french drain,
which is the permanent system. The availability of such a system
is necessary prior to initiation of the on-site remedy, batch
flushing, as discussed in the 1985 ROD.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, together with the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, have
determined that there are significant differences between the
selected remedy outlined in the July 11, 1988 Record of Decision
and the remedy as designed. However, EPA and NJDEPE continue to
believe that the remedy remains the most appropriate and cost
effective means to protect human health and the environment while
providing a solution to the contamination problems that
permanently and significantly decreases the toxicity, mobility
and volume of the contamination. The differences discussed above
do not fundamentally alter the intent or basic features of the
selected remedy. For information relating to the history of the
Lipari Landfill site and the alternatives evaluated prior to
choosing the original remedy, please refer to the subject Record
of Decision.




(1) The design-based construction cost e*tis*te nunber, which Is calcuUttd for the stLection of the
remedial action contractor, cannot be disclosed at this tie*. Since such disclosure would jeopardize the
•election process, it is forbidden by the Federal Acquisition Regulations. However, the estimate Is being
included and filed in a separate confidential copy of this Explanation of Significant Differences that is
privileged. After a remedial action contractor has been selected or a settlement is reached whereby the
remedial action is carried out by parties responsible for the contamination, the estiaiate uUL be available
to the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    •      NEW INFORMATION AND SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES
During the design process following the Record of Decision (ROD),
field and laboratory investigations were made to better define
the quantities of contaminated materials to be handled and to
obtain treatability and engineering properties data required for
design. The investigations included the following:
field/geotechnical studies; soil, sediment and ground water
testing; surveying; soil and sediment treatability studies; and
hydrogeological studies.


At Chestnut Branch marsh, test borings were made to delineate
the areal extent of contamination as well as the depth of
contamination in those marsh areas believed to be only
surficially contaminated, as indicated in the ROD.
In developing the ROD, EPA estimated the total marsh soil volume,
i.e., marsh surface area times the average soil depth to the
underlying clay, to be 71,500 cubic yards, but that only a
portion of that volume would require excavation and treatment.
At that time, EPA assumed that surficially contaminated marsh
areas would be excavated to a two foot depth, well above the
depth of the clay underlying the marsh. Only Zone 3 (see Figure
1)i approximately one fourth of the marsh area, would have been
excavated down to the underlying clay. Overall, it was believed
that 30,000 cubic yards would need to have been excavated for
treatment.
However, field testing has provided an improved estimate of the
total marsh volume as well as a better understanding of the
extent of marsh contamination. Soil borings to establish the
true thickness of the marsh above its underlying clay showed that
the total marsh soil volume is approximately 57,500 cubic yards.
Further, field boring test results show that contamination exists
throughout the depth of the marsh in all three marsh zones.
These results are supported by the results of a parallel program
of ground water testing and other recent ground water testing
which involved the sampling of the water column down to the clay
layer. The ground water test results reveal contamination with
Lipari site pollutants consistent with the boring results.
Based on the general finding of deep marsh contamination, the
estimated volume of marsh soil to be excavated and treated is a
maximum of 57,500 cubic yards, compared to the ROD estimate of
30,000 cubic yards. A minor reduction in the marsh soil volume
to be excavated and treated is possible as the testing results
are finalized. The contaminated sediment volume to be excavated
from Chestnut Branch and Rabbit Run is revised to 600 cubic yards
from the 1,250 cubic yards estimated in the ROD.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-
The material taXen from the marsh would be treated in the low
temperature volatilization system (LTVS) to a non-detectable
level of bis(2-chloroethyl)ether (BCEE) utilizing a laboratory
detection limit of 11 parts per billion. Although the marsh
soils contain other contaminants, treatment to the detection
limit for BCEE, which is a semi-volatile compound, will ensure
the removal of similar and more volatile contaminants in the
soils. The treated material will be placed on the nearby Alcyon
Racetrack.
The stream sediments, like the Alcyon Lake sediments, contain
only one organic contaminant, namely BCEE, in significant
concentrations. As described below for the Alcyon Lake
sediments, only those excavated stream sediments with BCEE levels
greater than ISO ppb would require treatment prior to placement
as a non-hazardous material. Since the stream sediments have
been found to contain levels of BCEE below 180 ppb, none of the
stream sediments would require thermal treatment, pending
confirmational testing at the time of excavation.
Alcvon Lake
With respect to Alcyon Lake, additional field investigations led
to a reduction in the estimate of sediment volume in the lake
from the 140,000 cubic yards indicated in the ROD to 97,500 cubic
yards. The volumetric data were obtained along with a lake
sampling program to assess the contamination level in the
sediments. Sediment borings taken over the entire lake area,
from the sediment surface to its interface with the clean lake
sand, provided sediment depths as well as samples for chemical
analysis. Using the sediment depths along with earlier
information and the known lake bed area, the sediment volume in
situ was calculated.
Analysis of the sediment samples showed that bis(2-chloroethyl)
ether is widely present within the sediment column at significant
concentrations, although testing has revealed no significant
additional organic chemical contamination. Based on these
findings, it is concluded that the lake sediments continue to be
a sufficient BCEE source to cause surface water levels to exceed
the Federal Water Quality Criterion (1.36 parts per billion) and
must be removed.
Removal of the lake sediments will be accomplished by excavation
with the lake drained rather than by hydraulic dredging with the
lake at normal level as indicated in the ROD. Excavation is
preferred because hydraulic dredging would generate much more
wastewater requiring treatment. Further, excavation is more
thorough in removing sediments, is less costly, and minimizes
suspension and possible carry over of contaminated sediments
downstream of the lake during sediment removal.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

According to the ROD, the sediments removed from the lake bed
would be thermally treated before placement as non-hazardous
material, along with treated marsh and stream soils, at the
racetrack property nearby Alcyon Lake. However, screening
calculations, which modeled the fate and transport of
contaminants from the racetrack property to the underlying ground
water and to Alcyon Lake, showed that the excavated lake
sediments probably would not require treatment. The modeling
showed that lake sediments with BCEE levels up to 180 parts per
billion could be safely placed on the racetrack without
threatening Alcyon Lake, i.e., the Federal Water Quality
Criterion for BCEE would not be exceeded in the lake water.
Since the BCEE level in the lake sediments has been found to be
uniformly below 180 ppb, none of the sediments would require
treatment prior to placement, pending confirmational sediment
testing at the time of excavation. Any material found to have
concentrations of BCEE greater than 180 ppb will be treated prior
to placement on the racetrack. After placement on the racetrack,
water will separate from the lake sediments by natural drainage
to an underdrain system and thereby create a stable surface for
eventual use as a park. The water captured by the underdrain
system will be tested for natural decomposition chemical products
and other chemicals and treated as required until drainage to
ground water meets water quality standards.
The design process also revealed that significant waste water
flows requiring treatment vill be generated during all aspects of
the off-site remediation. This waste water, together with that
collected in the french drain from any landfill seepage and that
pumped from the Kirkwood aquifer, will be treated at the on-site
treatment plant. The revised wastewater flow from off-site
activities requiring treatment at the on-site treatment plant
could be up to 120 gallons per minute compared to 40 gallons per
minute estimated in the ROD.
Costs for the thermal treatment of marsh and stream soils also
were shown during design to be higher than expected in the ROD.
Along with treatability studies, a study of thermal treatment
costs that included contacts with vendors of thermal treatment
technology indicated that the unit cost in dollars per cubic yard
treated could be approximately two to four times that estimated
in the ROD.
Finally, a portion of the cost increase relates to the fact that
certain actions required in the 1988 ROD had to be addressed
earlier than planned to avoid a stoppage of work involving the
1985 ROD remedial action. The complexity of the off-site design
led to a delay in the 1988 ROD project schedule. This delayed
the availability of the french drain system, which is required by
the 1985 ROD prior to operation of the batch flushing system to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

capture any seepage from the landfill containment during on-site

                               -4-
flushing operations. In order for on-site flushing operations to
proceed on schedule, a temporary wellpoint interception system to
capture the seepage was designed and constructed for use until
the permanent remedy, the french drain, is in place.
              *
The significant differences from the ROD and their effects on the
design are summarized in Table 1. Overall, the differences
translate to an increase in the remedial action estimated cost
from $21 million to approximately $50 to $75 million.
Although it is not possible to include the exact cost estimate
for the remedial action in the Explanation of Significant
Differences at this time for the reasons mentioned above, the
remedy is still determined to be cost effective. The cost
estimate will be released after EPA selects a remedial action
contractor or EPA reaches a settlement with responsible parties
to perform the work.
Notwithstanding the significant differences from the ROD and
their effect on expected costs, the remedy selected in the ROD
remains the most environmentally protective, appropriate and cost
effective means to protect human health and the environment while
providing a permanent solution to the contamination problems
associated with the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 1


ISSUE AS PRESENTED IN               SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES
THE RECORD OF DECISION              AND DESIGN APPROACH

Volume of contaminated soil         Volume is up to 57,500
in Chestnut Branch marsh is         cubic yards, to be
30,000 cubic yards, to be           excavated and thermally
excavated and'thermally treated     treated and placed at the
and placed at the racetrack.        racetrack.
Volume of contaminated              Volume to be excavated is 600
sediment in Chestnut Branch         cubic yards; thermal treatment
and Rabbit Run streams is           not necessary before placement
1,250 cubic yards, to be            at the racetrack, pending
excavated and thermally             confirmation at time of
treated and placed at               excavation.
the racetrack.
Volume of Alcyon Lake               Volume of Alcyon Lake
sediments is 140,000                sediments is 97,500 cubic
cubic yards, to be                  yards; removal to be
hydraulically dredged               accomplished by excavation
and thermally treated               after draining lake; thermal
and placed at the                   treatment not necessary
racetrack.                          before placement at the
                                    racetrack, pending
                                    confirmation at time of
                                    excavation.
Wastewater flow from                 Wastewater flowrate is up to
off-site activities is               120 gallons per minute;
40 gallons per minute;               pump to on-site plant for
pump to on-site plant for            treatment prior to disposal.
treatment prior to disposal,
Thermal treatment unit cost          Thermal treatment unit cost
is base cost.                        is approximately two to four
                                     times base cost.
The estimated remedial action        The estimated remedial action
cost is $21 million.                 cost is $50 to $75 million.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           FIGURE I




                                         StCWity
                                         Ft net




 LiPari
Landfill




             Marsh Air Emission Sampling Sites and Zones
                             i Landfill. Gl&uettttf County. Nt« Jersey
