LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION FOR THE VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY INCORPORATED SITE
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/99365
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 40470e7f96e8b17d2240c5620f2e971ca89f607e8596262bae66b920ef90373c
Source PDF pages: 225
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              SDMS Document



                                                                 99365




                             DECLARATION STATEMENT
                              RECORD OF DECISION
                        Vineland Chemical Company


    Site Name and Location
    Vineland Chemical Company, Vineland, Cumberland County,
    New Jersey
    Statement of Basis and Purpose
    This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
    the Vineland Chemical Company site, developed in accordance with
    the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
    Liability Act, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and
    Reauthorization Act and, to the extent applicable, the National
    Contingency Plan. This decision is based on the administrative
    record file for this site.
    The State of New Jersey has concurred with the selected remedy.
    Assessment of the Site
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
site, if not addressed by implementing the response actions
selected in this Record of Decision, may present an existing or
potential threat to public health, welfare, or the environment.
Description of Selected Remedy
The remedial actions selected in this document represent
permanent solutions for three portions of the site including the
contaminated plant site soil, the contaminated groundwater in the
underlying aquifer, and the exposed and subaerged contaminated
sediments in Blackwater Branch and the Maurice River. In
addition, an interim remedy is presented for the fourth portion,
which addresses the contaminated sediments in Union Lake.
The remedial actions, which will be implemented in phases or
operable units, consist of the following:
1



Operable Unit One (Plant Site Source Control)                                   0

        In situ treatment, by flushing, of the arsenic-contaminated
        soils to reduce arsenic levels. Portions of the
        contaminated soil will be excavated and consolidated prior- .^
        to the flushing action.                                     *^
                                                                         5c=?
                                                                         0)
                                                                         ~n
                                                                          o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  o   Plant site remediation also includes closure of the two
      lined surface impoundments in compliance with the Resource
      Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and decontaaination of
      the former chicken coop storage buildings.
Operable Unit Two (Plant Site Management of Migration)
  o   Removal of arsenic-contaminated groundwater through pumping,
      followed by on-site treatment and reinjection of the treated
      groundwater to the aquifer at the maximum rate practicable.
      The remainder of the treated groundwater will be discharged
      to the Maurice River. A portion of the treated groundwater
      will also be used for the soil flushing action in Operable
      Unit One. The arsenic-contaminated sludge from the
      groundwater treatment process will be transported off-site
      for hazardous waste treatment and disposal. This action
      will effectively eliminate the source of arsenic into the
      Maurice River system.
Operable Unit Three (River Areas Sediments)
  o   Excavation and treatment of the exposed arsenic-contaminated
      sediments in the Blackwater Branch floodplain. Treatment
      will consist of a water wash extraction. The cleaned
      sediments will be redeposited in the excavated portion of
      the floodplain. The sludge from the extraction process will
      be transported off-site for hazardous waste treatment and
      disposal. Remediation will begin after the contaminated
      groundwater flow into the Blackwater Branch has been
      stopped.
 o    Dredging/removal and treatment, by water wash extraction, of
      the submerged arsenic-contaminated sediments in the
      Blackwater Branch adjacent to and downstream of the Vineland
      Chemical Company plant site. Prior to removing any
      sediments, an environmental assessment of the impact of
      dredging will be performed and a confirmation made that
      these sediments are a source of contamination to the river
      system. The treated sediments will be redeposited on
      undeveloped areas of the Vineland Chemical Company plant
      site. The sludge from the extraction process will be
      transported off-site for hazardous waste treatment and
      disposal.
 o    After stopping the flow of arsenic-contaminated groundwater
      from the Vineland Chemical Company plant site, a three year
      period for natural river flushing will be implemented. This
      will allow the submerged, arsenic-contaminated sediments in
      the Maurice River to be flushed clean through natural
      processes. If, after this period, the submerged sediments
      are no longer contaminated with arsenic above the action
      level, no remediation will be performed in the river.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Similarly, if sediment contamination above the action level
      persists, but the observed or expected natural
      decontamination rate is consistent with an acceptable public
      health risk, no remediation will be performed. However, if
      contamination above the action level persists in some
      locations and is expected to remain at levels posing
      unacceptable health risks, those locations would be
      remediated.
  o   Remediation of the submerged Maurice River sediments will be
      performed, as necessary, by dredging and treatment with a
      water wash extraction. However, prior to removing any
      sediments, an environmental assessment of the impacts of
      dredging will be made. The treated sediments will be
      deposited on undeveloped areas of the Vineland Chemical
      Company plant site. The sludge from the extraction process
      will be transported off-site for hazardous waste treatment
      and disposal.
Operable Unit Four (Union Lake Sediments)
  o   Removal and treatment of arsenic-contaminated sediments on
      the periphery of Union Lake will be performed after the
      three year flushing period (if no remediation is performed
      in the Maurice River) or after remediation of the Maurice
      River (if this is necessary following the flushing period).
      Verification sampling will be conducted prior to remediation
      to confirm the locations of sediments contaminated above the
      action level for arsenic along the periphery of Union Lake.
  o   The arsenic-contaminated sediments on the periphery of Union
      Lake will be excavated after they are exposed by lowering
      the lake's water level. However, for the upper end of the
      lake above the submerged dam, prior to removing any
      sediments, an environmental assessment of the impact of
      dredging will be performed. The sediments will be treated
      by water wash extraction and the cleaned sediments returned
      to their approximate former locations in Union Lake. The
      sludge from the extraction process will be transported
      off-site for hazardous waste treatment and disposal.
 o    This is an interim remedy, since arsenic-contaminated
      sediments above health-based levels will remain in Union
      Lake. Therefore, periodic reviews will be conducted to
      determine whether contaminated sediments are redistributed,
      through natural processes, to the cleaned areas.               H

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Statutory Determinations
The selected remedies for Operable Units One, Two and Three are
protective of human health and the environment, comply with
Federal and State requirements that are legally applicable or
relevant and appropriate to these remedial actions, and are
cost-effective. These remedies utilize permanent solutions and
alternative treatment technologies to the maximum extent
practicable and satisfy the statutory preference for remedies
that employ treatment that reduces toxicity, mobility, or volume
as a principal element. Because these remedies will not result
in hazardous substances remaining on-site above health-based
levels, the five year review will not apply to these actions.
The selected remedy for Operable Unit Four is an interim remedy
which protects human health and provides for further monitoring
and study to determine the scope and nature of any additional
actions which may be necessary. The supplemental study will
address the dynamics of sediment transport to, within, and from
Union Lake, and will deal with the effect of arsenic on biota.
This interim remedy will meet all of the statutory preference
criteria, with the exception of permanence.
Because the remedy for Operable Unit Four will result in
hazardous substances remaining in Union Lake above health-based
levels, a review will be conducted within five years after
commencement of remedial action at the lake to ensure that the
remedy continues to provide adequate protection of human health
and the environment.



William Jx^MuszyJci , P.E.                     'bate
Acting Regional Administrator




                                                                   O
                                                                   O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          DECISION SUMMARY

                   Vineland Chemical Company Site
                        Vineland, New Jersey

SITE DESCRIPTION
The Vineland Chemical Company plant site is located in a
residential/industrial area in the northwest corner of the City
of Vineland in Cumberland County, New Jersey. The plant location
is shown in Figure 1. The Vineland Chemical Company has produced
organic herbicides and fungicides at this location since 1949.
The herbicide manufacturing process reportedly has produced
approximately 1,107 tons of waste by-product salts each year.
These wastes have an Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
hazardous waste number of K 031 and are presently neither treated
nor disposed of at the site, and are not stored on-site for more
than 90 days. The salts are transported by licensed shippers to
licensed facilities in Ohio and Michigan for disposal. In the
past, improper storage of these salts on the plant property led
to arsenic contamination in the soil and groundwater.
The Vineland Chemical Company site is ranked among the top ten
hazardous waste sites in New Jersey, and is ranked number 42 on
the National Priorities List. Arsenic contamination,
attributable to the Vineland Chemical Company, has been detected
in the soils and groundwater at the plant site, and has been
detected in surface waters and sediments as far as 36 miles
downstream from the plant.
The plant site is shown in Figure 2. The plant consists of
several manufacturing and storage buildings, a laboratory, a
worker change facility, a wastewater treatment plant and several
lagoons. The manufacturing and parking areas shown in Figure 2
are paved. The lagoon area is unpaved and is devoid of
vegetation. This area is characterized by loose sandy soils. The
remainder of the site is covered by trees, grass, or shrubs.
The site is situated in a residential/industrial area. Twelve
residences are shown in Figure 2 in the immediate vicinity of the
plant. A number of other residences are located close to the
plant along Wheat, Orchard, Oak, and North Mill Roads.
The Blackwater Branch is immediately north of the plant site.
This stream flows east to west and discharges into the Maurice
River approximately 1.5 river miles downstream from the plant.
The upper Maurice River flows approximately 7 river miles
downstream into Union Lake, which is approximately 2 miles long.
The Maurice River then flows approximately 25 river miles
downstream from the lake into the Delaware Bay.                  T
                                                                 *%i
                                                                 4*
                                                                 O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Some time between April 1985 and June 1986, beavers constructed a
dam on the Blackwater Branch just downstream from the North Mill
Road bridge. The dam flooded the Blackwater Branch to the
approximate extent shown in Figure 2. The dam was removed in
October 1987 to allow for construction of a new bridge. The
Blackwater Branch is now flowing in its normal channel and the
flooded areas are now exposed.

Union Lake is located in the city of Millville, New Jersey. In
the past, the lake had been used extensively for recreational
activities. The dam at the southern end of the lake is the
oldest in the state, and the spillway is currently being rebuilt.
During reconstruction, the water level of the lake has been
lowered approximately eight to nine feet.

Because of the potential health risks posed by exposure to
arsenic contamination in the lake sediments, recreational
activities in the lake have been restricted by the NJDEP during
the drawdown condition.

Reconstruction is expected to be completed by late fall of 1989,
at which time the lake will be allowed to refill. Once refilled,
the NJDEP plans to partially reopen the lake to boating and
fishing. Complete lake reopening to include swimming will depend
on the results of a sediment testing program planned by the
NJDEP.
SITE HISTORY
As early as 1966, the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) observed Vineland Chemical discharging
untreated wastewater with unacceptable arsenic concentrations (67
milligrams per liter (mg/1)) into the unlined lagoons. An
unknown quantity of arsenic rapidly percolated to the groundwater
from the lagoons. On February 8, 1971, Vineland Chemical was
ordered to install and provide industrial wastewater treatment
and/or disposal facilities. The wastewater treatment works did
not become operational until March 1980.
Waste salts from the herbicide production process were stored
on-site in uncontrolled piles on the soil, in the concrete lagoon
LL-2 (which at the time was unlined), and in abandoned chicken
coops on the plant property. The storage of salts in piles was
observed in April 1970 and in the coops in April 1973. It was
not until 1978 after issuance of a court order that the salts
were containerized and removed. These salts reportedly contained
one to two percent arsenic (RCRA Part B Permit   Application by
Vineland Chemical Company, 1980). As these salts have a high
solubility, precipitation contacting these piles rapidly
dissolved the salts and carried an unknown quantity of arsenic
into the groundwater.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Between 1975 and 1976, the Vineland Chemical Company was fixating
the waste salts for disposal at the Kin-Buc Landfill. The process
involved mixing the dried salts with ferric chloride and soda
ash, reportedly reducing the solubility. The process was stopped
in 1976 when the Kin-Buc Landfill voluntarily stopped accepting
all chemical wastes', including the fixated salts. Vineland
Chemical then resumed piling the untreated waste salts on the
soil surface at the plant site.
A court order issued on January 26, 1977 required Vineland
Chemical to containerize the waste salts from the chicken coops
and piles, and then store the drums in a warehouse off-site. In
June 1979, another order was issued for the disposal of the
stored drums at an approved landfill. Removal and disposal of
these drums was not completed until June 30, 1982.
Currently, the waste salts and the sludge from the wastewater
treatment systems are stored in large-capacity trailers and tote
bins. The tote bins are filled at the point of generation in the
manufacturing buildings, and then emptied into the trailers. The
salts and sludge are transported to licensed facilities, as
mentioned previously. During peak production, as many as four or
five trailers were filled and removed per week.
Aerial photographs provided by the EPA's Environmental Photo-
graphic Information Center (EPIC) and other investigations
suggested several possible locations of past contamination. The
cleared area in the southwest corner of the site shown as a
"former outdoor storage area" in Figure 2 was at one time
occupied by two chicken coops. Sometime between November 1975
and March 1979, both coops were destroyed. These coops were
reportedly used to store process chemicals and/or waste. The
materials stored in the coops may have percolated into the
groundwater. This area is now devoid of vegetation. Photographs
also show many other locations containing mounded material and/or
drums. These include the lagoon area and locations along the
plant road. The waste salts were reportedly mounded so high at
times in Lagoon LL-2 that the salts spilled over onto the soil
near the lagoon.
It was alleged that the floors of the manufacturing plant leaked
arsenic compounds into the underlying sands. The original floors
were brick and were reported in need of repairs several years
ago. Allegedly, when the old bricks were removed, the soil
contained crystalline wastes from previous spills. It is not
known whether any soil was removed when the floors were                  <<
replaced. In the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study             £
(RI/FS), the soils below building *9 were sampled and had high
arsenic concentrations.                                                  o
                                                                         o
In response to a series of Administrative Consent Orders issued
by the NJDEP, Vineland Chemical instituted some cleanup actions !***
                                                                  C. 4

                                3                              fj;i
                                                                  ro

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and modified the production process. The cleanup actions
included stripping the surface soils in the manufacturing area,
piling these soils in the clearing by well cluster EW-15, and
paving the manufacturing area; installing a storm water runoff
collection system; removing the piles of waste salts; and
installing a groundwater pumping and treatment system,- which
included the wastewater treatment plant. Modifications to the
production process included installing a water system where
mixing of process water and non-contact cooling water was
unlikely, lining two of the lagoons used in the wastewater
treatment system (LL-1 and LL-2) , and properly disposing of the
waste salts.
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

Since 1978, a number of studies have been performed by or for the
NJDEP Office of Science and Research in the Maurice River
watershed and at the Vineland Chemical Company plant site. The
Vineland Chemical Company itself has also conducted some
investigations into the groundwater plume at the plant. A
detailed discussion of these investigations is provided in the
RI/FS reports. These investigations are summarized in Table 1.
ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

Potentially responsible parties (PRPs) identified for the site
include the Vineland Chemical Company and its owners. EPA signed
an Administrative Consent Order with the Vineland Chemical
Company on September 28, 1984 allowing the company to conduct a
remedial investigation of the site pursuant to the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA).
Vineland Chemical submitted RI/FS Work Plan drafts which required
major revisions. Vineland Chemical failed to submit a draft Work
Plan incorporating the modifications required by EPA by April
17, 1986. EPA granted Vineland Chemical additional time until
May 6, 1986, but the revised Work Plan was not submitted in a
timely manner. EPA assumed responsibility for the RI/FS on May
8, 1986. EPA's RI/FS is summarized in this Record of Decision
(ROD) and serves as the basis for the selected remedy for the
site. After the RI/FS was completed, a 30-day public comment
period was provided, ending on August 1, 1989.
EPA determined that the Vineland Chemical Company could not
effectively undertake the preliminary remedial investigation
work; the company will not be given the option to perform the
remedial design work. EPA expects to use its enforcement
authority to assure that the PRPs fund the remedial work to the
maximum extent possible.
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    N)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES

A Community Relations Plan was developed for the site. The plan
lists contacts and interested parties in government and the local
community. It also establishes communication pathways to ensure
timely dissemination of information.
EPA finalized the Work Plan for the RI/FS in November 1986 and
placed this document in the three information repositories. A
public meeting was held on December 8, 1986 to discuss the Work
Plan for the RI/FS and to inform the public about the Superfund
program and the history and status of the site.
The RI/FS reports and Proposed Plan for the Vineland Chemical
company site were released to the public in -June 1989. These
documents were made available to the public in both the
administrative record and in information repositories maintained
at the EPA Docket Room in Region II, Millville City Hall, and
Vineland City Hall, and the public libraries of Millville and
Vineland. The Notice of Availability for these documents was
published in The Daily Journal. A public comment period was held
from July 1, 1989 through August 1, 1989. In addition, a public
meeting was held on July 18, 1989, followed by a public
availability session on July 19, 1989. At these meetings,
representatives from EPA answered questions about problems at the
site and the remedial alternatives under consideration. The
responses to the comments received during this period are
included in the Responsiveness Summary at the end of this ROD.
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

The RI/FS encompassed the areal extent of the contamination in a
study area approximately 38 miles long with several sub-areas,
including:
  o   The Vineland Chemical Company plant site;
  o   The River Areas, consisting of the Blackwater Branch, the
      upper Maurice River between the Blackwater Branch and Union
      Lake, and the lower Maurice River between Union Lake and the
      Delaware Bay; and
  o   Union Lake, an 870-acre impoundment on the Maurice River.

Table 2 presents the areas studied and the dates that the final
draft RI and FS reports were submitted for public review. The
following discussion summarizes the characteristics within the
three sub-areas. The RI/FS reports provide the complete details
of, and the supporting documentation for, the summaries provided
below.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Vineland Chemical Company Plant Site
Table 3 shows contaminants detected in the soils.   Figure 3 shows
the arsenic concentrations at the sampling nodes.
Approximately 126,000 cubic yards of soil above the water table
is contaminated with arsenic concentrations above the action
level of 20 milligrams per kilogram (mg/kg), with concentrations
as high as 650 mg/kg. Contamination was found in areas where
arsenic was known or suspected to have been improperly stored or
dumped on the soils in the past.
Off-site soil arsenic concentrations are very low to undetected.
On-site soils in areas with no manufacturing history have low to
undetected arsenic concentrations. These data indicate that
there has been very little to no surface migration of soil
contamination.
The soils below Building #9 have very high arsenic
concentrations. This is a process building where crystalline
arsenic wastes were reportedly observed on the ground in the
past. This indicates that further arsenic contamination may be
present underneath some of the paved manufacturing area.
The dust samples taken from the chicken coops had high
concentrations of arsenic, cadmium, lead, mercury, and zinc, as
shown in Table 4. All of these metals, except possibly zinc,
were used in the past for manufacturing herbicides.
The groundwater underneath the site is heavily contaminated with
arsenic. Figure 4 shows the plume beneath the plant site. The
contamination is restricted to the upper aquifer, identified as
the upper sand, that overlies a banded clay zone approximately 40
to 50 feet below the ground surface. Below the banded zone,
arsenic was detected infrequently and at very low levels (highest
concentration was 28 micrograms per liter (ug/1)). Most of the
deep well samples contained no detectable arsenic.
Cadmium contamination was also observed in the groundwater in the
upper sand. The cadmium plume is in the same general location as
the arsenic plume. Although cadmium was found in the
groundwater, it was not found in the soils. Trichloroethylene
(TCE) and lead were also found in the groundwater. Pesticides
were detected in monitoring wells at all depths. Table 5
presents a summary of the contaminants detected in the
groundwater.
The groundwater from underneath the plant site discharges into
the Blackwater Branch. The present-day input of arsenic into the
groundwater from the plant site soils was estimated to be between     o
                                                                      o
0.02 and 0.12 metric tons per year, while approximately six
metric tons of arsenic per year enters the Blackwater Branch with    -H>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the groundwater discharge. This indicates that the arsenic
entering the Blackwater Branch is probably the result of past
contamination.
o River Areas
Tables 6 and 7 present summaries of the contaminants detected in
the surface water and sediment within the river areas,
respectively. Figures 5, 6, and 7 show the sediment arsenic
concentrations in the top one foot of sediment for sampling
stations in the Blackwater Branch, the upper Maurice River and
the lower Maurice River, respectively.
The main contaminant of concern is arsenic. Arsenic
concentrations in the sediment and surface water in the
Blackwater Branch are low to undetected upstream of the Vineland
Chemical Company plant site, and are elevated downstream of the
site. Similarly, arsenic concentrations in the sediment and
surface water of the Maurice River are low to undetected above
this river's confluence with the Blackwater Branch, and are
elevated below the confluence. All of the tributaries to the
Maurice River between the Blackwater Branch and Union Lake show
very low to undetected arsenic concentrations. These data show
that the Vineland Chemical Company plant is the only significant
source of arsenic to the Maurice River drainage basin between the
plant and Union Lake.
The highest surface water arsenic concentration (over 6000 ug/1)
was observed in the area previously flooded because of a beaver
dam on the Blackwater Branch. The flooded area was directly
adjacent to the Vineland Chemical Company plant site and in the
direction of the arsenic-contaminated groundwater plume. This
area was drained by the Cumberland County Public Works
Department, which removed the beaver dam since the sampling took
place to facilitate the construction of a new bridge on Mill
Road.
The arsenic concentration in the upper Maurice River surface
water decreases progressively downstream from the Vineland
Chemical Company site. The arsenic concentration does not drop
below 50 ug/1, the New Jersey surface water standard for arsenic,
within this portion of the river. The arsenic concentration in
the lower Maurice River surface water decreases gradually
downstream from Union Lake until the tidal front is encountered.
The total arsenic concentration does not drop below 50 ug/1 until
approximately 21 river miles downstream from the Vineland
Chemical Company plant site based on the 1987 RI/FS data. In the
1973 sampling performed by the NJDEP, the total arsenic
concentration in the surface water did not drop below 50 ug/1
until approximately 26.5 river miles downstream from the site.
                                                                    o
                                                                    ro

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on samples collected by the Vineland Chemical Company at
North Mill Road, an estimated 500 metric tons of arsenic have
been transported past North Mill Road into the Blackwater Branch
and upper Maurice River.
Unlike the surface waters, there is no clear pattern of arsenic
distribution areally in the Maurice River sediments. In some
cases, higher concentrations were observed further downstream
than upstream. The sediment arsenic distribution is more likely
controlled by the chemical partitioning of arsenic between water
and fine grain sized material, and by the local sediment
deposition rate, than by strict distance downstream from the
site.
Arsenic concentrations in the sediments positively correlated
with total organic carbon content, iron content and percent clay.
These data suggest that arsenic is bound to the sediments via
organic carbon and ferric hydroxide matrices which coat the finer
sediments fractions. Leach tests of Union Lake sediments showed
that 50 to 70 percent of the sediment bound arsenic is not easily
extractable. The fraction retained correlates positively with
percent organic matter.
The three river sections were examined to determine their
influence on the arsenic load in the drainage basin. The
Blackwater Branch and upper Maurice River appear to be simple
conduits for arsenic released from the site, that is, they pass
the arsenic released from the site into Union Lake. The data
were unclear on whether Union Lake is a conduit or a sink for
arsenic flow. In the past Union Lake has been a major sink for
arsenic, since an estimated one-third (140 metric tons) of the
arsenic released from the site through time has been captured in
the lake sediments. An insufficient data base exists to reliably
quantify the sediment arsenic inventory in the lower Maurice         <^
River, although sediment arsenic contamination is present in this   \_j
section of the river. Any arsenic entering the lower river and      X.'
not adsorbed onto the sediments is presumably transported to
Delaware Bay.                                                        O
                                                                     G>
Future arsenic levels were predicted assuming the arsenic flux to
the basin from the site was halted. The level of water-borne
arsenic in the upper Maurice River and the Blackwater Branch
should drop shortly after the source of arsenic from the plant
site is eliminated. There is a low inventory of arsenic in the
sediments in this portion of the river, which presently behaves
as a conduit. Since it is not clear what is controlling the
water column arsenic inventory in Union Lake at present, .•'t is
difficult to predict how rapidly lake arsenic levels will
decrease. The water column arsenic levels in the lower Maurice
River are dependent upon lake arsenic levels.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

No pesticides/PCBs were found in fish samples taken from the
upper Maurice River. However, arsenic was detected in one of the
fish samples from the upper Maurice River, and in crab and oyster
samples from the lower river. Arsenic was not detected in fish
samples from the lower Maurice River. The detected
concentrations are within the range of normal background levels
in fish and shellfish.
The USEPA's Environmental Response Team prepared a bioassessment
on the Blackwater Branch and the upper Maurice River. The report
concluded that there was an adverse impact to the benthic
communities in the Blackwater Branch downstream from the Vineland
Chemical Company plant site. The impact took the form of lower
species diversity and a toxic response in bioassay tests done
with the sediments. The impact lessens in the Maurice River,
probably resulting from dilution.
o union Lake
The only hazardous substance of concern in the lake sediments and
water is arsenic. Arsenic concentrations above 50 ug/1 were
found in many water samples. Arsenic concentrations above 20
mg/Xg were found in many sediment samples.
Table 8 summarizes the concentration ranges of arsenic in water
samples. The arsenic concentrations were higher in the summer
and early fall than in the winter in many of the studies
performed to date. In general the dissolved arsenic
concentrations are uniform throughout the water column.
Particulate and/or total aqueous arsenic concentrations tended to
be higher in water samples taken at the sediment/water interface.
Table 9 summarizes the concentration ranges of arsenic levels in
the sediments, which are presented in Figure 8. The maximum
sediment arsenic concentration from the RI/FS's Phase I sampling
was 107 mg/kg. Previous NJDEP investigations found sediment
arsenic concentrations as high as 1273 mg/kg. The arsenic
contamination was generally restricted to the top one foot of        o
sediment. The highest concentrations were generally found near        g
the submerged dam in the northern portion of the lake and             v •
adjacent to the main dam in the southern portion of the lake.        §>**
                                                                     <i
Fish samples were obtained from three different locations in the    £•*
lake. Five separate species were caught and analyzed. The
analytical results showed that the fish contained arsenic at the
normal concentration for U.S. fish and shellfish. The fish also
contained chlordane, DDE, and PCB 1260 at concentrations of less
than 1 mg/kg.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
The potential health risks caused by exposure to contaminated
media were calculated. A general discussion of the methods used
to assess these risks is presented below, followed by a
discussion of possible health risks posed by each of the
sub-areas within the study area. The risk assessments for each
of these sub-areas are presented in the RI reports.
A risk assessment involves determining possible routes of human
exposure to contaminated media (air, water, soil) at a site, then
estimating possible intake levels. Contaminants within those
media are determined. The toxicological properties of those
contaminants are then evaluated. Finally, semi-quantitative
estimates of potential health risks are determined using the
potential routes of exposure, contaminants of concern, and the
toxicological properties of those contaminants.
Cancer potency factors (CPFs) have been developed by EPA's
Carcinogenic Assessment Group for estimating excess lifetime
cancer risks associated with exposure to potentially carcinogenic
chemicals. CPFs are multiplied by the estimated intake of a
potential carcinogen to provide an upper-bound estimate of the
excess lifetime cancer risk associated with exposure at that
intake level. The term "upper-bound" reflects a cautious
estimate of the risks calculated from the CPF. Use of this
approach makes underestimation of the actual cancer risk highly
unlikely. Cancer potency factors are derived from the results of
human epidemiological studies or chronic animal bioassays to
which animal-to-human extrapolation and uncertainty factors have
been applied.
Excess lifetime cancer risks are probabilities that are generally
expressed in scientific notation (e.g., 1X10"6) . An excess
lifetime cancer risk of IxlO"6 indicates that, as a plausible
upper bound, an individual has a one in one million chance of
developing cancer as a result of site-related exposure to a
carcinogen over a 70-year lifetime under the specific exposure      <±
conditions at a site.                                               O
                                                                    o
The risk assessment estimates contain certain limitations. There
are inherent inaccuracies in risk estimates when making
assumptions about population behavior patterns, intake levels,
and chemical toxicological data. The risk estimates on the whole
tend to be conservative; that is, overstating rather than
understating risks in an effort to provide for public safety.
Because of the assumptions inherent in the pathway models and
other uncertainties, the risk estimates discussed below should b<
considered r.c acre accurate than plus or minus one order of
magnitude.


                               10

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Plant Site
The risk assessment considered risks to workers from the plant
soils, and to residents from the residential soils. Future risks
were calculated in the event that the plant was not operational
and was subject to unrestricted residential access. Future risks
were also calculated assuming that contaminated groundwater,
which is not presently used as a drinking water source, was used
and had the same contamination characteristics that it has
presently.
For workers, arsenic was the main contaminant of concern. The
worst case and most probable risks from arsenic in the site soils
were 4 x 10"3 and 2 x 10~7, respectively. Risks to workers from
other chemicals in the soils were insignificant. Risks to
workers from groundwater, even if they consumed the plant
production well groundwater, were insignificant since the
production well's arsenic concentration was far below the Federal
Safe Drinking Water Act standard for arsenic, 50 ug/1. This is
also known as the Maximum Contaminant Level, or MCL.
For residents, arsenic was the main contaminant of concern. The
worst case and most probable risks to residents from exposure to
arsenic in the residential soils were 1 x 10'* and 6 x 10 ,
respectively.
If residents were to develop groundwater supplies from within the
contaminated groundwater plume, they would be subject to greatly
increased health risks. The worst case risks approached unity,
while the most probable risks were 2 x 10"2. Groundwater from
within the plume is not presently used, and the risk assessment
indicates that it should not be used until the arsenic
concentration in the plume has been substantially reduced.
o River Areas
                                                                    <L
Two types of risk assessments were performed. In the Blackwater     ^
Branch and the upper Maurice River, a semi-quantitative risk        o
assessment of the type discussed above was prepared. In the         o
lower Maurice River, a qualitative risk assessment was performed    ^
to estimate in a qualitative sense whether the lower Maurice
River posed a potential health threat to exposed populations.        ^
                                                                    f •'*
In the Blackwater Branch, the total worst case and most probable     Q
carcinogenic risks from arsenic were 5xlO"3 and 5xlO'5,
respectively. In the upper Maurice River, the total worst case
and most probable carcinogenic risks were IxlO"3 and 1x10"*,
respectively. Noncarcinogenic risks were generally minor. In
all cases, ingestion, either of sediment, water or fish,
constituted most of the risks. Dermal contact with the water and
inhalation of dried sediments were insignificant.

                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In the lower Maurice River, it was estimated that none of the
exposure pathways posed increased health risks from arsenic. This
was based both on differences in exposure pathways between the
upper and lower river, and on the generally lower arsenic
concentrations in the lower river.
The ingestion of fish from the upper Maurice River posed risks of
approximately 1x10" . However, the actual risks may be much
lower than the calculated risks. The form of arsenic in fish is
generally non-toxic and is easily excreted by humans. Also, the
levels of arsenic found in the samples were within the range of
arsenic normally found in fish and shellfish.
An increased health risk from ingesting mercury in fish was
calculated. However, the risk was based on estimated mercury
concentrations in the biota determined from the mercury
concentration in the surface water and the bioconcentration
factor. The fish samples were not analyzed for mercury,
therefore their actual mercury concentration is unknown.
o Union Lake
The risk assessment considered a number of different exposure
pathways to the arsenic found in the various environmental media.
Risks were calculated for the lake under four different lake
full/lake drawdown scenarios. The worst case risk from sediments
and water was estimated to be 7 x 10"* under all four lake
full/lake drawdown scenarios. The most probable case risk from
sediments and water was estimated to be 1 x 10"5 under all four
lake full/lake drawdown studies.
The sediment exposure pathways were considered valid only for
shallow water areas, less than approximately two and one-half
feet deep. At greater depths, it is unlikely that intimate
sediment contact could occur that could cause accidental sediment
ingestion.                                                          <^
The fish ingestion pathway was evaluated for arsenic as well as     -^
for other organics found in the fish. Of the total fish             G
ingestion risk, approximately 86% resulted from the presence of     Q,
PCBs thought unrelated to the Vineland Chemical Company site. The
arsenic risks from fish were somewhat lower than those found in
the river areas.
SCOPE OF THE OPERABLE UNITS
The Vineland Chemical Company site is complex with multiple
contamination areas: the plant site, the Maurice River, and
Union Lake. This complexity, and the interrelationship of the
areas, necessitates that the cleanup be done in discrete phases
which are called operable units. The phases or operable units
are planned for sequential execution beginning with the plant
                               12

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

site. Once the arsenic-contaminated groundwater from the plant
site entering the Blackwater Branch is stopped, the cleanup of
the Blackwater Branch itself can begin, to be followed by cleanup
of the upper Maurice River, as required, and finally Union Lake.
The operable units are:
Operable Unit One:     Plant Site Source Control
Operable Unit Two:    Plant Site Management of Migration
Operable Unit Three:    River Areas Sediments
Operable Unit Four:    Union Lake Sediments
Operable Unit One addresses the contaminated soils at the plant
site. The remedial objectives are to prevent current or future
exposure to the contaminated site soils, and to reduce arsenic
migration into the groundwater.
Operable Unit Two addresses the contaminated groundwater at the
plant site. The objective is to achieve the aquifer cleanup goal
of 0.05 mg/1 arsenic to the maximum extent practicable.
Operable Unit Three addresses the river areas sediments. The
primary objective is to minimize public exposure, either through
containment, removal, or institutional controls, for those areas
with unacceptably high sediment arsenic concentrations, such as
the exposed former sediments in the Blackwater Branch floodplain.
Operable Unit Four addresses the sediments in Union Lake. The
primary objective is to reduce potential human health risks by
minimizing public exposure to sediments with unacceptably high
arsenic concentrations, either through removal, containment, or
institutional controls.
The EPA has determined that the elimination of the source of
arsenic in to the basin (the contaminated groundwater flowing
from the Vineland Chemical Company plant site) would remediate
the stream water quality more appropriately than attempting to
directly remediate the stream water. The risk assessment and
biota studies indicate that there is no reason to perform
additional work in the lower Maurice River. Therefore no
remedial response objectives were developed for these two
portions of the study area.
DESCRIPTION OF ALTERNATIVES
                                                                    <;
This section describes the remedial alternatives which were         £
developed for each operable unit using all applicable guidance.
These alternatives are presented in detail in the FS reports and    0
                                                                    o

                                  13
                                  13

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

are summarized below. Table 10 summarizes the site specific
soil, groundwater and sediment cleanup goals developed by the EPA
and NJDEP for the remedial alternatives.
The RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions (LDRs) impacted all the
remedial alternatives for all the sub-areas of the site. The
LDRs are one of the many Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
Requirements (ARARs) which apply to remediation at this site, and
has a significant effect on all of the remedial alternatives. The
performance standards and requirements of the LDR were taken into
account in each of the remedial alternatives presented below.
The LDRs as they influence remediation at this site are complex.
For convenience, Figure 9 presents a schematic diagram
illustrating the process. A complete discussion of the LDRs is
provided in the FS reports,
EPA Headquarter's Site Policy and Guidance Branch personnel
(SPGB) have determined that the arsenic-contaminated soils,
sediment and groundwater at the Vineland Chemical Company site
are considered the RCRA listed hazardous waste K 031. This is
because the arsenic contamination was derived from the listed
waste K 031, which was improperly stored or disposed of at the
Vineland Chemical Company site.
The EPA is presently developing criteria for the disposal of all
listed hazardous wastes, including K 031. In general, these
criteria would require treating listed wastes by the Best
Demonstrated Available Technology (BOAT). These BOAT standards
have been established for some listed wastes, but at this time,
no BOAT standard is available for K 031. If a BOAT standard for
K 031 waste is not established by May 8, 1990, then land disposal
of all K 031 wastes, including the contaminated soils, sediments
and groundwater from this site, would be restricted.
After a detailed review of the site-specific contaminant
characteristics, EPA established performance criteria which could
be used to determine appropriate treatment standards for the
contaminated soils, groundwater and sediments in the absence of
BOAT levels. These performance criteria will govern the remedial
actions at the Vineland Chemical Company site assuming that a
BOAT level is established for K 031 wastes by May 8, 1990, so
that land disposal is not restricted.
  o   Soils and Sediments - These materials may be treated in
      place, or excavated and moved within a contaminated zone,
      without invoking the LDRs. However, if they are excavated
      and moved from a contaminated zone, they must be treated so
      that the treated soil and sediment have an arsenic
      concentration of less than 0.32 ng/1 in the extract from an
      EP Toxicity Test. The performance criterion of 0.32 mg/1
      was established by the use of the VHS model as discussed in
      the FS. If these treated materials meet this level, they

                                                                 S
                                                                 C-1
                                                 - .              CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      are eligible for delisting. Delisting allows these treated
      materials to be considered nonhazardous and no longer
      subject to RCRA Subtitle C control.
      If the treated soils and sediments cannot meet the target
      delisting criterion, then EPA will seek to obtain a
      treatability variance. This variance will allow the treated
      but non-delistable soils and sediments to be disposed of as
      hazardous waste in a RCRA Subtitle C landfill. The
      treatability variance level will be established, as
      necessary, after a detailed consideration of a number of
      site-specific factors, including the optimization of the
      treatment process.
  O   GjrOundwatejr   — If   the   C0ntciluj.nateu   yroundwater j.S tired ted   in
      place, land disposal restrictions do not apply. If,
      however, the groundwater is removed from the ground, then it
      must be treated to remove arsenic to the MCL of 50 ug/1. If
      the groundwater is treated to this level, it will no longer
      "contain" hazardous waste constituents per the "contained
      in" policy. It could therefore be disposed on land, or
      could be disposed in a surface water body provided that all
      other applicable State and Federal requirements for surface
      water discharge are met.
The two main treatment technologies evaluated for the soils and
sediments, extraction and fixation, are expected to produce
treated materials that leach arsenic at less than 0.32 mg/1.
Therefore the remedial alternatives consider that the treated
soils and sediments are eligible for delisting. The EPA has
demonstrated through treatability studies that the groundwater
can be treated to less than 50 ug/1 arsenic. This would permit
land or surface water disposal of the treated groundwater.

The authority for delisting rests with different organizations
depending on where the treated materials are disposed. If the
treated materials are disposed within the confines of this
Superfund site, authority for delisting rests with the EPA's
Region II Regional Administrator, who announces the intention to
delist in the Proposed Plan and the ROD. The Superfund site is
the Vineland Chemical Company plant site and all areas of
contamination caused by the site, including the BlacJcwater
Branch, Maurice River and Union Lake. Off-site disposal within
the State of New Jersey would require a delisting petition to be
reviewed by NJDEP. In the event that the treated soils and
sediments are disposed of in a state other than New Jersey,
delisting would be performed by a delisting petition to the state
in question if. like New Jersey, the state has been delegated
delisting responsibility by EPA Headquarters, or by filing a
petition with EPA Headquarters, if the state has not been granted.
delisting authority.
                                         15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

After the treated soils and sediments have been delisted and
declared nonhazardous, a method of final disposal must be
determined. This method is dependent on whether or not the
material is classified by the NJDEP as an ID 27 waste. If the
material is classified as an ID 27 waste, it must be disposed of
in a nonhazardous waste landfill. If the material is not
classified as an ID 27 waste, landfill disposal is not required
and the material may be used to restore excavated areas of the
site or otherwise disposed on-site.
The NJDEP has reviewed the site specific conditions and has
determined that, if the soils and sediicents are treated such that
they leach arsenic at less than 0.32 mg/1 in an EP Toxicity Test,
and contain arsenic at a concentration less than 20 mg/kg (the
most stringent soil/sediment cleanup level used at the site),
NJDEP would waive classification of this material as an ID 27
waste.

o OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
The soil cleanup level is 20 mg/kg arsenic, which corresponds to
a residential risk of 5xlO"6. Figure 10 presents the locations
of soils with arsenic above this action level. All of the source
control (SC) action alternatives concentrate on these soils. All
of the alternatives also include measures to remediate the
chicken coops, and to complete substantive portions of RCRA Clean
Closure requirements for the two lined impoundments on the plant
site. The measures for the coops and impoundments are the same
in eacli of the different source control alternatives discussed
below. The source control alternatives differ in the method
utilized to remediate the contaminated soils.

The primary source of contamination in the coops is dust; thus,
each would first be decontaminated by vacuuming. The vacuumed
dust and particulate matter would be treated utilizing the
technology for treating the soil within each alternative. If the
decontamination procedures do not sufficiently reduce the arsenic
contamination, each of the chicken coops would be sealed to
prevent public access.
Closure of the lined RCRA impoundments would include removal and
off-site treatment and disposal of the wastewater and sludge
contained in the impoundments, and excavation, decontamination
and off-site disposal of the liners, foundations, piping and any
other ancillary equipment associated with the impoundments.
Alternative SC-1:   No Action
                                                                     <
Thsrs are r.c substantial remediation activities involved in this •"*
alternative. Potential public health risks would be reduced by      ^
preventing access to contaminated soils by using restrictive       0

                                16
                                16
                                                            «^       °

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

fencing and warning signs* Potential environmental impacts via
soil leaching would not be reduced.
Plant Site Alternative SC-2:    Multilayer Capping System
This alternative includes excavating and consolidating
arsenic-contaminated soil in the capping areas, and constructing
a multilayer capping system. The cap would consist of a clay
layer, a geomembrane, a sand layer and a vegetative layer.
Capping would significantly reduce human health threats by
minimizing the potential for contaminant contact, and would
mitigate adverse environmental impacts by minimizing leachate
generation. However, the contaminated soil would remain on-site
which would require long-term monitoring. The time to implement
this alternative is estimated to be one year.
Plant Site Alternative SC-3A:   Excavation/Fixation/Off-Site
                                Nonhazardous Landfill
This alternative involves excavating approximately 126,000 cubic
yards of soil. The soil would be fixated with cements and
binders which reduce the mobility of arsenic to such a degree
that the soils are no longer hazardous. This would enable the
fixated product to be delisted. The treated material would be
deposited in an existing off-site nonhazardous landfill. This
would result in the complete removal of contaminated soil from
the site. The excavated areas would be restored using clean
fill. The time to implement this alternative is estimated to be
one year.
Plant Site Alternative SC-3B:   Excavation/Fixation/On-Site
                                Nonhazardous Landfill
This alternative is identical to SC-3A except that the landfill
would be a new one built specifically for this purpose on the
Vineland Chemical plant site property. The same permanent
remediation at the site would be achieved as with Alternative
SC-3A. However, this alternative would require long-term
maintenance and monitoring to ensure that the landfill does not
leach contaminants.
Plant Site Alternative SC-3C:   Excavation/Fixation/On-Site
                                Redeposition
This is the same as Alternative SC-3A except that the treated
soils would be redeposited at their approximate original           <j
locations. This alternative requires that the NJDEP classify the    2
treated and delisted material as non=ID 27 waste. Long-term
monitoring would be required.                                      g
                                                                   K)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plant Site Alternative SC-4A:    Excavation/Extraction/Soils
                                 to Off-Site Nonhazardous Land-
                                 fill/Of f-Site Hazardous Sludge
                                 Disposal
This involves excavating and treating approximately 126.000 cubic
yards of contaminated soils by extraction with water to remove
arsenic. The cleaned soils would be delisted and deposited in an
existing off-site nonhazardous landfill. The
arsenic-contaminated water would be treated to remove the arsenic
and discharged to the Blackwater Branch. The sludge by-product
of the water treatment would be sent to an existing off-site
hazardous waste treatment and disposal facility and would be
managed in accordance with the LDR requirements in effect at the
time of placement. This alternative would result in the removal
of contaminated soils from the plant site; thus, long-term
monitoring would not be required. The excavated areas would be
restored using clean fill. The time required to implement this
alternative is two years.
Plant Site Alternative SC-4B:    Excavation/Extraction/Soils to
                                 On-Site Nonhazardous Landfill/
                                 Off-Site Hazardous Sludge Dis-
                                 posal
This alternative is the same as SC-4A except that the cleaned
soils would be deposited in a new nonhazardous landfill to be
built on the Vineland Chemical plant site property specifically
for this purpose. This would leave treated soils on-site in the
controlled environment of a landfill, which would require
long-term maintenance and monitoring.
Plant Site Alternative SC-4C:     Excavation/Extraction/On-Site
                                 Redeposition of Soils/Off-Site
                                 Hazardous Sludge Disposal
This is the same as Alternative SC-4A except that the treated
soils would be redeposited at their former locations. This
alternative requires that the NJDEP classify the treated and
delisted soils as non-ID 27 waste. Since the treated soils would
be delisted and no longer classified as waste, the site would be
restored to normal use. This alternative would provide
essentially the same effective remediation as the other
extraction alternatives, with reduced disposal costs. Long-term
monitoring would be required.
Plant Site Alternative SC-5:    In Situ Flushing
This alternative involves flushing the contaminated soils with
water. Some of the soils would first be excavated and
consolidated within contiguously contaminated zones. All of the
contaminated soils would then be surrounded with a concrete berm
                                                              H
                                                                   cl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

and continuously flooded with water. The water which flushes and
extracts the arsenic from the soil would percolate to the
underlying groundwater where it would be pumped and treated. The
groundwater treatment process would result in an arsenic sludge
residue which would require off-site hazardous treatment and
disposal. Approximately eight years would be required to
remediate the soils.
Plant Site Alternative SC-6:   In Situ Solidification/Fixation
                               of Unsaturated Zone Soils
This involves fixation in place, without excavation, using the
same fixation process as Alternatives SC-3A, SC-3B, and SC-3C.
Similar to Alternative SC-3C, the treated soils would remain at
their former locations * Leachate generation and contaminant
migration to the groundwater would be eliminated unless the
fixation system failed. It is estimated that approximately two
years would be required to implement this alternative.   Long-term
monitoring would be required.
O OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE KANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)

The groundwater cleanup goal is the MCL for arsenic, 0.05 mg/1,
in the shallow aquifer. This goal will be achieved to the
maximum extent that is technically practicable.
During design, a combination of pumping and treatment with
subsequent natural attenuation of the aquifer to reach the
cleanup goal will be evaluated. Pumping and treatment would need
to continue at least to an aquifer arsenic level where resumption
of groundwater flow to the Blackwater Branch would not cause
violation of the arsenic instream standard in that body, 0.05
mg/1.
An application for an Alternate Concentration Limit (ACL) may be
sought in accordance with appropriate New Jersey regulations, if,
for example pumping and treatment appears to reach a point where
it is no more effective than natural attenuation. The need for
an ACL and its value would be determined during the early years
of remedial action on the aquifer.
The process discussed above, pumping followed by natural
flushing, was evaluated in the RI/FS. The alternatives
considered, and presented below, specified operation of the
pumping and treatment system until the maximum groundwater plume
arsenic concentration is 0.35 mg/1. At this concentration, based
on the RI/FS information, groundwater flowing to the Blackwater    ^
Branch would not cause the instream standard of 0.05 mg/1 to be   HJ
violated. It was estimated that approximately 10 years would be    ^
required for natural flushing to reduce the arsenic concentration 0
to 0.05 mg/1 after achieving the 0.35 mg/1 level,                  o
                                                              t* •"
                                                              <!
                                19                               f'l
                                                                 CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plant Site Alternative MOM-1:    No Action
This alternative includes a long-term monitoring program and an
institutional control program to regulate the use of the aquifer.
Natural flushing would reduce the potential health risks over
time. However, the groundwater would continue to impact the
Maurice River system, and pose human health risks requiring
institutional controls on groundwater use.
Plant Site Alternative MOM-2B:   Downgradient Capture/
                                 Treatment/Reinj ection
This alternative involves pumping groundwater from wells located
close to the Blackwater Branch for downgradient capture, thereby
minimizing the migration of arsenic-contaminated groundwater to
the Biackwater Branch. Pumping would be followed by treating the
groundwater to the drinking water standards for arsenic, cadmium,
and TCE by one of three treatment options to be described later.
Treated water would be reinjected to the aquifer. Approximately
75 years would be required to reduce the arsenic plume
concentration to 0.35 mg/1, as necessary.
Plant Site Alternative MOM-3A:   Downgradient Capture and Source
                                 Area Pumping/Treatment/Discharge
                                 to the Maurice River
This entails a combination of the downgradient pumping scheme of
MOM-2B with additional pumping from extraction wells in the
higher concentration source area to shorten the cleanup time. The
treated water would be discharged through a pipeline to the
Maurice River. Approximately 30 years would be required to
reduce the arsenic plume concentration to 0.35 mg/1.
Plant Site Alternative MOM-3B:   Downgradient Capture and Source
                                 Area Pumping/Treatment/Rein-
                                 jection
This alternative is the same as MOM-3A except that the treated
water would be reinjected to the aquifer instead of being
discharged to the Maurice River, thus accelerating the
remediation time. Approximately 25 years would be required to
reduce the arsenic plume concentration to 0.35 mg/1.




                                 20                              C
                                                                 Q

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Plant Site Alternative MOM-4A:   Site Pumping/Treatment/Rein-
                                 ject ion/Discharge to the Maurice
                                 River
This alternative involves using additional extraction wells in
the high concentration source area to achieve a higher pumping
rate than with the other MOM alternatives, which significantly
hastens the cleanup. Treated groundwater would be reinjected to
the aquifer to the maximum extent practicable, with the remainder
discharged to the Maurice River. Approximately 13 years would be
required to reduce the arsenic plume concentration to 0.05 mg/1,
based on the FS.
Groundwater Treatment Process Options

The following are treatment options for removing arsenic, cadmium
and TCE:
Treatment Process Option Tl: Chemical Precipitation/Air
Stripping/Vapor Phase Activated Carbon Adsorption/Liquid Phase
Activated Alumina Adsorption
Treatment Process Option T2: Chemical Oxidation/Chemical
Precipitation/Ion Exchange/Liquid Phase Activated Carbon
Adsorption
Treatment Process Option T3 : UV-H2O2 Oxidation/Chemical
Precipitation
All three process options would clean the contaminated
groundwater to the MCL for arsenic, cadmium, and TCE. Common to
all three is a chemical precipitation step, which uses iron salts
to remove the arsenic and cadmium from the water. The three
options differ in the method used to remove the TCE; process Tl
employs air stripping, while T2 uses carbon adsorption, and T3
uses oxidation to destroy the TCE. The three options also differ
in the method used as a final step to "polish" the treated water
and remove any residual arsenic or cadmium down to the MCL.
 O   OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREA SEDIMENTS)

The sediment cleanup level is 120 mg/kg arsenic in the submerged
sediment, and 20 mg/kg arsenic in the exposed sediment in the
Blackwater Branch floodplain. These correspond to risks of
IxlO"5. Figure 11 shows the areas to be remediated in the
Blackwater Branch floodplain.
River Areas Alternative 1:   No Action                                ^
                                                                      M
                                                                      2
Potential public health risks from river sediments would be
reduced by limiting access through sign posting and educational       0
programs. Existing environmental contamination would continue,       <=>
                                 21

                                                               •a
                                                               O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

but could be decreased at a significant rate through natural
processes after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is
stopped. Monitoring would be required to document the nature and
scope of the natural processes.

River Areas Alternative 2A:    Dredging/Excavation/Thickening/
                              Fixation/Off-Site Nonhazardous
                              Landfill
This entails excavating approximately 56,200 cubic yards of
exposed contaminated sediment in the Blackwater Branch
floodplain, dredging approximately 21,000 cubic yards of
submerged contaminated sediment in the Blackwater Branch and the
Upper Maurice River, and treating them via fixation. Fixation
would utilize cements and binders to reduce the mobility of
arsenic. After del1sting. the treated product would be disposed
of in an off-site nonhazardous landfill. Clean fill would be
placed in the excavated areas of the floodplain to restore it to
its original condition, but no fill would be brought into the
submerged river areas. Long-term post-implementation management
would be required to monitor possible sediment redistribution.
Possible short-term environmental impacts include disturbing
floodplain and/or wetland areas during construction, and impacts
from truck traffic.
River Areas Alternative 2B:    Dredging/Excavation/Thickening/
                              Fixation/On-Site Nonhazardous
                              Landfill
Alternative 2B is the same as Alternative 2A, except that the
treated and delisted sediments would be disposed of in a
nonhazardous landfill built specifically for this purpose at the
Vineland Chemical Company plant site. This alternative would
require long-term maintenance and monitoring to ensure that the
landfill does not leach contaminants, and to monitor possible
sediment redistribution.
River Areas Alternative 3A:    Dredging/Excavation/Extraction/
                              Sediments to Off-Site Nonhazardous
                              Landfill/Off-Site Hazardous Sludge
                              Disposal
Alternative 3A entails the same excavation and dredging
activities as Alternatives 2A and 2B. Instead of being fixated,
the arsenic would be extracted from the sediment with water. The
extractant would be treated to remove arsenic prior to its
discharge into the rivers. The sludge containing the extracted
arsenic would be disposed of off-site by a licensed hazardous
waste disposal vendor and will be managed in accordance with the
LDR requirements in effect at the time of placement. The
excavated floodplain would be restored with clean fill, but no
fill would be used to restore the submerged river areas.
                                22

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Long-term monitoring for sediment redistribution in the rivers
would be required.
River Areas Alternative 3B:    Dredging/Excavation/Extraction/
                              Sediments to On-Site Nonhazardous
                              Landfill/Off-Site Hazardous Sludge
                              Disposal
Alternative 3B is the same as Alternative 3A except that the
extracted sediments would be disposed of in an on-site
nonhazardous landfill. The landfill would be built specifically
for this purpose at the Vineland Chemical Company plant site.
Administrative approvals and land acquisition would be required.
Long-term maintenance and monitoring would be required to ensure
the landfill's integrity and to determine possible sediment
redistribution.
River Areas Alternative 3C:    Dredging/Excavation/Extraction/
                              Floodplain Deposition of Exposed
                              Sediments/Plant Site Deposition of
                              River Sediments/Off-Site Hazardous
                              Sludge Disposal
Alternative 3C is the same as Alternatives 3A and 3B except the
treated floodplain sediments would be deposited back into the
Blackwater Branch floodplain at their former locations. The
treated submerged sediments from the Blackwater Branch and the
Maurice River would be deposited on undeveloped areas of the
Vineland Chemical Company plant site. This alternative requires
that the NJDEP classify the treated and delisted sediments as
non-ID 27 wastes. This alternative would provide the same
effective remediation as the other extraction alternatives, with
reduced disposal costs. Monitoring of the floodplain, plant
site, and river sediments would be required.
o OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)

Figure 12 shows the contaminated areas in Union Lake which will
be remediated, as discussed below.
In the high access public areas, which include the public beach
and the Tennis and Sailing Club, "hot spots" with arsenic
concentrations above 20 mg/kg will be remediated from the
shoreline to a distance from the shore at which the lake water
depth is 5 feet. Approximately 24,100 cubic yards of
contaminated sediment are located in this area.
In the high access residential areas along the eastern shoreline,
"hot spots" above 20 mg/kg arsenic will be remediated to a
                                                                         o


                                23                                 <\

                                                                   rr-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

minimum lake depth of 2.5 feet, continuing to either a maximum
distance of 150 feet from the shoreline, or a lake depth of 5
feet. This comprises approximately 9,900 cubic yards of
contaminated sediment.
In the low access areas, e.g., the lake's western shore, "hot
spots" above 120 ing/kg will be remediated to a minimum lake water
depth of 2.5 feet, continuing to either a maximum distance of 150
feet from the shoreline or a lake depth of 5 feet. This
comprises approximately 96,650 cubic yards of contaminated
sediment.
Removal of the sediments as described above will reduce the
cancer risk level via the sediment ingestion exposure pathways to
2xlO'6 in the more accessible areas. The cancer risk level in
the less accessible areas will be reduced to less than 1x10 .
Union Lake Alternative 1:    No Action
Potential public health risks from lake sediments would be
reduced by sign posting and educational programs. Existing
environmental contamination would continue, but could be
decreased in the lake through natural processes after the flow of
arsenic from the plant site is stopped, or by sediment
resuspension and transport. Long-term monitoring would be
required.
Union Lake Alternative 2A:   Removal/Fixation/Off-Site Non-
                             Hazardous Landfill
This entails removing contaminated sediments identified above,
treating them by fixation with cements and binders to reduce
arsenic mobility, and disposing of the delisted treated sediments
at an existing nonhazardous landfill. Excavated areas would be
restored using clean fill, as in all the alternatives except 3C
and 5. Contamination in sediments in the deeper areas of the
lake would remain, but could be decreased through natural
processes after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is
stopped. Long-term post-implementation monitoring of the lake
sediments would be required since not all of the contaminated
sediments in the lake would be remediated.
Union Lake Alternative 2B:   Removal/Fixation/On-Site Non-
                             Hazardous Landfill

This is the same as Alternative 2A except that the fixated and
delisted sediments would be disposed of at a new nonhazardous
landfill built specifically for this purpose at the Vineland           <
Chemical Company plant site. Additional long-term maintenance         sr
and monitoring would be required to ensure the landfill's
integrity.                                                            °
                                                                      o
                                                                      NJ
                                 24                           ;,-i
                                                                 c£
                                                                 CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Union Lake Alternative 3A:    Removal/Extraction/Sediments to Off-
                              Site Nonhazardous Landfill/Off-Site
                              Hazardous Sludge Disposal
This alternative uses the same sediment removal activities as
Alternatives 2A and 2B. However, in place of fixation,
extraction with water would be used to remove arsenic from the
contaminated sediments. The cleaned sediments would be sent to
an existing nonhazardous landfill. Arsenic in the extraction
water would be converted to a sludge during treatment, and would
be disposed of at an existing off-site hazardous waste facility.
The treated water would be returned to the lake. Long-term
monitoring of sediment redistribution would be required.
Union Lake Alternative 3B:    Resoval/Extraction/Seuiaents to On-
                              Site Nonhazardous Landfill/Off-Site
                              Hazardous Sludge Disposal
This alternative is the same as 3A except that the extracted
sediments would be disposed of at a new nonhazardous landfill
built on the Vineland Chemical Company property specifically for
this purpose. Additional long-term monitoring and maintenance
would be required for the landfill.
Union Lake Alternative 3C:    Removal/Extraction/Lake Redeposition
                              of Sediments/Off -Site Hazardous
                              Sludge Disposal
This alternative is the same as 3A except that the extracted
sediments would be redeposited as fill for 'remediated areas in
the lake. This alternative requires that the treated and
del isted sediments be classified as non-ID 27 wastes by the
NJDEP. Long-term monitoring would be required.
Union Lake Alternative 3D:   Removal/Extraction/Plant Site
                             Deposition of Sediments/Off -Site
                             Hazardous Sludge Disposal
This alternative is the same as 3A except that the cleaned and
del isted sediments would be deposited at the Vineland Chemical
Company plant site in appropriate undeveloped areas. The same
waste classification steps required in Alternative 3C apply to
this alternative. Long-term monitoring at the plant site and in
the lake would be required.
Union Lake Alternative 5:    In Situ Sand Cover
This provides a type of containment by capping areas of
contaminated sediments with a one foot layer of clean sand. This
would reduce human health and environmental impacts. However,
the contaminated sediments would remain in the lake. Also, it is .
                                                                 f"*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

possible that the clean sands used as cover could become
contaminated through contact with the sediments, further
complicating the remedial effort, and in fact adding to the
quantity of material to be treated.
EVALUATION OF ALTERNATIVES

Pursuant to CERCLA, EPA must evaluate each alternative with
respect to nine criteria. These criteria were developed to
address the requirements of Section 121 of SARA. The nine
criteria are: short-term effectiveness; long-term effectiveness;
reduction of toxicity, mobility and volume; implementability; ,
cost; compliance with ARARs; overall protection of human health
and the environment; state acceptance; and community acceptance.
The discussion which follows provides a summary of the analysis,
relative to these criteria, of all of the alternatives under
consideration for the operable units at the Vineland Chemical
Company site. A complete analysis is provided in the FS reports
and is summarized in Tables 11 through 15.
OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)

o Short-Term Effectiveness; This criterion evaluates the time
  required for an alternative to achieve performance, and the
  potential adverse impacts from its implementation.
  Alternative SC-1 could be implemented in weeks. The remaining
  alternatives, except for Alternative SC-5, which would require
  eight years, could be implemented within two years.
 All of the alternatives, except SC-1, present potential
 short-term risks to workers, the community and environment from
 fugitive dust emissions during the remedial action. However,
 adequate dust suppression measures and a traffic control plan
 would be developed to minimize these potential exposures.
 Workers would be properly protected through utilization of
 personnel protective equipment. Site access would be
 restricted during implementation of all source control
 alternatives.
o Lona-Term Effectiveness; This category addresses the long-term
  effectiveness and reliability of an alternative.
 The no action alternative would require that natural
 processes reduce the soil contamination. It would take many
 years to achieve the cleanup goal of arsenic in the soils.

 Tests have shown that the fixation process would make the         <
 arsenic less leachable from the soils in the long-term;           g
 however there is always a potential for failure. Alternatives
 3A and 3B would be more effective than 3C since disposal          o
 would be in a landfill and leachate could be controlled. In       £
                               26

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Alternative 3A, the landfill would be off-site, which would
  be more protective for the Vineland Chemical Company site
  than the on-site landfill called for in 3B, but would offer
  the same overall protection of the environment in general.
  Extraction would be an effective process in the long-term
  since the arsenic is actually removed from the treated soils
  to the point where it is not leachable by water. Therefore
  there is a minimal need to encapsulate the cleaned soils.
  Alternative 4C provides a means of disposal that is as
  effective as the landfill alternatives, since the arsenic
  remaining on the soils should not be leachable by water.
  In situ fixation, SC-5, has the same drawbacks as SC-3C since
  the fixated soils would be disposed in a non-controlled
  environment c In situ flushing has the same advantages as the
  other extraction alternatives with the added advantage that
  minimal soil excavation would be required, and that an
  extraction treatment system would not be required.
  The capping alternative, SC-2, has the long-term concern that
  the cap could eventually fail, requiring a reapplication or
  maintenance. This alternative would require long-term
  monitoring, as would all of the alternatives except 3A and 4A
  which remove all of the contaminants from the site.
o Deduction of Toxicity. Mobility and Volume: This category
  evaluates the alternatives in terms of reducing the toxicity,
  mobility and volume of hazardous substances at a site.
  Of all the source control alternatives considered, those
  involving extraction offer the highest reduction of toxicity,
  mobility and volume. The no action or capping alternatives
  would yield no reduction of toxicity or volume, and there are
  no long-term guarantees regarding the reduction of mobility
  offered by a multilayer cap. In situ soil flushing would
  reduce the volume and toxicity of contaminants over a period of
  time, but increased mobility of contaminants would be required
  to achieve this. This alternative would require a groundwater
  capture system to contain the flushed arsenic. Fixation would
  reduce the mobility of the contaminants only, as they would
  remain stabilized in their present soil matrix. Fixation would
  also increase the volume of soil as large quantities of
  additives would be required.
o Impl ement ab i 1 ity ; This category addresses how easy or
  difficult, feasible or infeasible, it would be to carry out a
  given alternative. This covers implementation from design
  through construction, operation and maintenance. The           !
                                                                   <
  implementabiiity of an alternative is evaluated in terms of      a
  technical and administrative feasibility, and the availability
  of required goods and services.                                  o
                                                                    o
                                                                    TO
                               27

                                                                         a

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The feasibility of both the extraction and fixation processes
were proven in treatability studies. Both use equipment that
is readily available from a number of vendors. In situ
fixation would require more specialized equipment than fixating
excavated soils, and may be less available on the market.
In situ flushing is the simplest treatment alternative to
implement. It is believed that this alternative will work
based on information gathered in the RI/FS. However, the
effectiveness of this technology would have to be verified
through bench/pilot scale studies during design.
Capping is easy to implement and uses equipment and materials
which could be provided by a number of different vendors.
The extraction alternatives require more administrative
efforts than the fixation alternatives. Although a discharge
permit is not required, the treated water would be in
compliance with all New Jersey discharge regulations.
Additional administrative efforts will be required to dispose
of the sludge in a hazardous waste landfill.
On-site landfilling requires intensive efforts for land
acquisition and requires long-term monitoring. Off-site
landfilling requires less effort for land acquisition, but
requires efforts to secure available landfill space. Both
require administrative efforts to delist the treated soils.
Redeposition of extracted soils requires no land acquisition,
but does require delisting and a non-waste classification by
the NJDEP. Redeposition of fixated soils requires land
acquisition, monitoring, delisting, and a non-waste
classification. Fixating the soils in situ negates the need
for delisting and the non-waste classification.
Capping requires land acquisition and land use restrictions,
and requires long-term monitoring. This does not require
delisting.
In situ flushing would require the least administrative effort.
Delisting would not be required, a non-waste classification
would not be required, and no land use restrictions or
long-term monitoring would be required since the contaminants
would be removed.




                                                                o
                                                                o
                             28

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Cost; The present worth cost for each alternative is as
  follows:
     Alternative SC-1: $ 1,122,000
     Alternative SC-2: $ 7,232,000
     Alternative SC-3A: $62,937,000
     Alternative SC-3B: $35,466,000
     Alternative SC-3C: $26,484,000
     Alternative SC-4A: $44,560,000
     Alternative SC-4B: $25,102,000
     Alternative SC-4C: $16,934,000
     Alternative SC-5: $ 5,159,000
     Alternative SC-6: $24,872,000
o Compliance with ARARs; Section 121 (d) of CERCIA, requires
  that remedial actions comply with all applicable or relevant
  and appropriate Federal and State requirements for hazardous
  substances, pollutants, or contaminants that are attributable
  to a site.
  All of the remedial alternatives for this operable unit, except
  no action, can be designed to meet all Federal and State ARARs.
  A discussion of all of the ARARs for the selected remedy for
  this operable unit is presented in the Statutory Determinations
  section of this ROD. Below is a brief discussion of the ARARs
  which would differ between alternatives.
  The no action alternative, the in situ treatment alternatives,
  and the capping alternative would not invoke the provisions of
  the LDR. This is because no excavation of the contaminated
  soils outside of the area of contiguous contamination is
  required. The remaining alternatives would invoke the LDR.
  The extraction alternatives would require that the discharge of
  the treated extractant meet New Jersey requirements, and would
  require that the sludges be disposed of in accordance with
  applicable RCRA regulations. The fixation alternatives would
  not involve these ARARs, since water treatment and sludge
  generation are not required with fixation.

o Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment; This
  category evaluates the alternatives in terms of their ability
  to achieve overall protection of human health and the
  environment, which is the central mandate of CERCLA.
 The fixation alternatives render the contaminants in the soil        j
 insoluble and immobile, thus greatly minimizing leachate           < j
 generation. The extraction alternatives remove the arsenic         & !
      the soil, affording the greatest protection to human
 health and the environment. The capping systes reduces public      o /
 health risks by minimizing direct contact with the contaminated    £ I

                                                                    ' IS
                                                                      Ch
                                                                    -   GO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  soil, and prevents adverse impacts to the environment by
  minimizing leaching and subsequent migration of the
  contaminants. However, if the capping system fails, the threat
  to human health and the environment would be present. In situ
  flushing would adequately protect human health? however,
  adverse impacts to the environment could occur due to the
  failure of the pumping or treatment system, or from the
  extended remediation period required by this alternative. No
  action provides minimal protection to human health and the
  environment.
o State Acceptance; Comments from the State generally focused
  upon disposal of material generated by the treatment systems
  considered in the alternatives. The State also questioned
  whether the remediation would include the two RCRA impoundments
  on site. Closure of the two RCRA impoundments has been added
  to all of the alternatives except no action. The State concurs
  with the selected remedy discussed later in this document.
o Community Acceptance; One individual questioned why in situ
  vitrification had not been considered as a remedial technology.
  It had, but was screened out in the technology screening
  portion of the FS. The remaining comments were generally
  supportive of any efforts being made to clean up the plant
  site, and did not distinguish between the remedial alternatives
  presented to achieve this. Additional specific public comments
  on this and other operable units are presented in the
  Responsiveness Summary section of the ROD.
OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
o Short-Term Effectiveness; The alternatives requiring pumping
  and treatment basically differ from one another in the time
  required to achieve remediation. Based on the RI/FS data,
  Alternative 4A requires the least time, 13 years, but the
  highest pumping rate, up to 2,700 gallons per minute (gpm)
  initially. Alternative 2B requires the longest time, 75 years,
  with the lowest pumping rate, approximately 750 gpm. It is
  estimated that the no action alternative would require well
  over one hundred years to achieve remediation.
 All of the pumping and treatment alternatives involve at a
 minimum downgradient capture, or stopping the flow of
 contaminated groundwater into the Blackwater Branch. The
 extraction wells would be sited such that the downgradient
 capture zone was as close to the Blackwater Branch as possible
 without inducing infiltration from the bank. A small zone of
 arsenic contamination will therefore exist between the capture
 zone and the Branch. The arsenic in this zone will have to         <
 flush prior to the full effect of downgradient capture being       g j
 realized. During design, the closeness of the downgradient           j
 capture zone to the Blackwater Branch will be optimized to         o
                                                                      :
                                                                    !^:
                                                                           Ci
                                                                          CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  achieve the most expedient remediation without inducing
  excessive infiltration.
o Long-Term^ Effectiveness; Implementing the no action
  alternative would require restricting the future use of the
  groundwater for well over one hundred years, and allowing the
  arsenic contaminated groundwater to migrate into the surface
  water and adversely impact the downstream water quality over
  the long-term.
  Implementing any of the remaining pumping and treatment
  alternatives would be effective at achieving cleanup in the
  long-term. The remediation would be permanent (assuming a
  successful source control alternative) since the arsenic
  contaminated groundwater would be removed from the aquifer and
  treated.
  If in situ flushing is implemented for the source control
  alternative, a portion of the treated groundwater would be
  utilized as flush water. It is estimated that approximately
  400 gpm of flush water would be required and that the in situ
  flushing alternative would operate simultaneously with the
  pumping alternative for eight years. Implementation of the
  flushing alternative would result in an additional load of                    jj
  arsenic to the aquifer. It is estimated that in situ flushing
  would increase the remediation time period by approximately 10
  percent.
o Reduction of Toxicity. Mobility or Volume; The no action
  alternative would not immediately reduce the toxicity, mobility
  or volume of groundwater contaminants. A reduction would be
  achieved over time, though, as the groundwater transports the
  contaminants downgradient and off-site, continually dispersing
  them throughout the entire study area.
 The remaining alternatives would offer essentially the same
 reductions of toxicity, mobility and volume by removing
 contamination from the groundwater and eliminating its off-site
 migration. Reinjection would increase the mobility of the
 contaminants in the groundwater to speed the cleanup, but they
 would not be allowed to migrate off-site.
o Implementabiljty; All of the pumping and treatment
  alternatives employ basically the same technologies that are
  standard and readily available from a number of vendors (e.g.,
  well installation, pipeline construction). Alternative MOM-4A       j
  would operate at a very high pumping rate, 2700 gpm initially,    M |

                                                                    0
                                                                    o
                                                                    ro


                               31                                        '^
                                                                         »-.!
                                                                    . d

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  and would require an increase in the size and number of
  treatment units over the other alternatives. This could create
  slight difficulties for installation and operation not
  anticipated with the other alternatives.
  The no action alternative involves considerable administrative
  effort to ensure long-term restriction of groundwater use, to
  perform long-term monitoring, and to review the groundwater
  conditions existing within the contaminated aquifer through
  time.
  The remaining alternatives would remediate the aquifer to an
  arsenic concentration of 0.35 mg/1 (target level based on
  RI/FS data which may change during the final design) via
  pumping and treatment, and then, if additional data from design
  and operation show that pumping and treatment is no aore
  effective than natural attenuation, allow natural flushing to
  reduce the arsenic concentration to 0.05 mg/1. Administrative
  efforts would be required to establish a well restriction area
  to prohibit the installation of new potable water supply wells
  and to require the sealing of any existing potable water supply
  wells until the concentration of 0.05 mg/1 was reached.
  Administrative efforts would also be required for the pumping
  alternatives to obtain permission to access properties to
  install monitoring wells or pipelines off of the Vineland
  Chemical Company property.
o Cost; The present worth value for each alternative considering
  utilization of Treatment Option T2 is as follows:
    Alternative MOM-1: $    289,000
    Alternative MOM-2B: $44,981,000
    Alternative MOM-3A: $44,181,000
    Alternative MOM-3B: $39,936,000
    Alternative MOM-4A: $34,148,000
 Table 13 presents the cost of each alternative considering the
 various treatment options.
o Compliance with ARARs; Alternative MOM-1 would not satisfy the
  contaminant-specific groundwater ARARs. If long-term
  monitoring is executed and a well restriction area is
  established, Alternative MOM-1 would meet location and
  action-specific ARARs.
 New Jersey surface water discharge standards would apply to the
 alternatives requiring a surface water discharge.- while they
 would not apply to the alternatives requiring total on-site
 reinjection.


                               32

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  The remaining alternatives would all have to meet the same
  action, contaminant, and location specific ARARs, which are
  discussed in the Statutory Determinations section.
o Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment: The no
  action alternative would not afford any protection to the
  environment in that the source of arsenic into the basin would
  not be stopped. The environmental damage caused by this
  discharge would not be mitigated. However, human health would
  be protected by not allowing contaminated groundwater to be
  utilized.
 The remaining alternatives offer essentially the same overall
 protection. Contaminated groundwater flow would be stopped as
 reliably and quickly by any of the pumping and treatment
 alternatives. They differ only in the length of time pumping
 would be required to achieve remediation, but not in the goal
 of remediation.
o State Acceptance: The State's comments regarding the pumping
  alternatives focused on its desire to maximize reinjection and
  minimize the amount of discharge into the Maurice River or the
  Blackwater Branch. Reinjection has been incorporated into some
  of the alternatives to the maximum extent practicable.
  Discharge of the treated groundwater to the Maurice River, if
  necessary, is not expected to pose any significant adverse
  environmental impacts.
 The State was also involved in investigating a two-step
 approach to the aquifer cleanup goal, i.e.„, (1) pump and treat
 to a maximum level of arsenic in the aquifer that could be
 allowed to discharge into the Blackwater Branch without
 violating the instream standard of 0.05 mg/1 arsenic and, (2)
 if additional data show that pumping and treatment is not more
 effective than natural attenuation, allow the aquifer to flush
 naturally to an arsenic concentration of 0.05 mg/1. The 0.35
 mg/1 arsenic level used in the RI/FS is the calculated maximum
 concentration at which the load of arsenic in the groundwater
 would not violate the instream arsenic standard in the
 Blackwater Branch at the 7-day 10-year low flow. This was
 calculated considering the estimated flow of groundwater from
 the Vineland Chemical Company plant. During design the
 estimate of groundwater flow from the plant will be refined,
 thereby allowing recalculation of the groundwater pumping and
 treatment maximum arsenic concentration objective.
 The State concurs with the selected remedy discussed later in
 this document.
                                                                    2!    i

                                                                    O
                                                                   . o
                                                                     to

                               33                                         I
                                                                          to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Community Acceptance; No specific public comments were
  received that distinguished between any of the presented
  alternatives. The public was generally supportive of any
  efforts being made to eliminate the flow of arsenic into the
  Maurice River drainage system from the Vineland Chemical
  Company plant.
OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS )
o Short-Term Effectiveness; The no action alternative could be
  implemented in weeks and would result in minimal short-term
  effects to the local community. However, it could possibly
  restrict the use of the river areas.
  The remaining alternatives could be implemented in three years
  and could pose potential public health threats to the
  neighboring communities and on-site workers via inhalation of
  fugitive dust. Standard construction dust-suppression
  techniques would minimize these potential threats. On-site
  workers would be provided with personnel protective equipment.
  Excavation of the Blackwater Branch floodplain in Alternatives
  2A, 2B, 3A, 3B or 3C could disturb wetland areas, causing
  potential short-term environmental impacts. Prior to the
  excavation of any exposed sediment, a floodplain/wetlands
  assessment of the impacts of excavation will be performed.
  Dredging activities conducted in Alternatives 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B or
  3C could disturb riverine and wetland areas, causing possible
  short-term environmental impacts. Prior to the dredging of any
  sediment, an environmental assessment of the impacts of
  dredging will be performed.
o Lonq-Term Effectiveness; The no action alternative would
  result in some residual risk remaining on-site. The exposed
  floodplain sediments would probably not be remediated naturally
  over time, since there is no water flowing over them. However,
  the river is a dynamic system. Natural transport mechanisms
  may significantly reduce the arsenic contamination within the
  submerged sediments.
 Dredging could cause possible long-term impacts to the Maurice
 River system. An environmental assessment will be performed
 prior to removing any submerged sediment.
 The fixation alternatives (2A and 2B) have the potential for
 failure as the arsenic is not removed from the treated
 sediments. However, disposal would be in a landfill
 environment where any leachate could be controlled.
 The extraction alternatives actually remove the arsenic from
 the sediments to unleachable levels and thus provide greater           o
                                                                    •
                               34

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  reliability than fixation. Additionally, the need for
  disposal of the treated sediment in a landfill is minimized.
  Deposition of the treated floodplain sediments in their
  original locations and site deposition of the treated river
  sediments, outlined in Alternative 3C, would be protective.
  Off-site landf illing of the treated materials would not require
  a long-term management program. However, those alternatives
  involving on-site landfilling or floodplain deposition would
  require long-term monitoring to assess the effectiveness of the
  alternatives.
  In any of the action alternatives, monitoring would be required
  for a period of time to ensure that the sediments do not
  redistribute.
o Reduction of Toxicitv. Mobility or Volume: No action does not
  reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of the contaminants.
  The extraction alternatives (3A, 3B, and 3C) offer the highest
  reduction of toxicity, mobility and volume. Fixation would
  reduce only the mobility of the arsenic, and would actually
  increase the volume of sediment to be disposed.
o Impleroentabi 1 ity ; No action consists of simple tasks which
  present no implementation difficulties. Implementing the
  remaining alternatives involves the use of standard equipment
  that is commercially available and technologies that are
  developed and proven.
 Bench-scale tests have proven that fixation (Alternatives 2A
 and 2B) and extraction (Alternatives 3A, 3B, and 3C) are
 feasible for treating the arsenic-contaminated sediments.
 However, pilot-scale tests are required to provide design
 criteria. Pilot-scale tests would be performed if any of these
 alternatives are selected.
 Alternative 3C specifies disposal of the treated material in
 uncontrolled environments. If Alternative 3C failed, which is
 very unlikely, the Blackwater Branch would have to be
 reexcavated and the deposition areas of the plant site removed.
 No action requires surveillance in order to attain effective
 access restriction. Implementation of the remaining
 alternatives would require long-term operation and maintenance
 activities which would include periodic site sampling, and
 monitoring on-site landfills (Alternatives 2B and 3B) and
 deposition areas (Alternative 3C) .
 Site deposition, the simplest means of final disposal, would                         £
       '   ctlUUxm.StlTcitj.Vc   ci.i.Oi.b.5.   v»j u&c VGuxu naVc tO   Cj.SSSa.a.y   '•'
 the treated material as non-ID 27 waste.

                                           ™
                                           35

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Cost: The present worth cost for each alternative is as
  follows:
     Alternative li $    874,000
     Alternative 2A: $60,809,000
     Alternative 2B: $43,666,000
     Alternative 3A: $24,710,000
     Alternative 3B: $16,875,000
     Alternative 3C: $14,186,000
o Compliance with ARARs: All of the remedial alternatives,
  except no action, can be designed to meet all Federal and State
  ARARs. A discussion of all ARARs for the selected remedies is
  presented in the Statutory Determinations section of this ROD.
  Below is a brief discussion of the ARARs which vould differ
  between alternatives.
  Alternative 3C would require the NJDEP to waive an ID 27
  classification subsequent to delisting. The other alternatives
  would require only delisting.
  The extraction alternatives would require that the discharge of
  the treated extractant meet New Jersey regulations, and would
  require that the sludges be disposed of in accordance with
  applicable RCRA regulations. These ARARs do not apply to the
  fixation alternatives as no water treatment or sludge
  generation is associated with them.
  The New Jersey Solid Waste Regulation (NJAC 7:26), particularly
  Subchapter 2A, Additional Specific Disposal Regulation for
  Sanitary Landfills (May 5, 1986), would be~ considered in
  managing treated nonhazardous wastes for both on-site and
  off-site landfills under Alternatives 2A, 2B and 3A or 3B.
o Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment; The no
  action alternative would not contribute to the protection of
  human health and the environment.
 The remaining alternatives all remove and treat the
 contaminated sediments identified as a public health threat.
 Using these alternatives to remove the contaminated source,
 assuming no significant redistribution of the remaining
 contaminated sediments, and control of the contaminated
 groundwater entering the river from the Vineland Chemical
 Company site, would facilitate protection of human health and
 the environment. However, if contaminated submerged sediments
 left in the rivers did redistribute, this would require
 additional remediation.
o State Acceptance; The State desired an alternative that did
  not require either on-site or off-site nonhazardous disposal.
  Alternative 3C addresses this comment.
                               36

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  The State also expressed the need for an environmental
  assessment of the impacts of dredging to be performed prior to
  remediation of submerged sediments. The State concurs with the
  selected remedy discussed later in this document,
o Community Acceptance: The community expressed some opposition
  to dredging activities for the submerged sediments. Concerns
  were focused on (a) some residents not believing the health
  threat from the sediments existed because there was no imminent
  sign of adverse effects, (b) concern over environmental damage
  to the river itself due to dredging, and (c) concern over
  environmental damage from constructing support facilities such
  as roads in the wetlands.
 The EPA assured the community that remediation of submerged
 sediments would take place only if necessary following a
 three-year "natural flushing" period, as discussed in the
 Selected Remedy section of this ROD. EPA also assured the
 residents that appropriate studies would be performed prior to
 dredging to determine the environmental impacts of dredging and
 ways to minimize those impacts if dredging were necessary.
OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)

o Short -Term Effectiveness; The implementation of the no action
  alternative would require weeks and would result in minimal
  short-term effects to the local community. However, it may
  restrict the use of the lake.
 The implementation of the remaining alternatives would present
 minor threats to the community and on-site workers. Potential
 impacts include fugitive dust emissions during sediment removal
 and placement of the sand cover. This could be easily
 minimized.
 Alternatives 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, 3C and 3D involve removing
 contaminated sediments. Dredging would be conducted if the
 lake were at full condition. This may cause more adverse
 environmental impacts than excavation which could be done with
 lake at drawdown. Excavation would allow greater control in
 sediment removal. The sand cover could be more accurately and
 easily applied with the lake at drawdown.
 The time required to complete Alternatives 2A and 2B, 3A, 3B,
 3C and 3D is estimated to be three years. One year is required
 for Alternative 5.
               »4_ J .._.-..-.__*     ml* A   •*.«.. •.— A . . 2 _ _    . ^ J- - - tt  f . -- ---- . •* Ji
               WL. -L V O I C P O »   AliO     4IW CIWI,AU11           a J. UCA. lid <- J. V G WUUJL.U

 require some years for natural attenuation and transport          ^
 mechanisms to reduce significantly the volume of arsenic in the 0
 sediment.                                                      • o
                                                                  ro

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  With the remaining alternatives, contaminated sediments with
  concentrations above the target level would remain in the
  lake, although in areas not deemed a public health risk.
  Long-term monitoring would be required. If significant
  redistribution of the sediments occurs, additional remedial
  actions may be required.
  Fixation would immobilize the arsenic in the sediments;
  however, the possibility of failure would always exist.
  Extraction offers a more effective process since the arsenic is
  actually removed from the sediment to the point where it is not
  leachable. Therefore, there is minimal need for landfilling
  the treated sediment.
o Reduction of Toxicitv. Mobility or Volume: No action does not
  reduce the toxicity, mobility or volume of the contaminants.
  The remaining alternatives reduce the volume of contaminants in
  the lake. Fixation alternatives reduce the mobility of the
  arsenic in the fixed product; the contaminant becomes
  immobilized within a tightly bound matrix. The extraction
  alternatives reduce the toxicity of the sediments. The sand
  covering alternative does not reduce the toxicity or volume of
  contaminated sediment. However, it is expected to reduce the
  mobility.
o Implementabilitv; All of the alternatives use standard
  equipment that is commercially available from a number of
  vendors.
 Both dredging and excavation are well developed and proven
 means of sediment removal. Excavation would provide a greater
 means of control to ensure that all contaminated sediments
 would be removed.
 Alternative 5 requires standard construction equipment and fill
 material. This could be most easily implemented with the lake
 at drawdown; however, placing a layer of sand over contaminated
 sediment in shallow water is relatively easy.
 Long-term operation and maintenance activities would be
 required for all of the alternatives and would include periodic
 site sampling, performing five-year reviews, and monitoring
 on-site landfills (Alternatives 2B and 3B) or deposition areas                                                    ]
 (Alternative 3C and 3D).                                                                                          |
                                                                                                               H   j
 All of the alternatives vould require administrative attention, z j
 particularly Alternatives 2B, 3B, 3C and 3D'which involve
 _    a_^   _•_.!     .          _.£.*._   *__l»~_~~_.3A..._   ^,   ^^2*^    je-. — J * J *            .•_«        ^     1
 wwiiouj.uouj.nt-)   ail   wii—oj.uc   iiwiuia£.ci.Luwua   J.QIIUI.JLXJ.   xauxxxcjr,         «JJL   cue      o    I
                                                                                                           M
 lake deposition or plant site deposition of treated materials.                                                    j
 No action may require considerable administrative effort to                                                       j
                                              38                                                                        H
                                                                                                                       •01

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  restrict lake access, if necessary, pending the results of
  resampling activities and sediment redistribution studies.
o Cost; The present worth value for each alternative is as
  follcvrs:
                lake at; Full Condition   Lake at Drawdown
 Alternative Is $      874,000              $    874,000
 Alternative 2As $ 71,247,000               $ $8,840,000
 Alternative 2B: $ 51,414,000               $ 49,006,000
 Alternative 3A: $ 29,227,000               $ 27,417,000
 Alternative 3B: $ 20,133,000               $ 18,323,000
 Alternative 3C: $ 14,752,000               $ 12,942,000
 Alternative 3D: $ 18,233,000               $ 16,422,000
 Alternative 5:   $ 3,369,000         * •   $ 2,400,000
o Compliance vith ARMte?    All of the remedial alternatives for
  this operable unit, except no action, can be designed to neet
  all Federal and State ARARs as discussed in the Statutory
  Determinations section of this ROD. Below is a brief
  discussion of the ARARs which would differ between
  alternatives.
 Hydraulic dredging activities in the lacustrine areas would
 require compliance with Federal Rivers and Harbors Act Section
 10. The Clean Hater Act Section 404 requires that no activity
 affecting a wetland shall be permitted if a practicable
 alternative with less impact on the wetland is available. Dry
 excavation when the lake is at drawdown would have less impact
 and would therefore be favored relative to this ARAR.
 The no action alternative and the sand covering alternative
 would not invoke the provision of the LDR. The remaining
 alternatives are subject to LDRs. Subsequent to del is ting,
 RJDEP would have to waive an ID 27 waste classification of the
 treated sediments in Alternatives 3C and 3D.
 The extraction alternatives would require that the discharge of
 the treated extractant se@t New Jersey regulations, and would
 require that the sludges be disposed @£ in accordance vith
 applicable RCRA regulations. These ARARs do not apply to the
 fixation alternatives as no water treatment ©r sludge
 generation is associated vith thea.
 The New Jersey Solid Waste Regulation (KJAC 7 826), particularly
 Subchapter 2A - Additional Specific Disposal Regulation for
 Sanitary Landfills (May 5, 1986) would b© considered in
 managing treated nonhazardous wastes for both on-sit« and
 off-site landfills under Mteraativos 3A, 2B aM 3h or
                                                                    2


                                                                    S b*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment.: The no
  action alternative would require natural attenuation to reduce
  sediment arsenic contamination.
  All of the remaining alternatives would remediate only those
  sediments deemed a public health risk near the shoreline. A
  significant percentage of the contaminated sediments would not
  be remediated. Since these could always redistribute, this is
  only an interim measure. Additional remedial actions may be
  required.
o State Acceptance: The State requested that consideration be
  given to conducting the remedial action when the lake is at its
  full condition and when the lake is at drawdown. In addition,
  the-State recommended sampling prior to the initiation of the
  remedial alternative to confirm the location of those sediments
  to be treated.
  The State also requested that an environmental assessment be
  performed prior to remediating sediments in the less accessible
  northern end of the lake. The State concurs with the selected
  remedy discussed later in this document.
o Community Acceptance: The community response was generally
  divided on the lake alternatives. Some residents felt that EPA
  should take whatever actions were necessary to clean the lake
  so that it is safe for recreation since the lake is such a
  popular recreational area. Others felt that the lake as it
  exists poses no health threat, and therefore remediation was
  unnecessary and may be detrimental to some popular fishing
  spots.
  The overriding sentiment was that the lake should be reopened.
  The community was very pleased to hear that the NJDEP would
  reopen the lake for boating and fishing (two activities that do
  not promote sediment contact) after dam repairs are finished
  and the lake is refilled in late 1989.
SELECTED REMEDY/STATUTORY DETERMINATION

Section 121(b) of CERCLA requires EPA to select remedial actions
which utilize permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, EPA
prefers remedial actions that permanently and significantly
reduce the mobility, toxicity or volume of site wastes.
After a careful review and evaluation of the alternatives
presented in the feasibility study and consideration of ail
evaluation criteria, EPA presented the following alternatives to
the public as the preferred remedies for the four operable units
at the Vineland Chemical Company site:

                               40

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Operable Unit One (Plant Site Source Control)
    -   Alternative SC-5:    In Situ Flushing
o Operable Unit Two (Plant site Management of Migration)
    -   Alternative MOM-4A: Site Pumping/Treatment/Rein jection/
        Discharge to the Maurice River
o Operable Unit Three (River Areas Sediments)
    -   Alternative 3C: Dredging/Excavation/ Extraction/ Floodplain
        Deposition of Exposed Sediments/Plant Site Deposition of
        River Sediments/Off-site Hazardous Sludge Disposal
o Operable Unit Four (Union Lake sediments)
    -   Alternative 3; Removal/Extraction/Lake Deposition of
        Sediments/Off-Site Hazardous Sludge Disposal
The input received during the public comment period, consisting
primarily of questions and statements submitted at the public
meeting held on July 18, 1989, is presented in the attached
Responsiveness Summary. The public comments encompass a wide
range of issues, but do not necessitate any major changes in the
remedial approach taken at the site,
SELECTED REMEDIES
Based on consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the NCP,
the Administrative Record, the evaluations of alternatives
discussed in the previous section, and public comments, EPA, with
NJDEP concurrence, has selected remedies for each operable unit
as described below.
o   Operable Unit One:      Plant Site Source Control
In Situ Flushing is selected as the remedy because it is a
permanent remedy and it offers the most cost effective treatment
with minimal impacts to the environment. The costs associated
with this remedy are presented in Table 16.
This remedy involves excavating approximately 54,000 cubic yards
of contaminated soils within the contiguous zones of
contamination, and consolidating these soils with approximately
72,000 cubic yards of undisturbed contaminated soils into the
active flushing zones. These zones will be bermed and              <
continuously flooded with flushing water. The water will         s*?
dissolve and carry the arsenic from the soil to the underlying
oroundwater. Groundwater pumping and treatment,- vhich jsust be    °
                                                                      ro


                                    41

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

performed together with this source control remedy, will convert
the arsenic to a sludge. The sludge will be transported to an
off-site RCRA treatment and disposal facility.
Decontaminating the chicken coops will also be conducted as part
of the remedial action. The dust and particulate matter
recovered from the coops will be consolidated in the active
flushing zones. If it is determined that the decontamination
procedure did not effectively reduce the human health risks, the
chicken coops will be sealed to prevent public access, and/or
dismantled and transported to a RCRA Subtitle C facility for
disposal.
Closure of the two RCRA lined impoundments will comply with the
substantive portions of the RCRA clean closure requirements. The
wastewater and sludge recovered from the impoundments will be
transported to an off-site RCRA treatment and disposal facility,
as necessary. The recovered impoundment construction materials
will be steam cleaned and transported to an off-site RCRA
Subtitle C facility for disposal. Since the two impoundments are
within the lagoon area, any contamination in the soils near them
will be flushed to the water table through the implementation of
this remedy. The arsenic will treated by the pumping and
treatment system.
o   Operable Unit Two:   Plant Site Management of Migration
Alternative MOM 4A, Site Pumping/Treatment/Reinjection/Discharge
to the Maurice River, is the selected remedy. This remedy
satisfies the objective of minimizing the flow of
arsenic-contaminated groundwater to the Blackwater Branch, while
providing a cost effective and timely remediation. In the RI/FS,
approximately 13 years of pumping and treatment was required to
achieve a maximum groundwater arsenic plume concentration below
0.35 mg/1. At this concentration, the instream standard of 0.05
mg/1 arsenic in the Blackwater Branch was not violated. An
additional 10 years was required for the aquifer to naturally
flush to meet the remediation goal of 0.05 mg/1. Table 17
presents the costs associated with this remedy as investigated in
the RI/FS.
The site pumping system evaluated in the FS consisted of
approximately 31 extraction wells. The actual number of wells
will be determined in design. The wells will be located to
minimize contaminant migration to the Blackwater Branch and to
remove high concentration portions of the plume.
The total pumping rate in the FS was approximately 2700 gpm
initially (31 wells each pumping at approximately 90 gpss),
Extraction veils that vere in portions of ths pluse vhara the


                                 42                                 / G)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

arsenic concentration dropped below the action level, 0.35 ag/1,
were shut off during remediation as necessary. This
substantially reduced the annual operation and maintenance costs.
Additional data will be collected during design and operation of
the pumping system. If these data show that a point is reached
beyond which pumping and treatment is not more effective than
natural attenuation, the arsenic will be allowed to flush
naturally to the cleanup goal, 0.05 mg/1. The pumping and
treatment maximum arsenic objective calculated in the FS, 0.35
mg/1, will be recalculated during design. If a new target level
is necessary, it will be set such that the instream standard for
arsenic, 0.05 mg/1, is not violated in the Blackwater Branch.
The selected groundwater treatment method is Treatment Process
Option T2, which consists of chemical oxidation of organic
contaminants using potassium permanganate, physical and chemical
precipitation of metals, filtration, ion exchange polishing of
treated effluent, and activated carbon adsorption of TCE. This
treatment system will reduce arsenic concentrations in the
treated groundwater to below MCLs. The sludge generated from
this treatment system will be transported to an off-site RCRA
treatment and disposal facility. All treatment residuals (e.g.
spent carbon, ion exchange regenerant) will be disposed of
according to applicable RCRA regulations.
After treatment to MCLs, the treated water will be recharged to
the aquifer at the maximum rate practicable, and will be used to
provide the flushing water required for the in situ flushing of
contaminated soil. Any remaining water will be discharged to the
Maurice River, as necessary.
A well restriction area will be established during remediation,
until the cleanup goal of 0.05 mg/1 arsenic is met.
o   Operable Unit Three:    River Areas Sediment
The selected remedy is Alternative 3C. Remedial action on the
exposed Blackwater Branch floodplain sediments will begin soon
after arsenic flow in the groundwater to the Blackwater Branch is
stopped. It will entail excavating sediments with an arsenic
concentration above 20 mg/kg (approximately 56,200 cubic yards),
extraction with water to remove arsenic from the sediments, and
redeposition of treated sediments in the floodplain. Prior to
excavation of the exposed sediments, a floodplains/wetlands
assessment will be performed. At about the same time,
approximately 6,400 cubic yards of contaminated submerged
sediments in the Blackwater Branch adjacent to and downstream of
the Vineland Chemical plant site will be dredged. Prior to
i~t;inovin9 any sediments, &n envAironiusntsl assessiuenu of tlic impact
of dredging will be performed and a confirmation that these
sediments are a source of contamination for the river system will
                                  43

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

be made. The dredged material will be extracted with water to
remove arsenic, and then deposited in appropriate undeveloped
areas of the Vineland Chemical Company plant site. After
extracting arsenic from the sediments, the arsenic-laden water
will be treated to remove the arsenic and the sludge residue will
be transported to an existing off=site hazardous waste facility
for treatment and disposal. All other treatment residuals will
be disposed according to applicable RCRA regulations.
Contamination in the submerged sediments of the Maurice River is
expected to be significantly reduced over time, by the natural
scouring and dissolution effects of the river, especially after
arsenic flow from the plant site has been stopped. Therefore,
remediation of these submerged sediments will occur, as
necessary, beginning no sooner than three years after the arsenic
flow from the plant site has stopped. Remediation will entail
dredging, extraction with water to remove arsenic from the
sediments, and deposition of the cleaned sediments in undeveloped
areas of the plant site. Similar to the Blackwater Branch,
dredging the Maurice River will be subject to an environmental
assessment of its effect on the ecology.
The costs associated with the selected remedy are itemized in
Table 18.
o Operable Unit Four:   Union Lake Sediments
The selected remedy is 3C. This involves lowering Union Lake's
water level, and removing sediments from those portions of the
lake's periphery which contain arsenic at concentrations that
present an unacceptable exposure risk to the public. For the
sediments in the upper end of the lake, above the submerged dam,
removal will be done by dredging and excavation. However, prior
to dredging any sediments, an environmental assessment of the
impact of removal will be performed. For the remainder of the
lake, below the submerged dam, sediments will be excavated after
lowering the water level. Table 19 presents the costs associated
with this remedy.
The removed sediments will be washed with water to extract
arsenic, and, after treatment, will be returned as fill for the
remediated areas. The extraction water will be treated to
convert the arsenic to a sludge for off-site hazardous treatment
and disposal. All treatment residuals will be disposed according
to applicable RCRA regulations. The treated water will be
returned to the lake.
This is an interim remedy which is protective of the public          < j
health while further study is done. The interim remedy will not      g j
begin until after the submerged river sediments have been              j
remediated (if necessary, and after an assessment of the river's     o
natural cleansing performance).                                     '5 j
                                                                       •:
                               44                                      ;*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

ADDITIONAL ACTIVITIES
Some additional activities will be performed during the initial
phases of the remedial design process and prior to implementation
cf the selected remedial alternatives. These activities are
described below:                                            '•
o Column leaching tests will be performed to confirm the
  effectiveness of in situ flushing and to establish desorption
  characteristics of the soil. These tests will help to
  determine at what point arsenic will cease desorbing from the
  contaminated soil, and may provide a superior value for the
  coefficient Kd. This will allow design of an optimized pumping
  and treatment system.
o Additional soil data will be obtained to define fully areas for
  plant site soil remediation in Operable Unit One. Also, the
  full extent of arsenic contamination underneath the buildings
  and paved manufacturing areas of the Vineland Chemical Company
  plant site will be determined.
o A pumping test will be performed to obtain design-level aquifer
  hydraulic properties in order to optimize the pumping and
  treatment remedial action chosen for the contaminated
  groundwater.
     If the pumping test yields hydraulic properties that are
     different from those used in the RI/FS, revision of the
     pumping and treatment target level from 0.35 mg/1 arsenic in
     the groundwater may be required to protect the instream
     standard of 0.05 mg/1 arsenic in the Blackwater Branch.
   - If the chosen groundwater remediation scheme requires that
     treated water be discharged into the Maurice River or the
     Blackwater Branch, studies will be performed to assure that
     the streams can handle the additional flow.
o Additional monitoring wells will be installed to define the
  total extent of the groundwater arsenic plume. Specifically,
  the extent of the groundwater plume to the northwest, west, and
  south will be investigated.
o Subsequent to stopping the flow of arsenic to the Blackwater
  Branch through the implementation of a groundwater management
  of migration alternative, a three year flushing period for the
  Maurice River will begin. Monitoring of surface water and
  sediments during this period will determine the effectiveness     <
  of natural flushing mechanisms in the river and the need for      5
  additional remedial action in the river areas.
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o The mass balance of arsenic coming in and out of the basin will
  be determined to aid in the assessment of the river's natural
  flushing mechanisms. Gauging stations will be installed on the
  Blackwater Branch downstream of the Vineland Chemical Company
  plant site and at the inlet of Union Lake, and a flow measuring
  device will be installed on the dam at the controlled outlet of
  Union Lake. Water samples from these stations will be obtained
  periodically, as will samples from the existing United States
  Geologic survey (USGS) streamflow gaging station on the Maurice
  River at Norma. The data from these four stations will
  determine the arsenic load at four points in the basin. From
  this, the mass balance of arsenic in the basin and in Union
  Lake will be determined. This will also establish a data base
  prior to performing any remedial action in the river, and will
  help to determine the effectiveness of the actions.
o Mathematical modeling will be developed to forecast
  distribution patterns of the sediments within the Maurice River
  and Union Lake. Data from the above sampling program will be
  used to calibrate and optimize the model. This information
  will help to determine the need for remediation in the river
  and lake, and the long-term effectiveness of any such
  remediation.
o An environmental assessment of the Blackwater Branch, the
  Maurice River and the northern portion of Union Lake will be
  performed in the early stages of design, if remediation is
  necessary as determined by natural flushing studies and
  modeling studies discussed previously. The objective of the
  environmental assessment is to evaluate the nature and extent
  of potential environmental damage which may result from
  dredging operations (including support activities). The
  results of this environmental assessment will be used to
  determine the extent of dredging.
o Additional sediment samples will be collected to verify arsenic
  contamination within Union Lake. These sediments will also be
  analyzed for PCBs, as trace amounts of PCBs were detected in
  fish. PCBs have a high bioconcentration factor; therefore,
  small amounts in the water or sediment can produce detectable
  concentrations in fish. The PCBs detected in the fish are not
  believed to be related to the Vineland Chemical Company.
o Further studies will be performed on the biota in the area to
  determine the effects of arsenic on the biota at the sediment
  cleanup levels chosen for the remedial action. Also, the
  mercury concentration of the edible biota will be determined
  because of concerns raised by the concentration of mercury in
  the water and the bioconcentration factor of mercuryo
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    K)

                               46

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Before any remedial action is taken, a Stage IA survey will be
  performed to insure that important prehistoric and historic
  cultural resources are identified.
o A field survey to comply with the Endangered Species Act will
  be conducted prior to any remedial actions.
o Executive Orders 11990 and 11988, regarding protection of
  wetlands and floodplains, respectively, will be complied with
  by conducting wetlands and floodplain assessments during the
  design phase of the plant site and Blackwater Branch portions
  of the project.
o Remedial actions in the rivers and Union Lake will be evaluated
  in terms of impacting the lower Maurice River below Union Lake,
  in accordance with the Coastal Zone Management (CZM) Act and
  the New Jersey CZM Plan.
o The chosen treatment process for each operable unit will be
  optimized through bench and pilot scale tests to assure that
  the treated material will meet the delisting requirements with
  a considerable degree of certainty. In addition, verification
  testing conducted throughout the remedial action will assure
  that the substantive standards of the delisting program are met
  and that only nonhazardous wastes are removed from Subtitle C
  control.
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

PROTECTIVENESS

The selected remedy for Operable Unit One protects human health
by preventing contact with the soils and by ultimately reducing
the soil contamination to a lifetime risk level of 5 x 10"6 for
residents, which is within the range specified by EPA. A
groundwater pumping and treatment system must be implemented
together with this remedy to collect and treat the leached
arsenic.
The selected groundwater pumping and treatment remedy for
Operable Unit Two is protective of the environment and human
health. The system will minimize the flow of contaminated
groundwater to the Maurice River system. As a result, natural
flushing dynamics could mitigate the arsenic contamination
downstream. A well restriction area will be established during
remediation to minimize potential health threats.
The selected remedy for operable Unit Three is protective of            n
                                                                        ^
                                                                        2
human health. The remediation strategy specifies a three year
psnod to sss£ss the r^.v£r & niwursj. c^cansxng psirj-oimiancc. ±m.s
three year period will begin when the flow of arsenic-                  p
                                                                       fxj
contaminated groundwater from the site is effectively eliminated. .
                                                                             M
                                47                                           <J
                                                                             CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The exposed and submerged Blackwater Branch fioodplain will be
remediated during this three year period. If the Maurice river
contamination is sufficiently reduced during this period, human
health risks will have been reduced and remediation will not be
required. If the contamination has not flushed sufficiently,
then remediation will be undertaken to reduce human health risks.
Prior to removing any sediments, an environmental assessment will
be performed. Human health will be protected during this period
through the implementation of institutional controls. At the
completion of this cleanup, the risks will be below 1 x 10'5.
The interim remedy for Operable Unit Four is protective of human
health as the remediation strategy is based on public
accessibility. Sediments above the cleanup goals in accessible
areas will be removed, thus eliminating the principal exposure
pathway of ingestion. However, as arsenic-contaminated sediments
above the cleanup goals will remain in the lake, long-term
monitoring is required to assess sediment transport patterns.
COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE OR RELEVANT AND APPROPRIATE
REQUIREMENTS (ARARs):

The remedial objectives for Operable Units One, Three and Four
were developed based on the public health risk assessment
considering Federal and State ARARs. The risk based cleanup
level for plant site soils corresponds to the NJDEP "To Be
Considered" (TBC) criterion for arsenic cleanup in soils. It is
not required to cleanup to a TBC, therefore the cleanup standard
was established through health-based concerns. The cleanup goal
for Operable Unit Two is the MCL for arsenic established by the
Safe Drinking Water Act. This may need to be achieved by first
pumping to an ACL, if additional data show that pumping and
treatment is not more effective than natural attenuation, then
allowing the aquifer to naturally flush to reduce the arsenic
concentration to the MCL.
All excavation of soil above the cleanup goal will be executed in
accordance with Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, and
pertinent New Jersey floodplain area construction requirements.
The two RCRA surface impoundments are located within the flushing
zones. This CERCLA action will meet the substantive portions of
RCRA Clean Closure Requirements for these lagoons.
All dredging activities would be conducted so as to minimize
resuspension and erosion in order to comply with the requirement?
of the Federal Rivers and Harbors Act Section 10. Additionally,
dredging and excavation will avoid wetland areas where possible,
and wetland restoration will be iaplaaented for the disturbed
areas in order to comply with sections 401 and 404 of the Clean
Water Act. After the completion of remediation, any wetlands
                               48

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

that have been disturbed would be restored to their original
conditions.
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act requires that the
appropriate agency exercising jurisdiction over wildlife
resources, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, must be
consulted before undertaking any action that modifies a body of
water. Special attention must be given to the impact on wetlands
and floodplains (river and lake shores) in accordance with
Executive Orders 11990 and 11988. This is applicable to both
Operable Units Three and Four.
All of the selected remedies will comply with RCRA facility
standards and OSHA industry standards and regulation concerning
hazardous waste,
Supernatant from the dredging process and extractant from the
extraction process will be treated in accordance with Federal and
State ARARs prior to discharge. A New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) permit would not be required for
on-site discharge, but the permit conditions regarding arsenic
concentration would be met. The treated effluent would also meet
the New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards in terms of
arsenic and other conventional parameters (such as suspended
solids and pH) . The treated effluent would comply with the EPA
guidelines for disposal of dredged or fill material (40 CFR 230)
by restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and
biological integrity of river water in accordance with the Clean
Water Act (CWA Section 404). Reinjection of the treated water
will comply with the NJDEP's standard for reinjecting treated
water.
Sludge contaminated with arsenic will be generated in the
treatment systems associated with each operable unit. These
sludges would be transported in accordance with the Department of
Transportation (DOT) regulations regarding transport of a
hazardous waste and disposed of in accordance with applicable
RCRA regulations.
At the start of remedial design for any of the operable units a
Stage IA Survey, consisting of a comprehensive literature search,
will be conducted in accordance with the National Historic
Preservation Act.
Remedial activities upstream of Union Lake may flush arsenic
downstream to the lower Maurice River and Delaware Bay affecting
coastal resources below the Union Lake dam. The Coastal Zone
Management (CZM) Act will be considered during design to minimize
this affect. Accordingly, remedial activities will be evaluated
for consistency with the New Jersey CZM Plan.
                                                                    K)


                               49

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The discussion above dealt with pertinent ARARs to be considered
for all of the operable units. Extremely critical ARARs relative
to the implementation of the selected remedies at the Vineland
Chemical Company site are the RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions
(LDRs), which restrict the disposal of hazardous wastes. As
discussed previously, the contaminated soil, sediments and
groundwater within the study area are considered RCRA listed
wastes, and therefore LDRs are applicable. The following
determination incorporates pertinent factors in the LDRs.
In Operable Unit One, the contaminated soil will be excavated and
consolidated within flushing zones having contiguous
contamination prior to treatment. Thus, Operable Unit One is not
subject to LDRs.
The groundwater in Operable Unit Two will be treated to the MCL
for arsenic, and will no longer "contain" arsenic as stated in
the "contained in" rule. This treated groundwater may therefore
be disposed on land, in the in situ flushing leach fields, or may
be reinjected. Groundwater treated to this level may also be
disposed in surface water bodies, provided that the substantive
portions of NJPDES requirements are met. Since the groundwater
will be treated to the MCL for cadmium and TCE, in addition to
arsenic, this condition will be met.
The sediments in Operable Units Three and Four will be removed
prior to treatment, so that LDRs are applicable. In Operable
Unit Three, the delisted sediments will be disposed of on
undeveloped areas of the Vineland Chemical Company plant site, or
in the case of the floodplain sediments, within the areas of
excavation. The treated sediments from Operable Unit Four, Union
Lake, will be redeposited as fill for the excavated areas. All
of these disposal locations constitute on-site disposal, and
therefore the delisting authority will rest with EPA's Region II
Regional Administrator.
The treated sediment would be delisted if the material meets the
performance standards of the VHS model (0.32 mg/1 leachable
arsenic) and the most stringent risk-based arsenic level
established in the risk assessments for the sub-areas (20 mg/kg).
Delisting of the sediments would classified them as nonhazardous.
The NJDEP informed EPA that if the delisted material meets the 20
mg/kg arsenic concentration established in the risk assessment,
it would then be eligible for deposition on the plant site, or
within the excavation areas of the Blackwater Branch floodplain
and Union Lake.
Both the sediment extraction process and the groundwater             <
treatment system will produce a highly contaminated sludge, which   a:
will be treated. This sludge may be disposed of in a Subtitle C
hazardous landfill in accordance with the LDR requirements in       g
effect at the time of placement. However, it may be possible to .   NJ ^
                                                                      *•'}
                               50                                     C^
                                                                         CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

treat the sludges to render them nonhazardous. If this can be
accomplished, and if the delisting performance criteria discussed
above are met for the treated sludges, EPA would comply with the
administrative requirements to delist the treated sludges. This
would allow the treated and delisted sludges to be disposed of in
a nonhazardous landfill.
COST EFFECTIVENESS

The selected remedies afford high overall effectiveness
proportional to their costs.
In Situ Flushing is the least expensive means of achieving the
remedial objectives for Operable Unit One because it does not
require any substantial process implementation., other than
integration with the groundwater remediation system.
The selected groundwater remedy for Operable Unit Two is the
least expensive alternative because it takes the least time to
complete.
The selected remedy for Operable Unit Three utilizes water
extraction which is much less expensive than fixation. Further,
the preferred remedy specifies floodplain deposition and plant
site deposition, which are considerably less costly than the
landfilling options.
The selected interim remedy for Operable Unit Four is an
economical solution compared to the other alternatives entailing
removal and treatment. Although Alternative 5, In Situ Sand
Cover, is the least expensive alternative, it is less effective,
does not include treatment, and leaves arsenic in the remediated
areas.
UTILIZATION OF PERMANENT SOLUTIONS AND ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT
TECHNOLOGIES TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE

The selected remedial actions utilize permanent solutions and
treatment technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and
provide the best balance among the evaluation criteria of all the
alternatives available.
In Situ Flushing, the selected remedy for Operable Unit One, best
satisfies the evaluation criteria. It utilizes treatment and is
permanently effective once the arsenic passes from the soil into
the groundwater. Toxicity, mobility and volume of contaminants
would be reduced once cleanup goals are met. Fewer short-term
impacts are expected than with competing alternatives because            ^
less excavation is required. Implementation is not complex, but          ^
further testing is required. Cost is significantly lower than
other alternatives.                                                  o


                                                                    '5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

In addition, the capping alternative does not treat the
contaminated soil, nor is it permanent. The competing batch
treatment alternatives (fixation and extraction) require the
construction and operation of a treatment facility thus greatly
increasing the cost. Additionally, the fixation alternatives do
not reduce the toxicity or volume of contaminants. The competing
batch treatment alternatives are less imp lenient able than the
selected remedy due to the uncertainties of available off-site
nonhazardous landfill sites or the opposition (both public and
state) to construction of on-site landfills.
The use of groundwater pumping at a high flow rate (site
pumping), with treatment to remove the contaminants, followed by
reinjection and discharge, meets the evaluation criteria
successfully and provides for a permanent solution. Long-term
effectiveness and permanence would be achieved once the
groundwater cleanup goal is reached. Toxicity, mobility and
volume of the groundwater contaminants would be reduced, and the
flow of arsenic to the Maurice River system would be stopped.
Short-term effectiveness is achieved because the short-term risks
to on-site workers during and after installation are minimal. A
short period of time will be required to halt groundwater flow to
the Blackwater Branch after installation of the system.
Implementability is high in that reliable commercially available
operations are employed for pumping and treatment. The cost for
this alternative is significantly lower than that of the other
alternatives because the higher pumping rate results in the
shortest time to finish the cleanup. The competing alternatives
require significantly longer periods of remediation (as long as
75 years) resulting in increased costs.
For the exposed Blackwater Branch floodplain area, excavation of
the contaminated zones, subject to a floodplains/wetlands
assessment of the impacts of excavation, followed by water
extraction to remove arsenic, and redeposition of the cleaned
sediment as fill material in its former locations best meets the
evaluation criteria. By removing the contaminants from the
sediments to a safe level and disposing of contaminants at an
off-site hazardous waste facility, this alternative would
permanently protect human health and the environment, comply with
ARARs, and reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume of
contaminants. Implementability would be simple because only
commercially available equipment would be required. The cleaned
and delisted sediments would no longer be regarded as a waste.
This alternative is the least costly of the competing
alternatives.
Similarly, dredging the submerged sediments contaminated above
cleanup goals in the Biackvater Branch and the upper Maurice
River, followed by water extraction to remove arsenic, and
depositing the cleaned sediments in undeveloped areas of the
Vineland Chemical Company plant site meets the criteria. The
                               52

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

submerged Blackwater Branch sediments would be dredged, subject
to an assessment of the effects of dredging on the river ecology,
at about the same time that the exposed floodplain sediments are
remediated. Any submerged sediments contaminated above cleanup
goals remaining in the Maurice River above Union Lake would be
dredged after the three year natural flushing period, as
necessary, pending the results of an environmental assessment.
The dredged material would be extracted with water to remove
arsenic, and the cleaned sediments deposited in appropriate
undeveloped areas of the plant site. In addition, because
disposal of the cleaned sediment as clean fill for the remediated
river areas is not easily implementable, disposal would occur at
the Vineland Chemical Company plant site where cost would be
somewhat higher. Nonetheless, the overall cost is the lowest of
the implementable alternatives.
The chosen alternative for Operable Unit Three utilizes treatment
and will achieve a permanent solution. Since all of the
alternatives remove the same contaminated sediments at the same
action level, all would afford the same degree of health
protection. Competing fixation alternatives have higher
treatment and disposal costs with no increase in effectiveness.
Competing extraction alternatives have higher disposal costs with
no increase in protectiveness. Since extraction removes arsenic
from the sediments to the point where arsenic is no longer
leachable by water, floodplain or on-site disposal would pose no
threat from future leaching.
The selected remedy for Union Lake sediments, Operable Unit Four,
is an interim remedy to protect the public while further study is
performed. The interim remedy would begin after the submerged
river sediments have been remediated (if this is deemed necessary
after assessing the river's natural cleansing performance), to
avoid recontaminating areas of the lake. An interim remedy is
appropriate in this situation providing it does not result in any
of the following: directly cause additional migration of
contaminants; complicate the site cleanup, present an immediate
threat to public health or the environment; or interfere with,
preclude, or delay the final remedy, consistent with EPA's
priorities for taking further action. All of the alternatives
could be designed to meet the foregoing limitation except
Alternative 5 (In Situ Sand Covering), which could complicate or
delay any final remedy. Therefore, the remedy choice criteria
were used to select the best interim remedy from the remaining
alternatives.
Removal of sediments in Union Lake's periphery containing arsenic
at levels above cleanup goals, followed by extraction with water
to remove arsenic, and returning of the cleaned sediments to
their former locations in the Istke, vculd meet remedy choice
criteria. By reducing the sediment arsenic concentration to an
acceptable level, human health would be protected. Arsenic

                                                                s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

toxicity, mobility and volume in the lake would be reduced.
Since redistribution of the remaining arsenic contaminated
sediments is possible, long-term monitoring would be performed.
Short-term effectiveness is high with minimal and controllable
adverse impacts during removal and redeposition. This alternative
is simple to implement since it uses available commercial
equipment and reliable technology. Cost for this alternative is
the lowest among those which use treatment. The competing
fixation alternatives are less attractive as no decrease in
toxicity of arsenic is realized. The competing extraction
alternatives require acquisition of off-site landfill space or
construction of an on-site landfill, thus decreasing their
implementability.
In summary, the selected remedy for each of the four operable
units provides the best balance among the alternatives with
respect to the criteria used to evaluate remedies. Based on the
information available, EPA and NJDEP believe the selected
remedies are protective of human health and the environment,
attain ARARs, use permanent solutions and treatment technologies
to the maximum extent practicable and are cost-effective.
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for this site was released for public comment
in July 1989. The Proposed Plan identified the preferred
alternatives discussed in the ROD.
EPA reviewed all written and verbal comments submitted during the
public comment period. Upon review of these comments, it was
determined that no significant changes to the remedies, as they
were originally identified in the Proposed Plan, were necessary.




                               54

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                VINELAND
                CHEMICAL
                COMPANY




SCALE 1.24000
                      BASE MAP PREPARED BY U.&O.S., 1077

                             U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                         AGENCY
                                       uncmiUML. uumrANT 511
                                                                o
                                                                o
                                                           r^
                                         FIGURE 1          Vi
                                                           CD
                               VINELAND CHEMICAL
                                     ONE MILE RADIUS


                           EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      (APPROXIMATE LIMITS OF FLOODING)

                                                                                         I
                                                                                 :
                                                                 ir/r../ - g \
                                                         Li^gVVHEAT  ROAD -_JiMk__L
                                                                                     v
                                                                  4TROAD




                                    FORMER OUTDOOR
                                    STORAGE AREA




                                                                                                  R     RESIDENCES
                                                                                                        VICHEM PROPERTY BOUNDARY
                                                                                                  LL    LINED LAGOON
                                                                           V-.STUDY               UL    UNLINED LAGOON
                                                                           n^A
                                                                           ^•IBOUNDARY



                                                                                                          0       100   200      300
I   i   '   COOP                                                                                          I   .           I . I . I
                                                                                                              SCALE IN FEET

                   FORMER OUTDOOR   x   x' \
              i     STORAGE AREA                                                             TOPOGRAPHIC BASE PREPARED FOR U.S. ARMY CORPS
                                                                                             ENGINEERS BY KUCERA INTERNATIONAL, JANUARY 1
                                                                                                      U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                                  AGENCY

                                                                                                   VIN6LAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE



                                                                                                                  FIGURE 2
                                                                                                       VINEUAND CHEMICAL COMPANY
                                                                                                                SITE PLAN


                                                                                                 EBASCO SERVICES INCOnPOHATEO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                              NORTH
EW   20




                          :
                     !(       ^^K        - -
                    i/;e^ ;^s,/^Cx
                  J*-^-"n-
                                          —
                           -: -•-^**z• \\Y '
                                                                                                                  u - UNDETECTED
                                                                                                                  X • HEJECTED DATA

                                                                                                                      6    TRIPLE WELL CLUSTER 18]

                                                                                                                      8    DOUBLE WELL CLUSTER (6)

      z^^'Tr ^^f/:*KJ^
      [•^^if-^v-P^'-"---^ :'..J_•y.^.^^feifi.^k/k^^ /I„',-;-;JiT^;;"
      ![—'- ..—rgBx—. — ..=,.-1 .
                                ...
                                  ..i
                                    ^          ^^-   s>i __^   - p i . ^ N , /ff        ^ j-;. "t^.,:"^.,
                                                                                                                      « SURFACE SOIL SAMPLING LOCATIONS

                                                                                                                      *    SOIL BORING LOCATIONS
                              5                           5 / li i " : • ;/              H      ;                 !""«       100' GRID
     * L--—------t"
          fc^rr'
          7           .^r.L-^rn'f-i
                    .- /^E™- I. •-==sf,™:V \
                                         ;
                                             :
                                               -A -^S
                                               I  ij^=—^-y);
                                                             /" nr,,-L:_tinr                                      0
                                                                                                                      •B     200" GRID
     •',^4-
        » T •,^^=^_|Tx:|^-
                ; ^^Jt-j©^ .J^^5&^^_^^-^
                             iJss^-^-^'^Lr"'^         ^
                                         - V-| . ^ ,-^/f
                                               *                 ""       iiffl   UU_ : - = = . . . •   ; „

      l—^'-^^J-^^....._-.'         P"'" Tii '.Lj^"1^8^' •       .^-   "",;• f (TTTS---d".'- T.^///
      S>T^P^                       7^ -^^^^p4i^l^:^-l!
                                          T> ;;/ r   r
      s-- - -^^r"?^^ '"" . '• - ^^y^ - • ^ ,
      i                       :I
                          -JL -i • —.    -\        r~x • .            y      / f .--"I



                                                                                                                U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                                            AGENCY

                                                                                                               VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE


                                                                                                                               FIGURE 3
                                                                                                                       SURFACE SOIL
                                                                                                                  ARSENIC CONCENTRATIONS

                                                                 •v^-^?^^^XN X4| ~
                                                                                                              EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORAT

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     NORTH




.\\\^      ' "^y ]y*0/''-T, ','".'    jV \    !' ;'\       .-• ->\       GflOUNDWATER        [ A S ] : ppb
VS\     _ .-/I r-'f *Jj. ~^\ ^       *-\! \            \       'I
                                                                         U = UNDETECTED

                                                                         Q       TRIPLE WELL CLUSTER (81

                                                                         [X]     DOUBLE WELL CLUSTER (61

                                                                         ^5     STREAM GAUGE STATIONS

                                                                          4.    EXISTING MONITORING WELLS [ I 1)

                                                                          »     PRODUCTION WELL (II

                                                                          D     HART W E L L (11




                                                                                             100     200     300

                                                                                          SCALE IH P E E T

                                                                     TOPOG RAPHIC BASE PREPARED FOM US. ARMY CORPS OF
                                                                     ENGINEERS BY KUCERA INTERNATIONAL. J A N U A R Y 1966.
                                                                               U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL P R O T E C T I O '
                                                                                           AGENCY

                                                                               VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SIT



                                                                                           FIGURE 4
                                                                          A V E R A G E ARSENIC CONCENTRATIC
                                                                                        SHALLOW WELLS


                                                                         E8ASCO S E R V I C E S INCORPORA-

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       NORTH




                                    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                AGENCY

                                    VINEI.AND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE


                                                 FIGURE 5
KEY:                            MEAN SURFACE SEDIMENT ARSENIC RESULTS
  SURFACE SEDIMENT |AS1 - ppm           BLACKWATER BRANCH
  U •= UNDETECTED                              PHASE II
               DATA
                                  EBASCO S E R V I C E S I N C O R P O R A T E D
               200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                AGENCY

                                    VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE
                                                                        2
                                                                        fer

                                              FIGURE e
KEY:                            MEAN SURFACE SEDIMENT ARSENIC RESULTS
  SURFACE SEDIMENT (AS) - ppm           NORTH OF UNION LAKE
  U - UNDETECTED                               PHASE II                 •0
  X - REJECTED DATA                                                     C£
                                  EBASCO   SERVICES   INCORPORATED
                                                                        (J5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             MILLVILLE



                                NORTH

 UNION
 LAKE
  DAM




                                          U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
           MAURICE RIVER                              AGENCY
              COVE     «
                                         VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE
DELAWARE        BAY

                                                   r i va v-i n c /

KEY.                                    SURFACE SEDIMENT ARSENiC RESULTS
  SURFACE SEDIMENT [AS! = ppm                 SOUTH OF UNION LAKE          C"
  U - UNDETECTED                                     PHASE II              If.!
                                                                           O
  X - REJECTED DATA
                                        EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED
                                                                           c

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             ^.-. . i ESTIMATED POOl SIZE AT
            j'f. •' I THE DRAWDOWN CONDITION

                   EBASCO SAMPLING STATION

              48   NJOEP SAMPLING STATION


        U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                    AGENCY

        VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE


                     FIGURE 8
            ARSENIC CONCENTRATIONS
             IN SURFICIAL SEDIMENTS
            (NJOEP AND EBASCO. 1986)


       EBASCO S E R V I C E S   INCORPORATED




10ST

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                SEDIMENTS CONTAINING
                                     K03I WASTE




                                       ARE THE
LAND DISPOSAL             NO                              YES
                                 • SEGMENTS BSNG-
IS RESTRICTEO                         TREATED7



                                                                           TREATMENT




                                                                                                           [HAS A
                                                                           < 0.32 mg/1
                                                                                                        BOAT LEVEL
                                                                           ARSENIC W                                                    LAND DISPOSAL
                                                                                                    -    BEEN SET
                                                                           EPTOMCfTY                                                   IS RESTRICTED
                                                                                                     FOR K 031 WASTE
                                                                           LEACHATE?
                                                                                                      BY MAY 8, 1990?
                                    MATERIAL EUGBLE
                                     FORDHJSTNG                                                              YES




                                           I
                                       IS DISPOSAL        YES                                YES     DOES IEP TOXICnY
                                                                                                      LEAOHATE MEET •
                                         ON-SfTE?                      1                 1         TREATABBJTYVAR1A1MCE?           1



                                                              DBJST1NG
                                                                       T                 T
                                                                               MATERIAL IS EUGBLE
                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                           LAND DtSPOSAL
      DELETING                                              PERFORM ED BY         FOR DtSPOSAL M                           B RESTRICTED
 PERFORMED BY N.IDEP                                       USEPA REGION I     IN A RCRA SUBTTTLE tT
                                                       REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR         FAdJTY
                                                                                                           ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY

                                                                                                          VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SmE
        NONHAZARDOUS                                            NONHAZARDOUS
          DISPOSAL                                                DISPOSAL
                                                                                                                        FIGURE 9
                                                                                                            RCRA DtSPOSAL CONSIDERATIONS
  (a)     A TRtATAUILITY VARIANCE WILL BE ESTABLISHED, IF NECESSARY,
          DURING DESIGN BASED ON DATA FROM PILOT-SCALE STUDIES.
                                                                                                            EBASCO SERVICES MCORI>ORA,TED

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

NORTH




LEGEND :

  £3 ZONE 1-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF 2'

  £3 ZONI:- Z-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF F

  0    ZONE 3-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF ff

  ^ZONE ^-CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF 8'

 ^     ZONE 5-COHTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF 10'

 r^j   ZONE 5   -CONTAMINATION TO A DEPTH OF 5'


 H     A R E A S OF NON-EXCAVATION

 Q ACTIVE LINED LAGOONS




                  SCALE IN FEET
                    100     ?00




        U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTHCT
                    AGENCY

       VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE


                   FIGURE 10

                 ZONES OF SOIL
                CONTAMINATION


     EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         sn -s?
SB-51




                      — AWflOXIMATl LIMITS OF FLOODING            sb-*£'      ^tt-it-';                     U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                    V . <^
                                                                              •".o-rldrMi'.          "^                 AGENCY
                  0        SEDIMENT SAMPLE LOCATION               e-7 n«ii
                                                                  1 < t?«31   ^»-4T>7l    v
                                                                                                    X
                                                                  «-«I:MMI     4-rllTSI

                                                                   r                                        VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE
              Hi l - 4f " T
              [       ~]   «-« F E E T
                  U    UNHF T f C T E D                                                                                   FIGURE 11

                                                                                          IM F«T
                                                                                                                 AREA OF BLACKWATER
                                                                                    80        100         BRANCH FLOODPLAIN TO (BE REMEDIATED


        300       NIA                                                                                      EBASCO S E R V I C E S I N C O R P O R A T E D

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             REMEDIATION CRITERIA
                                                              REMEDIATION OF ALL SED1MEHTS WITH AN
                                                             ARSENIC CONCENTRATION OF 20 MG/KG Ofl
                                                             GREATER UNDERLYING A WATE» DEPTH OF 5'.
                                                             REMEDIATION OF ALL SEDIMENTS WITH AN
                                                             ARSENIC CONCENTRATION OF rt> MG/KG OR
                                                             GREATER UNDERLYING A MINIMUM WATER
                                                             DEPTH Of 3.5'. CONTINUING UP TO A 5' WATER
                                                             DEPTH WITHIN 150 OF THE SHORELINE.

                                                REMAINDER    REMEDIATION OF ALL SEDIMENTS WITH AN
                                               Of THE LAKE   ARSEINJC CONCENTRATION OF 120 MC/KQ OH
                                                             GREATER UNDERLYING A MINIMUM WATER
                                                             DEPTH OF 3.5'. CONTINUING UP TO A I WATER
                                                             DEPTH WITHIN 150' OF THE SHORELINE.
TENNIS AND     LEGEND
SAILING CLUB
               —10'—    BATHYMEVRIC CONTOUR



                                                                U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
               SEDIMENTS MEETING REMEDIATION                                AGENCY
               CRITERIA IN ZONE 1                              VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITF
               SEDIMENTS MEETING REMEDIATION
               CRITERIA IN ZONE 2
               SEDIMENTS MEETING REMEDIATION
               CRITERIA IN THE REMAINDER OF                          UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS
               THE LAKE                                                TO BE REMEDIATED


                                                              EEASCO S E R V I C E S INCOFIPORATI

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                TABLE 1
  PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS AT THE VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE


  DATE                             ACTIVITY
1978        Vineland Chemical Company commissioned a surface
            geophysical survey of the plant site at the
            direction of NJDEP.

1979-1980   NJDEP initiated a sampling program in the Blackwater
            Branch and the Maurice River.

1979        NJDEP collected soil samples from the plant site
            area.
1981        NJDEP performed a surface geophysical survey of the
            plant site.

1982        Vineland Chemical Company commissioned a groundwater
            investigation at the plant site.
1982        New Jersey Department of Health conducted a
            "Cross-Sectional Evaluation of Arsenic Exposure and
            Toxicity at the Vineland Chemical Company".

1982        Vineland Chemical Company commissioned a pumping
            test to be performed on the shallow aquifer
            underlying the plant site.

1980-1982   Studies conducted by NJDEP and Rutgers University to
            determine any seasonal chemical stratification of
            Union Lake.
1983-1985   Rutgers University conducted study to determine
            speciation of arsenic in Union Lake.

1986        Vineland Chemical commissioned a pumping test to be
            performed in the deeper groundwater below the site.
March 1988 USEPA's Environmental Photographic Information
           Center (EPIC) produced a report presenting an aerial
           photographic analysis of the Vineland Chemical
           Company plant site and surrounding area.
1988        U S E P A ' s E n v i r o n m e n t a l Response Team prepared a
            bioassessment on the Blackwater Branch and the Upper
            Maurice River.




                                                                               ..C

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                          TABLE 2


                                           RI AND FS REPORTS PREPARED FOR THE VINE.1.AND_CHEMIC_AL COMPANY SITE



                                                                       MEDIA                                         REVISED         FINAL
     TITLE                              AREAS                      INVEST IGATEJL           _.DRAFT__               _DRAF_T_       _JRAFJ_

Plant S i t e SI              ViChem Plant Site                Soi 1 , Groundw.iter          7/19/RB                3/10/89        6/23/89

River Areas RI                Blackwater Branch, Maurice       Sediment, Surface Water,      9/8/R8                 2/17/89        6/23/89
                              River between Blackwater         Biota
                              Branch and Union Lake,
                              Maurice River below Union
                              Lake to Delaware Bay

Union lake Rl 1               Union Lake                       Sediment, Surface Water.      6/21/88                4/28/89        6/23/89
                                                               Biota

Plant Site FS                 ViChem Plant Site                Soil. Groundwater             9/20/88                3/10/89        6/23/89


River Areas FS'               Blackwater Branch,               Sediment                       10/5/88               4/27/89        6/23/89
                              Maurice River between
                              Blackwater Branch and
                              Union Lake

Union Lake FS                 Union Lake                       Sediment                       1/18/89               4/14/89        6/23/89




1    R i s k assessment submitted on April 20, 1987. First Draft RI submitted on March 13, 1988. The June 21, 1988'RI incorporated the f i r s t
     revised r i s k assessm.'nt.

2    No FS Report is beimj prepared for       the Maurice River below Union Lake.     Sampling in this area was confirmations! only.




                   ZOO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         TABLE 3
                              SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                                         IN SOILS
SURFACE SOILS                                      MINIMUM     MAXIMUM
                                                   DETECTED    DETECTED
                                                   CONCEN-     CONCEN-
COMPOUND                                           TRATION     TRATION
** Class:        VOLATILES (ppb)
Methylene chloride                                     5.2         5.2
Chloroform                                             2           6
* * \^
    fiA a.,   • . LjLtn
          o o„_     P"»   '    " '

Diethylphthalate                                     370         370
Butyl benzyl phthalate                               760         840
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                            45         180
**Class:       PEST/PCB (ppb)
Dieldrin                                             39           39
4,4-DDT                                              20           39
**Class:       INORGANICS        (ppb)
Aluminum                                            766         3260
Arsenic                                               0.43       650
Barium                                                2 .3        12
Calcium                                              43         1150
Chromium                                              4           13
Copper                                                3           45
Iron                                               1230         4490
Lead                                                  2           12
Magnesium                                            46          197
Manganese                                             4 .6        35
Mercury                                               0.1         11. 3
Nickel                                                8.8         26. 4
Potassium                                           388          538.
Sodium                                               54          244 .
Vanadium                                              6.6          8. 4
Zinc                                                  5.6         33.

SUBSURFACE SOILS
** Class:       VOLATILES (ppb)
Methylene chloride                                    1       113900        ^-<
                                                                            •v.
Acetone                                              60          270        M
                                                      rt
                                                      O           45       —
1,1-Dichloroethene                                   16           16       0
Chloroform                                            1            3      • o

                                                                            -OS
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             TABLE 3 (Conf d)
                    SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                               IN SOILS

SUBSURFACE SOILS                        MINIMUM     MAXIMUM
VOLATILES (CONT'D)                      DETECTED    DETECTED
                                        CONCEN-     CONCEN-
COMPOUND                                TRATION     TRATION

2-Butanone                              27000       285560
Trichloroethene                            32           32
Benzene                                     2           52
Bromoform                                   1            2
4-Methyl-2-Pent3ncne                        5            5
2-Hexanone                                  6            6
Tetrachloroethene                          12           80
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane                   3            3
Toluene                                     5         3470
**Class:    BNA (ppb)
Benzoic acid                              160          160
Diethylphthalate                           60          480
Di-n-Buthylphthalate                      330          560
Benzo(a)Anthracene                        160          160
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                 40         1500
Chrysene                                  200          200
Di-n-octyl phthalate                      460          460
Benzo(b)fluoranthene                      550          550

**Class:    PEST/PCB (ppb)
Beta-BHC                                   13           17
Endosulfan I                                8.2          8.2
4-4-DDE                                     0-18         0.18
Endrin                                      0.33         2.9

**Class:    INORGANICS   (ppm)

Aluminum                                  145         5760
Antimony                                   35           39
Arsenic                                     0.581      482
Barium                                      1           40
Beryllium                                   0.2          0. 2
Cadmium                                     0.6          1, 06
Calcium                                    30          891
Chromium                                    2.4         34
Cobalt                                      3.4         14
Copper                                      1.8         24
                                          472        25900
Lead                                        1.2         23       o
                                                                 ro


                                                                 ;••*>
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           TABLE 3 (Cont'd)
                    SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                               IN SOILS
SUBSURFACE SOJLS                      MINIMUM         MAXIMUM
INORGANICS (CONT'D)                   DETECTED        DETECTED
                                      CONCEN-         CONCEN-
COMPOUND                              TRATION (pom)   TRATION
(ppm)
Magnesium                                 49              282
Manganese                                  1.9             63
Mercury                                    0.1              1.2
Nickel                                     6.3             19
                                         104              940
Selenium                                   0.6             10
Silver                                     2.4              4.1
Sodium                                    44             4890
Vanadium                                   1.9             26
Zinc                                       2.8             49


BUILDING #9 SOILS

**Class:    VOLATILES   (ppb)

Methylene chloride                        7                31
Acetone                               15000             15000
Toluene
**Class:    BNA (ppb)
Di-n-Butylphthalate                       97              690

**Class:    INORGANICS (ppm)
Aluminum                                 453             2223
Arsenic                                    7.50          1921
Barium                                     1                4
Chromium                                   2                5
Iron                                    1005             2293
Lead                                       3.8              3.8
Manganese                                 2                10
Sodium                                  533              2798
Vanadium                                  2.1               5.2
Zinc                                      6                48



                                                                  o




1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             TABLE 4
                 SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED IN
                     CHICKEN COOP DUST SAMPLES
                               mq/kQ
                                       MINIMUM      MAXIMUM
                                       DETECTED     DETECTED
                                       CONCEN-      CONCEN-
COMPOUND                               TRATION      TRATION
**Class:    INORGANICS
Aluminum                                 1680         3570
Antimony                                     4.3        55
Arsenic                                   114         5120
Barium                                     22          277
Beryllium                                    1.1         1.1
Cadmium                                      1.2       125
Calcium                                 17700       585000
Chromium                                     4.6        83
Cobalt                                       2.3        13
Copper                                      18         285
Iron                                     6240       118000
Lead                                        23         289
Magnesium                                1480         3090
Manganese                                 138          567
Mercury                                      0.73       12,2
Nickel                                      20         108
Potassium                                1900         4590
Selenium                                     0.16         0.7
Silver                                       4.3         4 .7
Sodium                                    822         8980
Thallium                                     0.11         0.3
Vanadium                                     4.1        46
Zinc                                      370         1100




                                                                M


                                                                o
                                                                CD
                                                                N)




                                                                    QD
                                                                    US

1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              TABLE 5
                    SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                            IN GROUNDWATER
                                        MINIMUM        MAXIMUM
SHALLOW GROUNDWATER                     DETECTED       DETECTED
                                        CONCEN-        CONCEN-
                                        TRATION        TRATION
COMPOUND                                 (ppb)          (ppb)
**CLASS: VOLATILES
METHYLENE CHLORIDE                          10           10
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE                           2.7          2.7
CHLOROFORM                                   1            1
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE                        1.4         17
  PROPENE
TRICHLOROETHENE                              1.3        1600
BROMOFORM                                    2 .2         2 .2
TETRACHLOROETHENE                            0 .5         4
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLORO-                         9 .3         9.3
  ETHANE
ETHYLBENZENE                                 0 .5         0.6
TOTAL XYLENES                                1.8          3.4

**CLASS: SNA
DIETHYLPHTHALATE                             4            4
DI-n-BUTYLPHTHALATE                          0.4          0.4
BIS[2-EHTYLHEXYL]                            1.7          5.8
  PHTHALATE
DI-n-OCTYL PHTHALATE
**CLASS: PEST/PCB
BETA-BHC                                     0.09         0.09
GAMMA-BHC                                    3           13
HEPATCHLOR                                  12           12
ENDOSULFAN I                                 0.557        0.557
4-4-DDT                                      0.23         0.23
ENDRIN KETONE                                0.03         0.21

**CLASS: INORGANICS
ALUMINUM                                    33          334000
ANTIMONY                                    58           10400
ARSENIC                                      2 . 100     12600
BARIUM                                       3             224
BERYLLIUM                                    4               4

                                                                  o
                                                                  to

                                                                  CS
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        TABLE 5   (Confd)
                 SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                         IN GROUNDWATER
                                    MINIMUM       MAXIMUM
SHALLOW GROUNDWATER                 DETECTED      DETECTED
                                    CONCEN-       CONCEN-
                                    TRATION       TRATION
COMPOUND                             (pPb)         (ppb)
CADMIUM                                  4            457
CALCIUM                                605          11700
CHROMIUM                                14.4          399
COBALT                                   9.4           90
COPPER                                  19.7         3050
IRON                                     6 . 02    430000
LEAD                                     2.9         3010
MAGNESIUM                              180           8450
MANGANESE                               21           1710
MERCURY                                  0.25          13.2
NICKEL                                   7.4          368
POTASSIUM                              532           8140
SELENIUM                                 1.9          376
SILVER                                  51             51
SODIUM                                1140          58000
VANADIUM                                12.6          567
ZINC                                    19.3          686
INTERMEDIATE GROUNDWATER
                                    MINIMUM       MAXIMUM
                                    DETECTED      DETECTED
                                    CONCEN-       CONCEN-
                                    TRATION       TRATION
COMPOUND                             (ppb)         (ppb)
*"CLASS: VOLATILES
ACETONE                                170         180
CARBON DISULFIDE                        17          17
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE                       2.4         2.4
CHLOROFORM                               1           6.7
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE                    2           3
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE                     2           2
TRICHLOROETHENE                          1         260
BENZENE                                  1.3         8
TETRACHLOROETHENE                        0.2         0.2
**CLASS: BNA


                                                              o
                                                              o

                                                               cr-
1004K                                                         r.?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE 5   (Cont'd)
                    SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                            IN GROUNDWATER

                                      MINIMUM         MAXIMUM
                                      DETECTED        DETECTED
                                      CONCEN-         CONCEN-
                                      TRATION         TRATION
COMPOUND                               (ppb)           (ppb)

DIETHYLPHTHALATE                           2             2
IDENO[1,2,3-CD]PYRENE                     20            20

**CLASS: PEST/PCB
GAMMA-BHC                                     6          6
HEPATCHLOR                                    0.584      0. 584
ENDOSULFAN I                                  0.765      1. 857
4-4-ODD                                       0.038      0. 038
4-4-DDT                                       0.53       1. 06
ENDRIN KETONE                                 0.02       0. 37
AROCHLOR 1254                                 2.1       17

**CLASS: INORGANICS (ppm)

ALUMINUM                                  94             5070
ANTIMONY                                  62               62
ARSENIC                                    4 .4        394000
BARIUM                                     9.3            155
CADMIUM                                    6.4           9580
CALCIUM                                 1100             9950
CHROMIUM                                  92               14,
COBALT                                    16               18
COPPER                                    17               82
IRON                                     388            38600
LEAD                                       3              110
MAGNESIUM                                438             3400
MANGANESE                                 22              986
MERCURY                                    0.2              0.
NICKEL                                    14               37
POTASSIUM                                534            14000
SELENIUM                                   1.5             13
SILVER                                    60               60
SODIUM                                  2620           432000
ZINC                                      19.1             72

DEEP GROUNDWATER

** CLASS:   VOLATILES

                                                                   2
CHLOROFORM                                    2              2
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE                          119            1.9
                                                                       OS
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           TABLE 5   (Confd)
                    SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                            IN GROUNDWATER
                                       MINIMUM        MAXIMUM
                                       DETECTED        DETECTED
                                       CONCEN-        CONCEN-
                                       TRATION        TRATION
COMPOUND                                (ppb)           (ppb)
DEEP GROUNDWATER
** CLASS:     BNA

  PHTHALATE                                    2.4          2 .4

** CLASS:     PEST PCB
4_4_DDT                                        0.38          0.38
ENDRIN KETONE                                  0.12          0.28

** CLASS:     INORGANICS
ALUMINUM                                  495            4580
ANTIMONY                                  330             330
ARSENIC                                     4              34
BARIUM                                     26             280
CADMIUM                                     4 .9            4 .9
CALCIUM                                   708           57900
CHROMIUM                                   14              36.4
COPPER                                     52.6            82 .9
IRON                                      470            4970
LEAD                                        3. 6           99.3
MAGNESIUM                                 180            3860
MANGANESE                                                  93.8
MERCURY                                     0.26            0.26
NICKEL                                     35              67
POTASSIUM                                 605           52700
SILVER                                      7               7
SODIUM                                   4540          236000
ZINC                                       21              78.1




                                                                    o
                                                                    o
                                                                    ro




1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 6
                  SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED
                          SURFACE WATER
                             PHASE II


                                           MINIMUM         MAXIMUM
                                           DETECTED        DETECTED
COMPOUND                                 CONCENTRATION   CONCENTRATION

**CLASS; VOLATILES (ug/1)
  Methyl Chloride                           4.0                 4.0
  Trans-1.- 2-Dichloroethene                9,o                 9. 0
  Trichloroethene                           2.0                11.0
  Benzene                                   4.0                 4.0
  4-Methyl-2-Pentanone                      3.0                 4.0
  Di-n-Butylphthalate                       2.0                 2.0
  Bis[2-Ethlhexyl]Phthalat                  0.6                 6.0
  Di-n-Octyl Phthalate                      8.0                 8.0
  Gamma-BHC                                 0.004               0.004


 'CLASS: INORGANICS (ug/1)

  Aluminum                                 132.0             1110.0
  Antimony                                  18.0               38.0
  Arsenic                                    2.2             6200.0
  Barium                                    32.0              148.0
  Beryllium                                  2.4                2.4
  Cadmium                                    4.6                4.6
  Calcium                                 3170.0           207000.0
  Chromium                                   7.7               56.0
  Cobalt                                    51.0               66.0
  Copper                                    11.0               87.0
  Iron                                     124.0             3660.0
  Lead                                       2.3               29.4
  Magnesium                               1600.0           591000.0
  Manganese                                 18.3              129.0
  Mercury                                    0.2                0.8
  Nickel                                     7.9              112.0
  Potassium                                405.0           232000.0
  Selenium                                   0.5                2.4
  Silver                                     9.6               35.0
  Sodium                                  3580.0          6092000.0
  Thallium                                   0.6                1.3
  Vanadium                                   6.5               60.0
  Zinc                                       8.0               74.1




1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 7

                 SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED IN
               SURFACE SEDIMENTS: 0-1 FT. SAMPLES
                             PHASE._II


                                           MINIMUM         MAXIMUM
                                           DETECTED        DETECTED
COMPOUND                                 CONCENTRATION   CONCENTRATION
**CLASS: VOLATILES (ug/kg)
  Methyl Chloride                            3                  3
  Carbon Disuiride                           4                  4
  2-Butanone                                 3                 13
  Toluene                                    3                260

**CLASS: BNA (ug/kg)
  Bis[2-Chloroethyl]Ether                  860                860
  Benzoic Acid                             310                310
  Acenaphthylene                            67                 83
  Acenaphthene                             450                450
  Dibenzofuran                             350                350
  Diethylpthalate                           42                 67
  Fluorene                                 620                620
  Phenanthrene                             150               2100
  Anthracene                               170                350
  Di-n-Butylphthalate                       42                 67
  Fluoranthrene                             30               1100
  Pyrene                                    32               1200
  Benzo[a]Anthracene                       110                200
  Chrysene                                 190                670
  Benzo[b]Fluoranthene                     210                370
  Benzo[a]Pyrene                           150                170
  Indeno[1,2,3-CD]Pyrene                    83                 83
  Benzo[G,H,I]Perylene                      83                 83


** CLASS:   PEST/PCB (ug/kg)
  Gamma-BHC                               230                 230
  4_4_DDD                                  13                  45
  Endosulfan Sulfate                       23                  23
  4-4-DDT                                  32                  32




                                                                         CD

1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       TABLE 7 (Cont'd)
                SUMMARY OF CHEMICALS DETECTED IN
              SURFACE SEDIMENTS: 0-1 FT. SAMPLES
                            PHASE II


                                    MINIMUM          MAXIMUM
                                    DETECTED         DETECTED
COMPOUND                          CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRATION

**CLASS: INORGANICS (mg/kg)
 Aluminum                           262               25965
 Arsenic                              1                3760
 Bariurn                              9                 810
 Beryllium                            1.6                 1.6
 Cadmium                              1.2                12.0
 Calcium                             10.0              5480.0
 Chromium                             3.1                 6.8
 Cobalt                               6.0               119.0
 Iron                                80.0             39000.0
 Lead                                 1.9               337.0
 Magnesium                           64.0              1440.0
 Manganese                            7.2               102.0
 Mercury                              0.2                 2.7
 Nickel                               1.5                17.0
 Potassium                          380.0               380.0
 Silver                               4 .4                4.4
 Sodium                             337.0               846.0
 Vanadium                             4.1                49.9
 Zinc                                 4.1               162.0




                                                                   o
                                                                   o



1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE 8

                        CONCENTRATION RANGES (ug/1) OF TOTAL,
                          DISSOLVED AND PARTICULATE ARSENIC
                              IN UNION LAKE- WATER SAMPLES


                                  Dissolved As        Particulate As    Total As
NJDEP (September, 1982-1983)

Upper Lake water                                                          36 - 267
Mid-Lake water                                                            27 - 100
Lowe r LoK e wa i_e L

PHASE I (June - July, 1986)

Upper Lake water                  44{R) - 5 0 ( R )    16 - 21         65(R) - 6 6 ( R )
  (EL-1, EL-2)

Mid-Lake water                       48 - 67          3.8 - 9.9           54 - 71

Lower Lake water                     48 - 75            5 - 10.2          54 - 81
  (EL-9 through EL-13)




PHASE II (January, 1987)

Upper Lake water                     21 - 41              MA               20 - 187
  (EL-28 through EL-30)

Mid-Lake water                       10-22               NA                11 - 26


Lower Lake water                     14-16               NA                12 - 126
  (EL-9 through EL-13)
                                                                                           z

NA - Not Applicable or Available                                                           o
                                                                                           o
(R) - Rejected value                                                                       to   JT
                                                                                                fnt
                                                                                                5
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 TABLE 9
               CONCENTRATION RANGES (mq/Rq) OF TOTAL
                         ARSENIC LEVELS IN
                    UNIQN LAKE SEDIMENT SAMPLES


NJDEP SAMPLING (August, 1986)

                                                  Total As

        Lakeshore sediments in less than           0 - 1273
        10 feet of water
        (193 sample locations)



PHASE I (June - July,   1986)


        Upper Lake sediment                       36 - 65
          (EL-1, EL-2)

        Mid-Lake sediment                              12
          (EL-5)

        Lower Lake sediment                       14 - 107
          (EL-9 through 13)




                                                              o
                                                              o
                                                              10
                                                                     G-
                                                                     ^j
                                                                   ..O
1004K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          TABLE 10
              REMEDIATION ARSENIC CLEANUP GOALS

                                                  CLEANUP
                                                   GOAL
PLANT SITE
o   Soils                                         20 mg/kg
o   Groundwater                                   50 ug/1
RIVER AREAS
o   Exposed Sediment                               20 mg/kg
o   Submerged Sediment                            120 mg/kg
UNION LAKE
o   Submerged Sediment                            120 mg/kg




                                                              o
                                                              o
                                                              K5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                         TABLE 11
                                                                      OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                          SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE
                                                                                                                     ALTERNATIVE SC-3A                           ALTERNATIVE SC-3B
                                                                              ALTERNATIVE SC-2                      EXCAVATION/FIXATION/                        EXCAVATION/FIXATION/
                                           ALTERNATIVE SC-1                      MULTILAYER                               OFF-SITE                                  ON-SITE
ASSESSMENT       FACTORS                      NO ACTION                        CAPPING SYSTEM                       NONHAZARDOUS LANDFILL                      NONHAZARDOUS LANDFILL
Short-Term Effectiveness
  -    Protection of coirinunity           No short-term threats to           Potential for direct contact          Same as Alternative SC-2                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2
       during remedial actions             communities                        of spilled waste and in-
                                                                              halation of fugitive dust
       P r o t e c t i o n o f workers     Personnel protection equipment     Minimal risk to workers,              Same as Alternative SC-2                    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2
       during r e m e d i a t i o n        required against dermal contact    Personnel protection equip-
                                           and inhalation during sign         ment required against direct
                                           posting and inspection             contact with wastes and
                                                                              inhalation of fugitive dust.
  -    Environmental impacts               No temporary adverse               Increase in traffic, noise            Same as Alternative SC-2                   Minimal increase in
                                           environmental impacts              and air pollution                                                                t r a f f i c noise and .lir
                                                                                                                                                               polluti on.

  -     Time until remediation             Many years (probably decades)      Estimated to be 1 year from     Same as Alternative SC-2                          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2
                                                                              start of construction to
                                                                              completion of remediation work.
Long-Term E f f e c t i v e n e s s

  -    Magnitude of residual               Existing impacts on the en-        Significant reductions in en-         Due to removal and treatment of        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
       ri sks                              vironment from the contaminated    vironmental impacts due to            contaminated s o i l s , environmental
                                           s o i l s would continuously       containment of contaminants           impacts would be eliminated.
                                           persist. Significant risk to       and reduction of leachate             Treatment of soils to below health-
                                           human health remains from          to the groundwater. Signifi-          risk based levels.
                                           potential contact with con-        cant reduction in risk to
                                           taminated s o i l s .              human health from potential
                                                                              contact with contaminated s o i l s .

  -    Adequacy of control                 Depends on success in prevent-     Requires long-term monitoring         Proven technologies                        Proven t e c h n o l o g i e s .
                                           ing access to site                 and 5-year reviews. Always                                                       Long-term landfill
                                                                              potential for failure.                                                           maintenance is required.

  -    R e l i a b i l i t y of controls   Signs would have to be replaced    Periodic cap maintenance              Technologies are highly reliable.           Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
                                                                              is required. Liners might
                                                                              have to be replaced.




                     £00         NIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            TABLE 11       (Cont'd)
                                                                             OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                                SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                                                                       ALTERNATIVE SC-4A                     ALTERNATIVE SC-48                     ALTERNATIVE SC-4C
                                                                                      EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/                EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/SOILS TO        EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/
                                             ALTERNATIVE SC-3C                        SOILS TO OFF-SITE NON-                ON-SITE NONHAZARDOUS                  ON-SITE REDEPOSITION OF
                                            EXCAVATION/FIXATION/                      HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE           LANOFILL/OFF-SITE                     SOILS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS
ASSESSMENT FACTOR;                          ON-SITE REDEPOSITION                      HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL             HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL             SLUDGE DISPOSAL
Short-Term Effectiveness
  -     Protection of community             Potential for direct contact              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        during remedial actions             of spilled waste and inhalation
                                            of f u g i t i v e dust

  -     Protection of workers               Minimal risk to workers.                  Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        during remedial actions             Personnel protection equipment
                                            required to protect against
                                            d i r e c t contact w i t h wastes and
                                            inhalation of fugitive dust.

   -    Environmental        impacts        Minimal increase in t r a f f i c ,       Increased t r a f f i c , noise       Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Sam<? as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
                                            noise and air pollution                   and air p o l l u t i o n

   -    Time until remediation              Estimated to be 1 year from               Estimated to be 2 years from          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A
                                            s t a r t of c o n s t r u c t i o n to   start of construction to
                                            completion of remediation work            completion of remediation work

Long-Tenn E f F e c t i v e n e s s

  -     Magnitude of residual               Due to removal and treatment              All contaminated s o i l s treated    Contaminated s o i l s treated to     Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-48
        ri sks                              of contaminated s o i l s , environ-      to below health-risk based            acceptable risk levels and            except redeposi l.ion areas
                                            mental impacts would be mini-             levels and removed from the           disposed in a controlled on-site      are not controllable
                                            mized.  Failure of treatment              site.                                 landfill.                             environments.         Potential
                                            could result in groundwater                                                                                           for f a i l u r e is low.
                                            contamination s i n c e redeposi-
                                            tion areas are not lined.
                                            Treatment of s o i l s to below
                                            health-risk based levels.

  -     Adequacy of control                 Proven technologies.       Redepo-        Proven technologies                   Proven technologies.  Long-term       Same' as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
                                            s i t i o n areas covered with                                                  landfill maintenance is required
                                            seeded soil for erosion.

  -     R e l i a b i l i t y of controls   Techniques are highly reliable            Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Sane1 as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C




                           200        NIA
1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             TABLE 11   (Cont'd)
                                                             OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                   SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                                                        ALTERNATIVE SC-6
                                                                        IN SITU SOLIDIFICATION/
                                   ALTERNATIVE SC-5                     FIXATION OF UNSATURATED
ASSESSMENT FACTORS                _JN SITU SOIL FLUSHING                      ZONE SOILS
Short-Term Effectiveness
      Protection of community Minimal risk to community from            Same as Alternative SC-5
      during remedial actions in situ treatment
      Protection of workers       Minimal risk to workers.              Same as Alternative SC-5
      during removal actions      Personnel protection equipment
                                  required to protect against
                                  direct contact with wastes and
                                  inhalation of fugitive dust.
  -   Environmental impacts        Leach fields must be maintained      No increase in dust
                                   for 8 years. Dust generated
                                   during i n i t i a l excavation
                                   operations.
  -   Time until remediation      Approximately 8 years are             Estimated to be 2 years
                                  required to extract arsenic           from start of construction
                                  from the soils in situ                to completion of remedia-
                                                                        tion work
Long-Term Effectiveness
  -   Magnitude of residual       Residual risks are minimized by       Same as Alternative   SC-5
      ri sks                      treating the contaminated soils
                                  to acceptable health-risk based
                                  levels. In situ treatment does
                                  not provide any control of
                                  leaching after completion of
                                  remediation.
  -   Adequacy of control         Minimal control of leach-fields       Proven technologies. Failure
                                  other than public deterrents.         of treatment could result in
                                  Arsenic must be allowed to leach      groundwater contamination,
                                  into groundwater to be treated        since liners and caps
                                  downgradi ent.                        associated with a landfill are
                                                                        not used.
      R e l i a b i 1 i ty of     R e l i a b i l i t y of technology   Technologies are highly reliable.
      controls                    would be dependent on efficiency
                                  of groundwater treatment system




               £00          MIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 11       (Cont'd)
                                                                        OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                               SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                    ALTERNATIVE SC-1                           ALTERNATIVE SC-2                     ALTERNATIVE SC-3A                          ALTERNATIVE SC-38
Reduction of Toxicity.
h o b i 1 i tv or Volume
    -    Treatment process            No reduction in toxicity,                  No reduction in toxicity             Reduction in mobility of contami-          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
         and remedy                   mobility and volume                        or volume. Reduction in              nants due to fixation process. No          except fixated s o i l s
                                                                                 mobility because the cap             reduction in volume or t o x i c i t y     n?mai n on-si te.
                                                                                 would prevent further                of contaminants. However,
                                                                                 leaching of contaminants             fixated soils removed o f f - s i t e .
                                                                                 and migration off-site.
         Amount of hazj.rdou:;        No material treated or removed             Same as Alternative SC-1             All hazardous materials bound              A l l hazardous m a t e r i a l s
         materials remaining                                                                                          within a fixated matrix and                bound w i t h i n a f i x a t e d
                                                                                                                      removed off-site.                          matri x .

    -    Irreversibi 1 i ty of        N/A                                        N/A                                  Treatment is essentially                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
         the treatment                                                                                                i rreversible
         Type and quantity of         All   contaminants        remain on-site   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-1   No secondary wastes from f i x a t i o n   Same as Alternati"e SC-3A
         residual wasti.1                                                                                             treatment process

Implementabi 1 ity
o       Technical Feasibility
    -    A b i l i t y to construct   No d i f f i c u l t y                     Uses standard earthwork              Standard equipment is commercially Samp as Alternative SC-3A
         technology                                                              equipment                            available
    -    Rel iabi 1 i ty O'f          Depends upon public awareness              Synthetic liners could fail          Well developed and proven                  Same as Alternative SC-3A
         technology                   and control of site access.                                                     technology. Pilot-scale studies
                                                                                                                      required to optimize treatment.
         Ease of undertaking          No d i f f i c u l t y                     Cap would have to be recon-          No d i f f i c u l t y                     Same AS Alternative SC-3A
         additional remedial                                                     structed
         action if necessary
         Monitoring considera-        Long-term monitoring required,             Same as Alternative SC-1             No long-term monitoring required.          On-site landfill requires
         tions                        monitoring analysis techniques                                                                                             long-term monitoring.
                                      are available.




                      200



1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                 TABLE 11         (Cont'd)
                                                                               OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                                      SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                           ALTERNATIVE SC-3C                           ALTERNATIVE SC-4A                            ALTERNATIVE SC-48                     ALTERNATIVE SC-4C.
Reduction of Toxici ty.
M o b i l i t y or Volume
    -       Treatment process                Reduction in contaminant                    Significant reductions in                    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A   Sams as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A
            and remedy                       mobility by f i x a t i o n process.        t o x i c i t y , mobility and volume                                              e x c e p t treated materials
                                             No reduction in t o x i c i t y or          of s o i l s by e x t r a c t i o n treat-                                         u l t i m a t e l y disposed of in
                                             volume of contaminants. Fixated             ment process                                                                       unlined r e d e p o s i t i o n
                                             s o i l s remain on-site in                                                                                                    areas.
                                             unlined redeposition areas.

            Amount of hazardous              All hazardous materials bound               All hazardous materials                      Same as Alternative SC-4A             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A
            materials remaining              w i t h i n a f i x a t e d matrix,         consolidated and disposed
                                             of o f f - s i t e

            Irreversibil ity of the          Treatment is essentially                    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C          Same as Alternative SC-3C             Same as Alternative SC-3C
            treatment                        i rreversible.

            Type and quanti ty of            No secondary wastes from                    Substantial quantities of                    Same as Alternative SC-4A             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A
            residual wastn                   f i x a t i o n treatment process.          hazardous sludges generated
                                             by e x t r a c t i o n treatment process.

Implementabi 1 i ty
o       Technical Feasibility
        - Ability to construct               Standard equipment is commer-               Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C          Same as Alternative SC-3C             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
           technology                        c i a l l y available

        -    R e l i a b i l i ty of         Hell developed and proven                   Well developed and proven                    Same as Alternative SC-4A             Same us A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
             technology                      technology.   Pilot-scale                   technology.
                                             studies required to optimize
                                             treatment. Redeposition
                                             not as reliable as a landfill
                                             liner/cap scenario.

             Ease of undertaking             No d i f f i c u l t y                      No d i f f i c u l t y                       No d i f f i c u l t y                No d i f f i c u l t y
             additional remedial
             action if necessary
             Monitoring                      Long-term monitoring required.              No long-term monitoring                      Same as Alternative         SC-3C     Same as Alternative SC-3C
             considerations                  Monitoring analysis techniques              requi red.
                                             available.




                        200            MIA

1 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 11       (Cont'd)
                                                                          OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                                 SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                      ALTERNATIVE SC-5                          ALTERNATIVE SC-6
Reduction in Toxicitv.
h p b i 1 i tv or Volume
    -     Treatment process             Reduction in toxicity and volume           Reduction in mobility of
          and remedy                    of contaminants. Mobility is               contaminants due to f i x a t i o n
                                        the arsenic removal mechanism.             process. No reduction in
                                                                                   volume or t o x i c i t y of
                                                                                   contaminants.

          Amount of hazardous           All hazardous materials                    All hazardous materials bound
          material remaining            consolidated and disposed of               within a f i x a t e d matrix
                                        off-si te
          Irreversi hi 1i ty of         Treatment is essentially                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-5
          the treatment                 i rreversible.
          Type and q u a n t i t y of   S i g n i f i c a n t quantities of        No secondary wastes generated
          residual v«aste               hazardous treatment sludges
                                        generated from groundwater
                                        treatment system

Implementabi 1 i ty
o   Technical F e a s i b i l i t y
    -     A b i l i t y to construct    Standard equipment commercially            Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-5.
                                        available.

    -     R e l i a b i l i t y of      Bench-scale studies in con-                Hell developed and proven
          technology                    junction with groundwater                  technology.  Pilot-scale
                                        modeling required to o p t i m i z e       studies required to optimize
                                        treatment. Groundwater treat-              treatment.
                                        ment technologies are proven
                                        and highly reliable.

          Ease of undertaking           No d i f f i c u l t y                     Additional remediation would
          additional remedia-                                                      be d i f f i c u l t since all of
          tion if necessary                                                        presently contaminated areas
                                                                                   would be s o l i d i f i e d in place.

          Monitoring considera-         Long-term monitoring is required           Same as Alternative SC-5
          tions                         Techniques for analysis are
                                        available.




1 I /Mr

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        TABLE 11            (Cont'd)

                                                                        OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)

                                                               SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                             ALTERNATIVE SC-1                 ALTERNATIVE SC-2                         ALTERNATIVE SC-3A                        ALTERNATIVE SC-3B

o   Administrative

    -    Abi 1 i ty t.o obtain                 Permits not required             Hauling and landfilling                  Deli sting approval required             Deli s t i n g approval
         approval s                                                             permits for RCRA impoundment             from NJDEP                               requi red from EPA
                                                                                material (applicable to all                                                       Region II.         As the
                                                                                remedial action alternatives)                                                     s i t e f a l l s under CERCLA,
                                                                                                                                                                  p e n r - t s for the l a n d f i l l
                                                                                                                                                                  ar.3 not required.

         Coordination with                     Coordination required             Coordination required                   Coordination required                     Intensive coordination
         other agencies                                                                                                                                            required for on-site
                                                                                                                                                                   landfill f a c i l i t y .

         A v a i l a b i l i t y of Services
         & Materials

         Treatment c a p a c i t y             Not required                      RCRA f a c i l i t i e s    available   All components adequately                Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
         & disposal services                                                     for RCRA impoundment material.          available. Off-site landfill             except on-site landfill
                                                                                                                         requires administrative acquisi-         provides higher
                                                                                                                         tion.                                    a v a i ^ a b i l i ty for
                                                                                                                                                                  disposal .

         Necessary equipment                   Not required                      Not required                            Standard equipment and operations.       Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
         & specialists                                                                                                   S p e c i a l i s t s not required.

          Prospective                          Not required                      Not required                            Prospective technologies are        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
          technology                                                                                                     available and have been proven
                                                                                                                         in bench-seals tests. Pilot
                                                                                                                         studies needed to optimize process.




                    •zoo

1 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                TABLE 11          (Cont'd)
                                                                              OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                                  SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                        ALTERNATIVE SC-3C                             ALTERNATIVE SC-4A                                ALTERNATIVE SC--4B                                   ALTERNATIVE SC-4C
o   Administrative Feasibility
    -   A b i 1 i ty to obtain            Delisting required from                       Delisting required                               Delisting approval required from                     Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3C
        approvals                         EPA Region II. Approval                       from NJDEP                                       EPA Region II.       As the s i t e
                                              for on-site redeposition may be                                                            f a l l s under CEflCLA, permits
                                              d i f f i c u l t to obtain. ID 27                                                         for the landfill are not
                                              waste c l a s s i f i c a t i o n would                                                    requi red.
                                              prevent implementation of
                                              a1ternative.

        Coordination with                     Coordination required for                 Coordination required for                        Intensive coordination required                      C o o r d i n a t i o n required for
        other agencies                        approval of on-site redeposition          i d e n t i f i c a t i o n of o f f - s i t e   for on-site landfill f a c i l i t y                 approval of on-site
                                                                                        nonhazardous and hazardous                       and i d e n t i f i c a t i o n of o f f - s i t e   r e d e p o s i t i o n and identi-
                                                                                        landfills.                                       hazardous landfill                                   f i c a t i o n of hazardous
                                                                                                                                                                                              landfill.

        A v a i l a b i l i t y of Services
        & Materials
        Treatment capacity                    Treatment capacity, storage               Treatment and storage capacity                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4A except           Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        & di sposal servi ces                 capacity and disposal capacity            are adequately available.                        on-site landfill provides higher
                                              are all adequately available              O f f - s i t e landfill requires                a v a i l a b i l i t y for d i s p o s a l ,
                                                                                        administrative acquisition.

        Necessary equipment                   Standard equipment and opera-             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C                  Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        & speci ali sts                       tions. Specialists not
                                              requi red.
        Prospecti ve                          Prospective technologies are              Same as Alternative SC-3C                        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C                  Same? as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        technologies                          available and have been proven
                                              in bench-scale test. Pilot
                                              studies needed to optimize
                                              process.




1174K
         S28T

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                 TABLE 11    (Cont'd)
                                                                   OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                          SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT      FACTORS                ALTERNATIVE SC-5                    ALTERNATIVE SC-6
o   Administrative F e a s i h i l i
    -    A b i 1 i ty to obtain        RCRA LDRs do not apply to            Same as Alternative SC-5
         approvals                     in situ treatment methods,
                                       thus minimizing administrative
                                       approvals for this alternative
         Coordi nati on wi th          Coordination required to             Coordination required
         other agencies                identify an off-site hazardous       to l i m i t future site use
                                       l a n d f i l l facility
         Avai labi I i tv of S<;rvi<
         & Materials
         Treatment capacity            The groundwater treatment system     In situ fixation systems
         & di sposal services          would handle the additional          available to treat large
                                       load of arsenic from the leach       volumes of soil in place,
                                       field.
         Necessary equipment           Standard equipment, does not         Shallow soil m i x i n g rig with
         & special i sts               require specialists                  chemical feed system is
                                                                            available. Requires specially
                                                                            trained equipment operators.
          Prospective                  Prospective technology has been      Same as Alternative SC-5
          technology                   demonstrated in bench-scale
                                       test. Pilot studies would be
                                       required to optimize treatment.




                           NIA

! 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              TABLE 11       (Cont'd)
                                                                OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                    SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS ___ _         ALTERNATIVE SC-1                       ALTERNATIVE SC-2                     ALTERNATIVE SC-3A                    ALTERNATIVE SC-3B


o Total Capital Cost             $ 483,419                              $6,342,000                           $45,818,000                          $16,623,000
o Annual Operation and           $  37,000                              $    59,000                          $18,796,000                          $18,796,000 short-lerm
  Maintenance cost                                                                                                                                $   123,671 long-term
o Present Worth                  $1,222,000                             $7,232,000                           $62,937,000                          $35,466,000

Compliance with ARARs
    -   Compliance with          No contaminant-specific ARARs          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-1   Soils treated to New Jersey          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
        contami nant-specifi c   for arsenic-contaminated soil                                               Guidance TBC level for arsenic
        ARARs                    would be met New Jersey TBC                                                 in soils
                                 for arsenic would not be met.
    -   Appropriateness of       Not applicable                         Not applicable                       Treatability variance may be         Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
        waivers                                                                                              required.

    -   Compliance with          Not applicable                         All action-specific         ARARs    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2
        action-specific ARARs                                           wi 11 be met.

    -   Compliance wi th         Not in compliance w i t h State        Will be in compliance w i t h        Same as Alternative SC-2             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-2
        appropriate criteria,    and local c r i t e r i a or Federal   State and local criteria
        advisories, and          advisories                             and federal a d v i s o r i e s
        guidances
Overall Protection of Human      No protection of human health          Potential long-term threats          Substantial and permanent            Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
Health and the Environment       or the environment                     to human health and the              protection of human health and       except f i x a t e d s o i l s
                                                                        environment if capping system        the envi ronmenl:.                   d i s p o s e d in a controlled
                                                                                                                                                  on-si te l a n d f i 1 1 .

State Acceptance                 No State comments received             RCRA LDRs surface impoundments       RCRA LORs and concerns over          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3A
                                 to date.                               and modified capping have been       disposal have been included,
                                                                        added.

Community Acceptance             No public comments received            Same as Alternative SC-1             Same as Alternative SC-1             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-1
                                 to date.




              £00      MIA

1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                   TABLE 11       (Cont'd)

                                                                                  OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)

                                                                    SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                            ALTERNATIVE SC-3C                              ALTERNATIVE SC-4A                     ALTERNATIVE SC-46                     ALTERNATIVE SC-4C

Costs
o   Total Capital Cost                        $ 9,199,019                                    $41 ,077,000                          $20,227,000                           $13,293,000
o   Annual Operation and                      $18,796,000 short-term                         $ 1,927,000                           $ 1,927,000 short-term                $ 1 ,927,000 short-term
    Maintenance Cost                          $    11,970 long-term                                                                $   105,000 long-term                 $     1 I ,970 long-term
o   Present Worth                             $26,484,000                                    $44,560,000                           $25,102,000                           $16.934,000

Compliance with ARAfis

        Compl i ance wi V.h                   Soils treated to New Jersey                    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same 35 A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        contaminant-speci f i c               Guidance TBC Level for arsenic
        ARARs                                 in s o i l s
    -   Appropriateness of                    ID 27 waste c l a s s i f i c a t i o n must   Treatability variance may be          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-4    Sa^ne as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        waivers                               be waived. Treatability                        requi red.
                                              variance may be required.
    -   Compl iance wi l:h                    All action-specific ARARs will                 Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same a;. A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
        a c t i o n - s p e c i f i c ARARs   be met.
    -   Compl iance wi l.h                    Will be in compliance with                     Same as Alternative SC-3C             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e ? SC-3C
        appropriate criteria                  State and local c r i t e r i a and
        a d v i s o r i e s , and             Federal advisories.
        guidances

Overall Protection cif Human                  Substantial and permanent         Contaminants removed by                            Same as Alternative SC-4A             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e ? SC-4A
Health and the Envi rpninerit                 protection of human health        extraction, rendering the                          excepted treated s o i l s are        except redeposition areas
                                              and the environment. Contaminants soils nonhazardous. Exposure                       disposed in an on-site landfill       are not as controlled as
                                              remain on-site in a fixated       pathways eliminated. Sludges                                                             a 'landfill
                                              matrix without the protection     managed at o f f - s i t e f a c i l i t y ,
                                              of a 1iner or a cap.

State Acceptance                              RCRA LDRs and concerns over                    Same as Alternative SC-3C             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
                                              disposal options have been
                                              addressed.

Community Acceptance                          No public comments received to                 Same as Alternative SC-3C             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e SC-3C
                                              date.




                    £00
                                AT IA
        SCSI.
1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                            TABLE 11       (Cont'd)
                                                                           OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
                                                            SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE!


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                ALTERNATIVE SC-5                                    ALTERNATIVE SC-6
Cfliti
o   Total Capital Cost            $4,549,000                                          $ 7,619,000
o   Annual Operation and          $   68,500 short-term                               $18,761,000 short-term
    Maintenance cost,             $   11,970 long-term                                $     11,970 long-term
o   Present Worth                 $5,159,000                                          $24,872,000

Compliance with ARAHs
     -   Compliance with          Soils treated to New Jersey                         Same as Alternative SC-5
         contaminant-:;pecif ic   Guidance TBC level for arsenic
         ARARs                    in soiIs.
     -   Appropriateness of       RCRA LORs and the associated                        Same as Alternative SC-5
         waivers                  waivers do not apply to
                                  in s i t u treatment.
     -   Compli ance wi th        A l l a c t i o n - s p e c i f i c ARARs w i l l   Same as Alternative SC-5
         action-specific ARARs    be met.

     -   Compliance with          W i l l be in compliance w i t h                    Same as Alternative SC-5
         appropriate criteria     State and local criteria and
         advisories, and          Federal advisories.
         guidance?
Overall Protection of. Human      Potential long-term threats                         Potential long-term threats
Health and the Environment        if a l t e r n a t i v e f a i l e d to flush       if a l t e r n a t i v e f a i l e d .
                                  out the arsenic contaminants
                                  or if the groundwater pumping
                                  and treatment system f a i l e d .

State Acceptance                  Impacts of soil flushing                            No State comments received
                                  addressed under the management                      to date.
                                  of migration alternative.
                                  Coordination with impoundment
                                  closure and additional testing
                                  have been addressed.

Community Acceptance              No public comments received to                      Same as Alternative SC-5
                                  date.




                £00     NIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             TABLE 12
                                                   OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                           SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH TREATMENT OPTION


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                              TREATMENT OPTION T-l                    TREATMENT OPTION T-2             TREATMENT OPTION T-3
Key Components                             Chemical Precipitation/Air            Chemical Oxidation/Chemical       UV-HjOj Oxidation/Chemical
                                           Stripping/Vapor Phase Activated       Precipitation/Ion Exchange/       Precipitation
                                           Carbon Adsorption/Liquid Phase        Liquid Phase Activated
                                           Activated Alumina Adsorption          Carbon Adsorption
Shprt-Term Effectiveness
    - Protection of community              Potential for inhalation of           Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
      d u r i n g remedial actions         fugitive dust during construction
                                           of the treatment facilities
    - Protection of workers                Personnel protection equipment        Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
      during remediation                   required against dermal contact
                                           and inhalation of fugitive dust
                                           during construction of treatment
                                           f acil i ti es
     - Environmental Impacts               Potential environmental impact        Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
                                           from change of site use
     - Time u n t i l remediation                    N/A                                     N/A                             N/A
Long-Term Effectiveness
     - Magnitude of Residual               Treated effluent is expected to       Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
       Risk                                meet delisting requirements. Any
                                           residual waste would be disposed
                                           of according to RCRA standards.
     - Adequacy of Controls                Proven technologies. Long-term        Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
                                           monitoring program required to
                                           ensure effectiveness of treat-
                                           ment system.
     - R e l i a b i l i t y of Controls   Technologies are very reliable        Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
                                           treatment methods
Reduction of T o x i c i t v . Nobilil
or Volume

     - Treatment Process and               Reduction in toxicity and volume      Same as Treatment Option T-l      Same as Treatment Option T-l
       Remedy                              of groundwater contaminants
     - Amount of Hazardous                           N/A                                     N/A                             N/A
       Materials Remaining



                            MIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         TABLE 12 (Cont'd)
                                                    OPERABLE UNIT TV/0 (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                             SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH TREATMENT OPTION


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                                TREATMENT OPTION T-1                TREATMENT OPTION T-2_               TREATMENT OPTION T-3
    - Irreversi bi 1 i ty of                 Treatment is irreversible           Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Treatment.
    - Type of Quantity of                    Arsenic sludge generated from       Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Residual Waste                         clarification would require off-    Ion exchange generates highly
                                             site RCRA treatment and disposal    contaminated resins requiring
                                                                                 regeneration. Spent carbon
                                                                                 may be disposed or regenerated.
Implementabi 1 i ty
o   Technical F e a s i b i l i t y
    - A b i l i t y to Construct             Standard equipment commercially     Same as Treatment Option T-1        Relatively few experienced vendors
                                             available                                                               who could supply the equipment and
                                                                                                                     the trained personnel to operate
                                                                                                                     and maintain the system
    - R e l i a b i l i t y of Technology    Well developed and proven           Same as Treatment Option T-1        Innovative technology
                                             technology
    - Ease of Undertaking        No difficulty                                   Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Additional Remedial Action
      If Necessary
    - Monitoring Considerations              Monitoring of treated effluent      Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
                                             required to ensure effectiveness
                                             of technology
o   Administrative Feasibility
    - A b i l i t y to Obtain Approvals Deli sting approval required from        Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
                                        USEPA Region II Regional Admin-
                                        istrator
    - Coordination with Other                Coordination required               Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Agencies
Availabi1i tv of Services and Materials
    - A v a i l a b i l i t y of Treatment   Treatment capacity and storage      Same as Treatment Option T-1        Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Capacity and Disposal                  capacity are adequately available


                  200        MlA


1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                             TABLE 12 (Cont'd)
                                                     OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                             SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH TREATMENT OPTION


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                                TREATMENT OPTION T-1                    TREATMENT OPTION T-2             TREATMENT OPTION T-3
    - A v a i l a b i l i t y of Necessary   Standard equipment and operations. Same as Treatment Option T-1         Specialized equipment and operators
      Equipment and Specialists              No specialists required                                                 required. Very few experienced
                                                                                                                     vendors and operators
    - A v a i l a b i 1 i ty of              Prospective technologies are            Same as Treatment Option T-1    Few experienced vendors. Technolo-
      Prospective Technologies               available. Technologies are pro-                                        gies need to be proven in bench-
                                             ven in bench-scale tests. Pilot                                         scale tests. Pilot studies
                                             studies required to optimize                                            required to optimize process.
                                             process
Costs
    - Total Capi tal Cost
o   Considering Dowmjradi ent                $1,809,000                              $1,460,000                      $1,097,000
    Capture Pumping
o   Considering Dowmjradi ent                $2,871,000                              $2,027,000                      $1,521,000
    Capture and Source Area
    Pumping
o   Considering Site Pumping                 $4,230,000                              $2,515,000                      $1,948,000
    - Baseline Annua'i Operation                    N/A                                     N/A                             N/A
      and Maintenance Cost
    - Present Worth                                 N/A                                     N/A                             N/A

Compliance With ARAR;:
    - Compliance wi th                       W i l l meet MCL for arsenic,           Same as Treatment Option T-1    Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Contaminant-Specific ARARs             cadmium, and TCE
    - Appropriateness;       of waivers             N/A                                     N/A                            N/A

    - Compliance with Action-                A11 action-specific ARARs will be       Same as Treatment Option T-1    Same as Treatment Option T-1
      Speci fie ARARs                        met

    - Compliance with Appro-                Will be in compliance with State         Same as Treatment Option T-1    Same as Treatment Option T-1
      priate C r i t e r i a . , Advisories and local criteria and federal
      and Guidance                          advisories




1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            TABLE 12 (Cont'd)
                                       OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                               SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH TREATMENT OPTION


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                  TREATMENT OPTION T-1                 TREATMENT OPTION 1-2                TREATMENT OPTION T-3
Overall Protection of Human    Extracted groundwater will be      Same as Treatment Option T-1         Same AS Treatment Option T-1
Heal th and the Envi ronment   treated to levels below MCLs of
                               the contaminants of concern thus
                               adequately protecting human health
                               and the environment
State Acceptance               No specific State comments           Same as Treatment Option T-1       Same as Treatment Option T-1
                               received regarding the ground-
                               water treatment u n i t operations
Community Acceptance           No public comments have been         Same as Treatment Option T-1       Same its Treatment Option T-1
                               received to date




                7,00


] 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                TABLE 13
                                                     OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS               ALTERNATIVE MOM-1            ALTERNATIVE HOM-2B     ALTERNATIVE MOM-3A        ALTERNATIVE MOM-3B           ALTERNATIVE HOM-4A
Key Components                   No Action: Natural         Downgradient              Downgradient Capture and Downgradient   Capture       Site Pumping/Treatment/
                                 attenuation, long-term     Capture/Treatment/        Source Area Pumping/     and Source Area Pumping/     Rei njeclion/Discharge
                                 monitoring, restricted use Reinjection               Treatment/Discharge       Treatment/Reinjection       to the Maurice River
                                 of the groundwater, public                           to the Maurice River
                                 information meetings,
                                 five year reviews

Short-Term Effectiveness
     - Protection of community   No short-term risks to       Minimal risk to         Same as Alternative      Some as Alternative MOM-28   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
       during remedial actions   communi ties                 communi ty              MOM-2B                                                MOM-2B

     - Protection of workers     Personnel protection             Minimal risk to       Same as Alternative    Same as Alternative MOM-ZB   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
       during remediation        equipment required against workers. Personnel MOM-2B                                                       MOM-2B
                                 inhalation and dermal            protection equip-
                                 contact during                   ment required
                                 sign posting, sample             against direct con-
                                 c o l l e c t i o n , inspection tact wi th wastes and
                                                                  inhalation of fugi-
                                                                  tive dust

     - Environmental Impacts     No environmental impacts     Downgradient capture Downgradient capture        Same as Alternative MOM-3A   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
                                                              would almost im-       would almost im-                                       MOM-3A
                                                              mediately minimize     mediately minimize
                                                              the migration of       the migration of
                                                              contaminated ground- contaminated ground-
                                                              water to the Black- water to the Black-
                                                              water Branch.          water Branch.
                                                              Environmental impact Greater environ-
                                                              from change of s i t e mental impact from
                                                              use                    change of site use
                                                                                     due to larger capacity
                                                                                     of treatment system

     - Time Until Remediation    Many years (probably          Estimated to require Estimated to require 30    Estimated to require 25      Estimated to require
                                 decades)                      75 years to achieve years to achieve target     year;; to achieve target     at most 13 years
                                                               target cleanup ob-   cleanup objective          cleanup objective            to achieve target
                                                               jective                                                                      cleanup objective




                 ZOO    MIA


 1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                TABLE 13   (Cont'd)
                                                              OPERABLE: UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                         SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE
ASSESSMENT FACTORS                         ALTERNATIVE HOH-1           ALTERNATIVE MOH-2B ALTERNATIVE MOH-3A        ALTERNATIVE MOH-3B,          ALTERNATIVE MQM-4A
Long-Term Effectiveness
    - Magnitude of Residual                Long term evaluation re-    Extracted ground-    Same as Alternative     Same as Alternative MOM-2B   Same as Alternative
      Risks                                quired for natural degra-   water would be trea- MOM-2B                                               MOM-2B
                                           dation & transport          ted to below MCLs.
                                           reduction                   Aqui fer would be
                                                                       remediated to
                                                                       0.35 mg/1 arsenic.
                                                                       This would protect
                                                                       the in-stream
                                                                       standard of the
                                                                       Blackwater Branch.
     - Adequacy of Controls                Adequacy of control to    Proven technologies. Same as Alternative      Proven technologies. Down- Same as Alternative
                                           prevent human ingestion   Oowngradient capture MOM-2B. Source area      gradient capture would mi- MOM-3B. Site pumping
                                           dependent on success of   would minimize con- pumping would extract     nimize contaminant migration would extract cont,)-
                                           the well restriction area taminant migration   contaminants directly    to the Blackwater Branch.     minantx directly from
                                                                     to the Blackwater    from the plume.          Establishment of well re-     the plume.
                                                                     Branch. Establish- High pumping rate          striction area would mini-
                                                                     ment of well re-     could depress the na-    mize possibility of human
                                                                     striction area would tural water level of the ingestion/use of ground-
                                                                     minimize possibility Blackwater Branch or     water. High pumping rate
                                                                     of human ingestion/ dewater the Branch.       could depress the natural
                                                                     use of groundwater. Treated effluent could    water level of the Black-
                                                                     Qowngradient capture be diverted to the       water Branch or dewater the
                                                                     could induce infil- Branch to minimize this Branch. If this is deter-
                                                                     tration from the     impact.                  mined, treated effluent could
                                                                     Branch.                                       be diverted to the Branch.
     - R e l i a b i l i t y of Controls   Migration of contaminants Extraction of        Extraction of ground-   Proven and reliable tech-      Same as Al ternati v<>
                                           from site to Blackwater   groundwater via      water via pumping and   nologies. Long-term mon-       MOM-3B
                                           Branch, Maurice River and pumping and reinjec- discharge of treated    itoring would be required
                                           Union Lake would continue tion of treated ef- effluent to a surface    to ensure the effectiveness
                                                                     fluent are reliable water body is a reliable of this alternative
                                                                     technologies. Long- technology. Long-
                                                                     term monitoring      term monitoring would
                                                                     would be required    be required to ensure
                                                                     to ensure the ef-    the effectiveness of
                                                                     fectiveness of this this alternative,
                                                                     alternative.




                    200


 I 174X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 13   (Cont'd)
                                                                      OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                                  SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                       ALTERNATIVE MOH-1                     ALTERNATIVE MOM-2B    ALTERNATIVE HOM-3A           ALTERNATIVE HOM-3B           ALTERNATIVE HQM-_4A
Reduction of Toxicitv. M o b i l i t y
or Volume
    - Treatment Process and              No reduction of toxicity,             Reduction of volume Reduction of off-site          Same as Alternative MOM-3B   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
      Remedy                             mobi 1 i ty or volume                 and off-site mobi-    mobility and volume of                                    MOM-3A
                                                                               lity of aquifer con- aquifer contaminants,
                                                                               taminants. Reinjec- Any of the treatment
                                                                               tion actually in-     process options would
                                                                               creases on-si te      reduce the t o x i c i t y
                                                                               mobility to facili-
                                                                               tate collection of
                                                                               the plume. Any of
                                                                               the treatment process
                                                                               options would reduce
                                                                               the toxicity
        Amount of Hazardous              No material removed or               Remediation will      Same as Alternative           Same as Alternative MOM-2B   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
        Materials Remaining              treated                              continue until the    MOM-28                                                     MOM-2B
                                                                              aquifer arsenic
                                                                              concentration is
                                                                              0.35 mg/1. Natural
                                                                              attenuation requi-
                                                                              red to flush aqui fer
                                                                              to the arsenic MCL
                                                                              (0.05 mg/1).
     - Irreversibi1i ty of                                N/A                             N/A                 N/A                          N/A                           N/A
       Treatment
    - Type and Quantity of                                N/A                             N/A                 N/A                          N/A                           N/A
      Residual Waste
Implementabi1i tv
o , Technical Feasibility
    - A b i l i t y to Construct         No d i f f i c u l t y                Standard equipment     Same as Alternative         Same as Alternative MOM-2B   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
      Technology                                                               commercially avail-    MOM-2B                                                   MOM-2B. Increase in
                                                                               able                                                                            units may c o m p l i c a t e
                                                                                                                                                               operations

    - R e l i a b i l i t y of                            N/A                 Well developed and   Same as Alternative            Same as Alternative MOM-2B   Same as A l t e r n a t i ve
      Technology                                                              proven technology.   MOM-2B                                                      KOM-2B
                                                                              More sophisticated
                                                                              groundwater modeling
                                                                              required to refine
                                                                              KJJ, pumping rates
                                                                              and pumping duration
                         £00     NIA

1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                   TABLE 13        (Cont'd)
                                                                             OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                                         SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                   ..          ALTERNATIVE MOM-1                   ALTERNATIVE MOM-2B            ALTERNATIVE MOM-3A               ALTERNATIVE HOM-3B                     ALTERNATIVE MOH-4A
     - Ease of Undertaking                       No di f f i c u l t y               No d i f f i c u l t y . No   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e    Same as Alternative MOM-2B             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
       Additional Remedial                                                           additional remedial           MOM-2B                                                                  MOM-2B
       Action i f Necessary                                                          a c t i o n is antici-
                                                                                     pated

     - Monitoring                                Long-term monitoring                Long-term monitoring Same as A l t e r n a t i v e             Same as Alternative MOM-2B             Same as A l t e r n a t i ve
       Consi derati ons                          program is required                 program required             MOM-2B                                                                   MOM-2B
                                                                                     to ensure the
                                                                                     e f f e c t i v e n e s s of
                                                                                     the alternative

     Administrative Foasibilil
      - A b i l i t y to Obtain                  Permitting not required              Delisting approval            Same as Alternative               Same as Alternative MOM-2B           Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
        Approvals                                                                     required from the             MOM-2B. As this is a                                                   MOM-3A.
                                                                                      Regional Adminis-             CERCLA s i t e , permits for
                                                                                      trator of USEPA               a surface water dis-
                                                                                      Region II. Permis-            charge are not required.
                                                                                      sion required to              However the treated ef-
                                                                                      access properties             fluent is expected to
                                                                                      to install w e l l s          comply w i t h appl i cable
                                                                                      and the pipeline              discharge l i m i t a t i o n s .
                                                                                      located off the
                                                                                      ViChem Site

         Coordi nat ion wi th                    Coordination is required             Intensive coordina-           Same as A l t e r n a t i v e   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e MOM-2B   S.ime as A l t e r n a t i v e
         Other A g e n c i e s                                                        tion required for             MOM-2B                                                                 MOM-2B
                                                                                      d e l i s t i n g of
                                                                                      treated effluent

A v a i l a b i l i t y of S e r v i c e s li. Materials

      - A v a i l a b i l i t y of Treatment Not required                             Treatment capacity            Same as Alternative             Same as Alternative MOM-2B             Same as Alternati ve
        C a p a c i t y & Disposal                                                    and disposal ser-             MOM-2B                                                                 MOM-2B
      1
        Services                                                                      vices are readily
                                                                                      avai lable

      - A v a i l a b i l i t y of Necessary Not required                             Standard equipment   Same as Alternative                      Same as Alternative MOM-2B             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
        Equipment ft S p e c i a l i s t s                                            and operations. No MOM-2B                                                                            MOM-2B
                                                                                      specialists required




                         zoo


1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            TABLE 13   (Cont'd)
                                                          OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                   SUMMARY OF^VALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                 ALTERNATIVE    MOH-1          ALTERNATIVE MOM-2B _ALTERNATIVE MOH-3A            ALTERNATIVE HOM-3B           ALTERNATIVE MQH-4A
    - A v a i l a b i l i t y of   Not required                  Prospective techno- Same as Alternative           Same as Alternative MOM-2B   Same as Alternative
      Prospective Technologies                                   gies are available. MOM-28                                                     MOM-2B
                                                                 Computer modeling
                                                                 demonstrated the
                                                                 feasibility of the
                                                                 pumping technolo-
                                                                 gies. More sophis-
                                                                 ticated modeling is
                                                                 required to optimize
                                                                 system. Additional
                                                                 studies are also
                                                                 required to refine


Costs
     - Total Capital Cost          $ 3,620                           N/A                  N/A                         N/A                          N/A

     - Annual Operation and        $ 14,010                          N/A                  N/A                         N/'A                         N/A
       Maintenance Cost
     - Present Worth               $288,532                          N/A                   N/A                        N/A                          N/A

o    Treatment Option T-1
     - Total Capital Cost          N/A                            $ 3,363,000           $ 6,037,000                $ 5,014,000                  $ 8,694,000

     - Annual Operation and        N/A                            $ 3,369,000           $ 5,599,000                $ 5,513,000                  $ 8,128,000
       Maintenance Cost
     - Present Worth               N/A                            $65,944,000           $65,540,000                $60,152,000                  $50,350,000

o    Treatment Option T-2
     - Total Capital Cost          N/A                            $ 2,919,000           $ 4,965,000                $ 3,942,000                  $ 6,991,000

     - Annual Operation and        N/A                            $ 2,263,000           $ 3,618,000                $ 3,532,000                  $ 5,155,000
       Maintenance Cost
     - Present Worth               N/A                            $44,981,000           $44,181,000                $39,936,000                  $34,147,000




                       £00


1 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           TABLE 13    (Cont'd)
                                                         OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
                                                    SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

ASSESSMENT FACTORS                   ALTERNATIVE MOH-1           ALTERNATIVE MOH-2B ALTERNATIVE MOM-3A            ALTERNATIVE MOM-3B            ALTERNATIVE HQM-4A

o   Treatment Option T-3
    - Total Capital Cost             N/A                         $ 2,459,000           $ 4,323,000                $ 3,300,000                   $ 5,796,000
    - Annual Operation andd          N/A                         $ 3,065,000           $ 5,052,000                $ 4,966,000                   $ 7,291 ,000
      Maintenance Cost
    - Present Worth                  N/A                         $59,407,000           $58,226,000                $53,154,000                   $•13,373,000

Compliance with ARARs
    - Compl iance wi th              No contaminant-specific     The aqui fer will be Same as Alternative         Same cis Alternative MOM-2B   Same as Alternative
      Contaminant-Spoci fi c         ARARs will be achieved.     remediated to an     MOM-2B                                                    MOM-2B
      ARARs                                                      arsenic concentra-
                                                                 tion of 0.35 mg/1.
                                                                 This will not
                                                                 violate the instream
                                                                 standard of
                                                                 0.05 mg/1 arsenic in
                                                                 the Blackwater Branch.
    - Appropriateness of                      N/A                Per NJOEP guidance Same as Alternative           Same as Alternative HOM-2B    Same as Alternative
      Wai vers                                                   the establishment     MOM-2B                                                   MOM-2B
                                                                 of an ACL is rele-
                                                                 vant and appropriate
                                                                 for the ViChem Si te.


       Compliance with Action-       Not applicable              Will comply wi th     Same as Alternative        Same as Alternative MOM-2B    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
       Speci fie ARARs                                           all action-specific   MOM-2B                                                   MOM-3B
                                                                 ARARs

       Compliance with Appro-        Not in compliance with      Wi11 be in compli-    Same as Alternative        Same as Alternative MOM-2B    Same as Alternative
       priate Cri teriii,            state and local criteria    ance with State and   MOM-2B                                                   MOM-3B
       Advisories, and               and federal advisories      local criteria and
       Gui dance                                                 federal advisories




                               NIA



1174K'-!      fe* -

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TABLE 13          (Cont'd)

                                                                  OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)

                                                           SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE


ASSESSMENT FACTORS                     ALTERNATIVE MOH-1                    ALTERNATIVE MOH-2B              ALTERNATIVE MOM-3A             ALTERNATIVE MOM-3B                ALTERNATIVE MOH-4A

Overall P r o t e c t i o n of Human
Health and the Environment             R i s k of ingestion of and          Human health would             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e   Same as Alternative    MOM-2B     Samo as A l t e r n a t i v e
                                       direct contact with the              be adequately pro-             MOM-2B                                                            MOM-2B
                                       contaminated groundwater             tected through the
                                       c o n t r o l l e d but not elinv-   implementation of
                                       inated.                              t h i s pumping and
                                       Migration of groundwater             treatment alterna-
                                       to the Maurice R i v e r             t i v e and through the
                                       and Union Lake would                 establishment of a
                                       c o n t i nue.                       well r e s t r i c t i o n
                                                                            area. This r e s t r i c t i o n
                                                                            would apply until
                                                                            natural flushing
                                                                            mechanisms reduced
                                                                            the arsenic concen-
                                                                            tration to the MCL.
                                                                            Contaminant migration
                                                                            to the Maurice River
                                                                            and Union Lake would
                                                                            be minimized.

State Acceptance                       No State comments                    This alternative was T h i s alternative was             Same a:; A l t e r n a t i v e MOM-2B   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
                                       received to date                     developed in re-           developed in response                                                 MOM-3A
                                                                            sponse to the              to the S t a t e ' s comments
                                                                            S t a t e ' s comments re- concerning the signi-
                                                                            garding alternate          ficant environmental im-
                                                                            means of disposal of pacts associated with
                                                                            the treated                the disposal of the
                                                                            effluent.                  treated effluent in the
                                                                                                       Blackwater Branch.

Community A c c e p t a n c e          No public comments                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e    Same as Alternative           Same a;; Alternative MOM-1        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e
                                       received to date                     MOM-1                            MOM-1                                                           MOM-1




                         £00     MIA


 1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 14
                                             OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                  SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                                          A l t e r n a t i v e 2A-Oredging/          A l t e r n a t i v e 2B-Oredging/
                                                          Excavation/Thi ckening/                     Excavati on/Thi ckeni ng/
                           Alternative 1                  F i x a t i o n / O f f - S i t e Non-      Fixation/On-Si te
Assessment Factors           No Action                    hazardous Landfill                          Nonhazardous Landfill

Short Term Effectiveness
-Protection of             No short-term                  Potential for direct contact                Same as Alternative 2A.
 community during          threats to                     of s p i l l e d waste and inhala-
 remedial actions          conmuni ties.                  tion of f u g i t i v e dust.

-Protection of worker:; Personnel protection              Minimal risk to workers.                    Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
 during remedial        equipment required                Personnel protection equipment
 acti ons               against dermal contact            required against direct
                        and inhalation during             contact wi th wastes and
                        sign posting, sample              inhalation of fugitive dust.
                        collection, inspection.
-Environmental Impacts     No significant adverse         Increased t r a f f i c , n o i s e , and   Minimal increase in t r a f f i c ,
                           environmental impacts          air pollution. Sediment re-                 noise and air p o l l u t i o n . Sediment
                           from site activi ties.         suspension minimized by                     resuspension minimized by
                                                          increasing water intake of                  increasing water intake of dredge and
                                                          dredge and use of s i l t curtains,         use of silt curtains.

                                                          Excavation of exposed sediments             Same as Alternative 2A.
                                                          would pose minimal impacts.

-Time until remedi-        Some years.                    Estimated to be 3 years from                Same as A l t e r n a t i v e   2A.
  ation                                                   start of construction to
                                                          completion of remediation work.




                200


1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            TABLE 14       (Cont'd)
                                             OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                                                                                              Alternative 3C-Dredging/
                            Alternative 3A-Oredging/             Alternative 3B-Dredging/                     Excavat ion/Ex traction/Flood-
                            Excavation/Extraction/               Excavation/Extraction/Sedi-                  plain Deposition of Exposed
                            Sediments to Off-Site Non-           ments to On-Site Nonhazardous                Sediments/Plant Site Deposition
                            hazardous Landfi1 I/Off-Site         Landfill/Off-site Hazar-                     of River Sediments/Off-Site
Assessment Factors          Hazardous Sludge Disposal            dous Sludge Disposal                         Hazardous Sludge Disposal
Short-Term Effectiveness
-Protection of              Potential for direct contact         Same as Alternative 3A.                      Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 community during reme--    of s p i l l e d waste and inhale-
 d i a l actions            tion of fugitive dust.
-Protection of workers      Minimal risk to workers.             Same as Alternative 3A.                      Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 during remedial            Personnel protection equip-
 acti ons                   ment required against di-
                            rect contact with wastes
                            and inhalation of fugitive
                            dust.
-Envi ronmental             Increased traffic, noise,            Minimal increase in t r a f f i c            Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3U.
 Impacts                    and air pollution sediment           n o i s e and air pollution, sedi-
                            resuspension minimized by            ment resuspension minimized
                            increasing water intake of           by increasing water i n t a k e of
                            dredge and using silt                dredge and using s i l t c u r t a i n s .
                            curtai ns.
                            Excavation of exposed                Same as Alternative 3A.
                            sedimentswould pose minimal
                            impacts.
-Time until   remediation   Estimated to be 3 years from         Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A.
                            start of construction to
                            completion of remediation
                            work.




                  7.00


, 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  TABLE 14   (Cont'd)
                                                                     OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                                           SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                  Alternative 1                     Alternative 2A                      Alternative 2B
Long-Term Effectiveness
-Magnitude of Residual            Existing impacts on the          Sediments identified as a            Same as Alternative 2A
 Risks                            unvironment would persist.       public health risk would be
                                  However, natural degradation     removed and treated. Redis-
                                  and transport mechanisms         tribution of contaminated
                                  could significantly reduce       sediments could result in a
                                  the volume of sediments          public health risk. Treated
                                  i n the ri ver.                  sediments would be delisted
                                                                   as nonhazardous waste,
                                                                   supernatant water treated
                                                                   to NJPOES standards.
-Adequacy of Control              Depends on success in            Proven technologies.                 Same as
                                  preventing access to             Long-term monitoring program         Alternative 2A
                                  the site.                        required for remaining               Long-term maintenance
                                                                   sediment.                            required for on-site
                                                                                                        landfill f a c i l i t y .

- R e l i a b i l i ty of         Migration of contaminants        If significant redistribution        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A. Minimal
  Controls                        from sediments to water could    of sediments, additional             potential for f a i l u r e of on-site
                                  occur.                           remedial actions may be              landfill f a c i l i t y .
                                                                   requi red.
Reduction of Toxici
Hobi1i ty or Volume
-Treatment Process                No reduction of toxicity,        Reduction in mobility of             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
 and Remedy                       irsobility or volume.            treated sediment and slight
                                                                   reduction in volume of on-site
                                                                   sediments. No reduction in
                                                                   toxici ty.
-Amount of Hazardous              No material removed or           Sediments identified as a pub-       Same as Alternative 2A,
 Materials Remaining              treated.                         lic health risk are removed
                                                                   and treated to be delisted.
                                                                   Remaining sediments are not
                                                                   considered to pose health
                                                                   risks by the sediment inges-
                                                                   tion pathway.




                            200    NIA


1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 TABLE: 14
                                                    OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                      SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                 Alternative 3A                               Alternative 38                       Alternative 3C
Long-Term Effectiveness
-Magnitude of Residua!         Sediment identified as a     Same as Alternative 3A.                               Same as Alternative 3A.
 Risks                         public health risk would be                                                        Treated materials considered to
                               removed and treated. Re-                                                           be clean fill after substantive
                               distribution of contami-                                                           del i sting.
                               nated sediments could result
                               in a public health risk.
                               Treated sediment delisted
                               as nonhazardous waste.
                               Water treated to NJPDES
                               Standards.
-Adequacy of Control             Proven Technology. Long-                Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
                                 term monitoring program                 Long-term maintenance required           Long-term monitoring required
                                 required for remaining                  for on-site landfill f a c i l i t y .   to assess the e f f e c t i v e n e s s
                                 sediments.                                                                       of the alternative.



-Reliability of                  If significant redistribu-              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 Controls                        tion of sediments occur,                Minimal failure of on-site               Minimal potential of leachate
                                 additional remedial actions             landfill f a c i l i t y .               from delisted sediments
                                 may be requi red.                                                                deposited on floodplain and
                                                                                                                  plant s i t e .

Reduction in T o n i c H y .
M o b i l i t y or Volume

-Treatment P r o c e s s         Permanent reduction in                  Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.        Same as Alternative 3A.
 and Remedy                      t o x i c i t y of treated sedi-                                                 Deposition o f f e r s greater
                                 ments. Reduction in                                                              mobility of leachate than
                                 volume and mobility of                                                           landfil1i ng.
                                 on-site contaminants.

-Amount of Hazardous             Sediments identified as a              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.         Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 Material Remaining              public health risk are
                                 removed and treated to be
                                 delistable. Remaining
                                 sediments do not pose health
                                 risk by the sediment in-
                                 gestion pathway. Signifi-
                                 cant quantity of arsenic-
                                 contaminated sludge gener-
                                 ated from e x t r a c t i o n process.



                200        NTA

1174X

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   TABLE 14   (Cont'd)
                                                       OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                           SUMMARY Of EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                     Alternative 1                    Alternative 2A                   Alternative 28
-Irreversibi1 i ty of               IM/A                              Treatment is essentially         Same as Alternative 2A.
 The Treatment                                                        i rreversible.
-Type and Quantity of               N/A                               Treated waste expected to        Treated waste expected to be
 Residual Waste                                                       be delisted.                     delisted.

Implementabi1i ty
o Technical F e a s i b i l i t y
- Ability to Construct              No difficulty.                    Standard equipment               Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
  Technology                                                          commercially available.
- R e l i a b i l i t y of          No technology.                    Hell developed and               Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
  Technology                                                          proven technology.
                                                                      Pilot-scale studies required
                                                                      to optimize treatment.

   Ease of Undertaking              No di fficulty.                   Additional future remedial       Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
   A d d i t i o n a l Remedial                                       actions may be required.
   Action If Necessarv
   Moni tori ng                     Long-term monitoring              Long-term monitoring required.   Long-term monitoring for
   Considerations                   required, monitoring                                               on-site landfill and remaining
                                    analysis techniques                                                sediment required. Monitoring
                                    available.                                                         analysis techniques available.




                             zoo
 117'IK f     .T-ui

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 14     (Cont'd)
                                                  OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                       SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                  Alternative 3A                        Alternative 3B                   A1 ternative 3C
-Irreversibi1ity of                Treatment is irreversible.      Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 The Treatment
-Type and Quantity of              Treated waste expected to       Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as Alternative 3A.
 Residual Waste                    be delisted. Arsenic
                                   sludge generated from
                                   extraction process highly
                                   contaminated.
Implementabi 1 i tv
o Technical Feasibility
-Ability to Construct              Standard equipment commer-      Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as Alternative 3A.
                                   cially available.
- R e l i a b i 1 i ty of          Well developed and proven       Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
  Technology                       technology. Pilot-scale                                             Floodplain and plant s i t e
                                   studies required to opti-                                           deposition not as reliable as
                                   mize treatment.                                                     a landfill liner/cap scenario.

-Ease of Undertaking    Additional future remedial                 Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
 Additional Remediation actions may be required.
 If Necessary
-Moni tori ng                      Long'-term monitoring           Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as Alternative 3A.
 Considerate ons                   reqdi red.                      Long-term monitoring for on-
                                                                   s i t e landfill required.
                                                                   Monitoring analysis techni-
                                                                   ques available.




                     ZOO    NX A

1 174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           TABLE 14   (Cont'd)
                                               OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                  SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors             Alternative I                     Alternative 2A                   .Alternative 2B
o Administrative feasibility
-Abi1i ty to obtain        Permits not required.              Oelisting approval   required      Oelisting approval required
 Approvals                                                    from NJOEP.                        from EPA Region II.   As the
                                                                                                 site is a CERCLA site, per-
                                                                                                 mits for landfill are not
                                                                                                 required.

-Coordination w i t h      Coordination required.             Coordination required.             Intensive coordination required
 Other A g e n c i e s                                                                           for on-site landfill f a c i l i t y .

            it_y of Services
 &_Haterials
-Availabi1ity of           Not required.                      Treatment capacity and storage     Same as Alternative 2A. On-site
 Treatment Capacity                                           capacity are all adequately        landfill provides higher availa-
 & Disposal Services                                          available.     Off-site landfill   b i l i t y for disposal.
                                                              requires administrative
                                                              acqui si tion.

-Availabi1i ty of          Not required.                      Standard equipment and             Same as Alternative 2A.
 Necessary Equipment                                          operations. No specialists
 & Speciali sts                                               required.
-Availabi 1 i ty of        Not required.                      Prospective technologies are       Same as Alternative 2A.
 Prospective                                                  available. Technologies are
 Technologi es                                                proven in bench-scale tests.
                                                              Pilot studies would be
                                                              required to optimize process.
Costs
o Total Capital Cost       $ 44,500                           $ 28,868,000                       $10,973,000
o Annual Operation and $ 49,500                               $     13,020 Long-term             $    80,000 Long-Term
  Maintenance Cost                                            $ 17,670,000 Short-term            $17,670,000 Short-term
o Present Worth            $874,200                           $ 60,402,000                       $43,386,000




                  £00    MIA



1174K



                                                                          f
                                                                          •t'A'
                                                                          v£;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                TABLE 14   (Cont'd)

                                               OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)

                                    SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE


Assessment Factors                Alternative 3A                        Alternative 3B                       Al ternative 3C
o Administrative Feasibili
- A b i l i t y to obtain    Delisting approval required          Delisting approval required             Same as Alternative 3B. Approval
  Approvals                  from NJOEP.                          from EPA Region II.      As the         for floodplain and plant s i t e de-
                                                                  s i t e is a CERCLA site, per-          position may be difficult to ob-
                                                                  mits for landfill are not               tain. ID 27 waste classification
                                                                  requi red.                              of treated material would prevent
                                                                                                          implementation of alternative.
-Coordination with           Coordination required for            Intensive coordination required         Coordination required for
 Other Agencies              identification of off-site           for on-site landfill f a c i l i t y    approval of floodplain and plant
                             nonhazardous and                     and identification of o f f - s i t e   s i t e deposition and identification
                             hazardous landfills.                 hazardous landfill.                     of hazardous landfill.

-Avai labjl i tv of Service;.
 & Materials
-Availability of             Treatment capacity and               Same as Alternative 3A. On-             Treatment capacity, storage
 Treatment Capacity          storage are all adequately           site landfill provides higher           capacity and disposal capacity
 & Di sposal Services        available. O f f - s i t e land-     a v a i l a b i l i t y for disposal.   are all adequately available.
                             fill requires administra-
                             tive acquisition.

-Availabili ty of            Standard equipment and               Same as Alternative 3A.                 Same as Alternative 3A.
 Necessary Equipment         operations. No specialists
 & Specialists               requi red.

-Availabili ty of               Prospective technologies are Same as Alternative 3A.                      Same as Alternative 3A.
 Prospective                    available. Technologies
 Technologies                   are proven in bench-scale
                                studies. Pilot-scale
                                studies required to optimize
                                process.

Costs
o Total Capital Cc-st           $21,530,000                       513,209,000                             $11,083,000

o Annual Operation &            $    13,020 Long-term             '$   54,000 Long-term                   $    13,020 Long-term
  Maintenance Cosl:             $ 1,587,000 Short-term            $ 1,587,000 Short-term                  $ 1,587,000 Short-term

o Present Worth                 $24,583,000                       $16,808,000                             $14,136,000




                            MIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       TABLE u (Cont'd)
                                                          OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                                            SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                       Alternative 1                      Alternative 2A                  Alternative 29
Compliance with ARARs
-Compliance wi th                      No contaminant-specific ARAR      No contaminant-specific ARAR      Same as Alternative 2A.
 contaminant-speci fie                 established for arsenic con-      established for arsenic con-
 ARARs                                 taminated sediment. Will          taminated sediments. W i l l
                                       not meet health-based levels.     meet health-based levels.
-Appropriateness of                    Not applicable.                   Treatability variance may be      Same as Alternative 2A.
                                                                         requi red.
-Compliance w i t h                    Mot. applicable.                  All action-specific ARARs         Same as Alternative 2A.
 a c t i o n - s p e c i f i c ARARs                                     will be met.
-Compliance with ap-                   Not in compliance with state      Will be in compliance with        Same as Alternative 2A.
 propriate c r i t e r i a ,           and local criteria and fed-       State and local criteria
 a d v i s o r i e s , and             eral advisories.                  and federal advisories.
 guidance

Overall Protection of                  Risk of direct contact with       Rist: of sediment ingestion re-   Same as Alternative 2A.
      Health and the                   contaminated sediment and         duced. Contaminants removed
Envi ronment                           water controlled but not          and chemically fixated to re-
                                       eliminated. Contaminants          duce toxicity and eliminate
                                       remain on-site and their          mobility. Volume of fixated
                                       t o x i c i t y , mobility or     solids will increase.
                                       volume unaltered.                 Cancer risk level for those
                                                                         sediments identified as a
                                                                         public health risk would be
                                                                         reduced to levels protective
                                                                         of human health.
State Acceptance                       State comments indicated          General comments from the State   Same as Alternative 2A.
                                       that the No Action                include the need for additional
                                       Alternative would be pro-         sampling prior to the initi-
                                       tective of human health if        ation of a remedial action.
                                       restrictive measures were         The State also identified need
                                       enacted.                          for an environmental assessment
                                                                         in the river areas to determine
                                                                         impacts of dredging.
Community Acceptance                   No public comments have been      Community expressed that no-      Same as Alternative 2.A.
                                       received to date.                 action would be the preferred
                                                                         alternative for submerged
                                                                         sediments in the river areas.



                                        NIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          TABLE 14   (Cont'd)
                                           OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
                               SUMMARY Or EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors           Alternative 3A                      Alternative 3B               Alternative 3C
Compliance with ARARs
-Compliance wi th          No contaminant-specific       Same as Alternative 3A.          Same as Alternative 3A.
 centami nant-speci fi c   ARAR established for arsenic.
 ARARs                     Treated sediment will meet
                           health-based levels.
-Appropriateness of        Treatabil i ty variance may be Same as Alternative 3A.         ID 27 waste c l a s s i f i c a t i o n
 waivers                   requi red.                                                     must be waived.
                                                                                          Treatability variance may be
                                                                                          requi red.
-Compliance with           All action-specific ARARs        Same as Alternative 3A.       Same as Alternative 3A.
 action-specific ARAf'.s   will be met.
-Compliance with ap-       'rfi11 be in compliance with     Same as Alternative 2A.       Same as Alternative 3A.
 propriate criteria,        state and local criteria
 advisories, and            and Federal advisories.
 guidance
Overall Protection oi:     Risk of sediment ingestion     Same as Alternative 3A.         Same as Alternative 3A.
Human Health and the       reduced. Contaminants removed
Envi ronment               and extracted and converted
                           to nonhazardous form. Vol-
                           ume of contaminants unchanged.
                           Cancer risk level for those
                           sediments identified as a
                           public health risk reduced
                           to levels protective of human
                           health.
State Acceptance           General comments received    Same as Alternative 3A.           Same as Alternative 3A.
                           from the State include the
                           need for additional sampling
                           prior to the initiation of a
                           remedial action. The State
                           also identified need for an
                           environmental assessment in
                           the river areas to determine
                           the impacts of dredging.
Community Acceptance       Community expressed that no      Sames as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.
                           action would be the pre-
                           ferred alternative for the
                           submerged sediments in the
                           river areas.


                     £00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                           TABLE 15
                                                                           OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                                SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                                                                                                                           A l t e r n a t i v e 3A-Removal/
                                                                                                                                           Extraction/Sediments to
                                                                        Alternative 2A-Removal/            Alternative 2B-Remova1/         O f f - S i t e Nonhazardous
                                        Alternative 1                   Fixation/Off-Site                  Fixation/On-Site                Landfill/Otf-Site Hazardous
Assessment Factors                        No Action                     Nonhazardous Landfill              Nonhazardous Landfill           Sludge Dif.pp.sa1

Short-Term E f f e c t i v e n e s s

- P r o t e c t i o n of               No short-term                     Potential for direct contact      Same as Alternative 2A         Same as Alternative 2A.
  community during                     threats to                        of spilled waste and inhala-
  remedial a c t i o n s               communi ties.                     tion of fugitive dust.
-Protection of workers                 Personnel protection             Minimal risk to workers.           Same as Alternative 2A         Same as Alternative 2A.
 during remediation                    equipment required               Personnel protection equipment
                                       against dermal contact           required against direct
                                       and inhalation during            contact with wastes and
                                       sign posting, sample             inhalation of fugitive dust
                                       collection, inspection.
-Environmental         Impact"         No significant adverse            Increased traffic, noise, and     Minimal increase in traffic,   Same as Alternative 2A.
                                       environmental impacts             ai r polluti on.                  noise and air pollution.
                                       from site activities.
                                                                         Hydraulic dredging may result     Same as Alternative 2A.        Hydraulic dredging may result in
                                                                         in localized resuspension of                                     localized resuspension of sedi-
                                                                         sediments. Migration of sus-                                     ments. Migration of suspended
                                                                         pended particulates could be                                     particulates could be controlled
                                                                         controlled by increasing the                                     by increasing the water intake of
                                                                         water intake of the dredge                                       the dredge and utilizing s i l t
                                                                         and utilizing silt curtains.                                     curtains.
                                                                         Excavation of the exposed         Same as Alternative I!A.       Same as Alternative 2A.
                                                                         sediments would pose minimal
                                                                         impacts.
-Time until remedi-                    Some years.                       Estimated to be 3 years from      Same as Alternative 2A.        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.
 ' ation                                                                 start of construction to
                                                                         completion of remediation work.




                       ZOO         MIA


 1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                   TABLE 15         (Cont'd)
                                                                                 OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                                      SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

                                       Alternative SB-Removal/                     A l t e r n a t i v e 3C-Removal/            A l t e r n a t i v e 30-
                                       Extraction/Sediment to                      E x t r a c t i o n / L a k e Deposi-        Removal/Extraction/
                                       On-Site Nonhazardous                        tion of Sediments/Off-                       Plant S i t e Deposition of
                                       Landfill/Off-Site Hazar-                    S i t e Hazardous Sludge                     Sediments/Off-Site                        A l t e r n a t i v e 5-In   Situ
Assessment Factors                     dous Sludge Disposal                        Disposal                                     Hazardous Sludge Disposal                 Sand C o v e r i n g

Short-Term E f f e c t i v e n e s s

- P r o t e c t i o n of               S.jme as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.        Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.             Same as Alternative 3A.             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
  community during reme-
  dial a c t i o n s

- P r o t e c t i o n of workers       Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.         Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.             Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.
  during remediation




-Envi roninental                       Minimal increase in traffic               Same as Alternative 3B.          Same as Alternative 3A.                          If remediation is conducted
 Impacts                               noise and air p o l l u t i o n .         Temporary adverse impacts such                                                    when the lake is at its full
                                                                                 as resuspension of sediments may                                                  condition discharge of the
                                       Same as Alternative 3A.                   occur as a result of dredging                                                     sand covering could result in
                                                                                 and/or redeposition of treated                                                    temporary adverse impacts such
                                                                                 material. Migration of sus-                                                       as resuspension of sediment.
                                                                                 pended particulates could be
                                                                                 controlled by increasing the
                                                                                 water intake of the dredge
                                                                                 and utilizing silt curtains.

                                       Same as Alternative 3A.                   Same as Alternative 3A.                       Same as Alternative 3A.             Covering lake bottom count
                                                                                                                                                                   affect biota.

-Time until remediation                Same as Alternative 3A.                   Same as Alternative 3A.                       Same as Alternative 3A,             Estimated to be 1 year from start
                                                                                                                                                                   of remediation to finish.




                             ^oo

H74K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                           TABLE 15     (Cont'd)
                                                              OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                   SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors         Alternative 1                       Alternative 2A                        Alternative 2B                              Alternative 3A
Long-Term Effectiveness
-Magnitude of Residual    Long-term evaluation             Sediments identified as a               Same as Alternative 2A.                     Sediment identified as a public
 Risks                    required for natural             public health risk would be                                                         health risk would be removed and
                          degradation and transport        removed and treated. Redis-                                                         treated. Redistribution of con-
                          reduction.                       tribution of contaminated                                                           taminated sediments could result
                                                           sediments could result in a                                                         in a public health r i s k . Treated
                                                           public health risk. Treated                                                         sediments d e l i s t a b l e as nonhazar-
                                                           sediments delistable as                                                             dous w a s t e . Supernatant w.iter
                                                           non hazardous waste. Super-                                                         treated tc MJPDES.
                                                           natant water treated to
                                                           NJPDES.
-Adequacy of Control      Depends on success in             Proven technologies.                   Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.           Proven Technology. Long-term
                          preventing access to              Long term monitoring program           Long-term maintenance                       monitoring program required for
                          the site.                         required for remaining                 required for on-site                        remaining sediments.
                                                            sediment.                              landfill f a c i l i t y .

-Reliability of           Migration of contaminants         Excavation of the exposed              Same as Alternative 2A.                     Excavation nf exposed sediments
 Controls                 from sediments to water could     sediments when the lake is                                                         when the l a k e is at drawdown
                          occur.                            at drawdown would o f f e r more                                                   would o f f e r more control of
                                                            control of operations than                                                         operations than dredging.
                                                            dredging.

                                                            If significant redistribution          Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A. Minimal   If s i g n i f i c a n t redistribution of
                                                            of sediments, additional               failure of on-site landfill                 sediments occurs, a d d i t i o n a l re-
                                                            remedial actions may be                facility.                                   medial a c t i o n s may be required.
                                                            required.

Reduction of Toxici ty.
Mobility or Volume
-Treatment Process        No reduction of toxicity,         Reduction in mobility of               Same as Alternative 2A.                     Permanent reduction in t o x i c i t y
 and Remedy               mobi1i ty or volume.              treated sediment and slight                                                        of treated sediments. Slight
                                                            reduction in volume of on-site                                                     reduction in volume and m o b i l i t y
                                                            sediments. Increase in volume                                                      of on-site contaminants.
                                                            of treated sediments.
                                                            No reduction in t o x i c i t y .

-Amount of Hazardous      No material removed or            Sediments identified as a pub-         Same as Alternative 2A.                     Sediments i d e n t i f i e d as a public
 Materials Remaining      treated.                          lic health risk are removed                                                        health risk are removed and
                                                            and treated to be delistable.                                                      treated to be delistable. Re-
                                                            Remaining sediments are not                                                        maining sediments are not consi-
                                                            considered accessible for                                                          dered a c c e s s i b l e for sediment in-
                                                            sediment ingestion pathway.                                                        gestion pathway. S i g n i f i c a n t
                                                                                                                                               quantity of a r s e n i c contaminated
                  ZOO                                                                                                                          sludge generated from e x t r a c t i o n
                                                                                                                                               process.




1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      TABLE 15     (Cont'd)
                                                                        OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                             SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                  Alternative 3B                       Alternative 3C                        Alternative 30                           A1ternati ve 5
Long Term-Ef fecti vengsi;
-Magnitude of Residual            Same as Alternative 3A. Long-          Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3C              Contaminated sediments above a c t i o n
 Risks                            term maintenance and monitoring                                                                                 level would remain on-site.  Sedi-
                                  required for on-site landfill.                                                                                  ment redistribution to top of sand
                                                                                                                                                  cover could result in a public
                                                                                                                                                  health r i s k .

-Adequacy of Control              Same as Alternative 3A.                Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 3A.   Long-term maintenance of sand
                                  Long-term maintenance required                                                                                  cover would tip required. Addi-
                                  for on-site landfill facility.                                                                                  tional cover or regrading of cover
                                                                                                                                                  may be necessary. Long-term moni-
                                                                                                                                                  toring required for remaining
                                                                                                                                                  sediments.

-Reliabili ty of                  Same as Alternative 3A.                Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.             N/A
 Controls



                                  Same as Alternative 3A.                Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.             R e l i a b i l i t y of sand cover to pre-
                                  Minimal risk of failure of             Minimal potential of                 Minimal potential of                vent ingestion of sediments
                                  on-site landfill f a c i l i t y .     leachate from delisted               leachate from delisted              unknown. Significant long-term
                                                                         sediments deposited in lake.         sediments deposited on the          maintenance of -over required to
                                                                                                              plant s i t e .                     prevent exposure of sediments.
Reduction i n T o x i c i t y .
Mobi 1 i tv or Volume

-Treatment Process                Same as Alternative 3A.                Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.             No reduction ir> toxicity or volume
 and Remedy                                                              Reduction in t o x i c i t y and                                         of waste. Arsenic m o b i l i t y would
                                                                         mobility of sediments.                                                   be reduced. Contaminated sediments
                                                                                                                                                  left uncovered may redistribute to
                                                                                                                                                  areas of potential public risk.


-Amount of Hazardous              Same as Alternative 3A.                Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.             All material remaining in place.
 Material Remaining




                           £00

1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                      TABLE 15          (Cont'd)
                                                                      OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                          SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                   Alternative 1                     Alternative 2A                                Alternative 2B                        Alternative 3A
Reduction of Toxicity.
Mobi1 i tv, or Volume (Cent 1 )
-trreversibility of                N/A                             Treatment is e s s e n t i a l l y              Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.   Treatment is e s s e n t i a l l y irrever-
 Treatment                                                         irreversible.                                                                       sible.

-Type and Quantity of              N/A                             Treated vaste expected to                       Same as A l t e r n a t i v e 2A.   Treated waste expected to be de-
 Residual Waste                                                    be d e l i s t a b l e .                                                            listable. A r s e n i c sludge gener-
                                                                                                                                                       ated f r o m e x t r a c t i o n p r o c e s s
                                                                                                                                                       highly c o n t a m i n a t e d .

Implementabil i tv
o Technical Feasibility
- A b i l i t y to Construct No difficulty.                        Standard equipment.                             Same as Alternative 2A.             Standard equipment commercially
  Technology                                                       Commercially available.                                                             available.

- R e l i a b i l i t y of         No technology.                  W e l l developed and proven       Same as Alternative 2A.                          Well developed and proven tech-
  Technology                                                       technology.                                                                         nology. P i l o t scale s t u d i e s
                                                                   Pilot scale studies required                                                        required to o p t i m i z e treatment.
                                                                   to optimize treatment.     Excava-
                                                                   tion of exposed sediment                                                            Excavation or exposed sediment
                                                                   would be more reliable than                                                         would be more reliable than
                                                                   hydraulic dredging due to an                                                        hydraulic dredging due to an in-
                                                                   increase in operational control.                                                    crease in o p e r a t i o n a l c o n t r o l .

   Ease of Undertaking                                             Additional future remedial                      Same as Alternative 2A.             Additional future remedial a c t i o n s
   Addi ti onal                                                    actons may be required.                                                             may be required.
   Remediation,
   If Necessary
   Monitoring                      Long-term monitoring            Long-term monitoring required.                  Long-term monitoring fcir           Long-term monitoring required.
   Considerations                  required. Monitoring                                                            on-site landfill and remaining
                                   analysis techniques                                                             sediment required. Monitoring
                                   available.                                                                      analysis techniques available.

                                                                   Monitoring would be required                    Same as Alternative 2A..            Monitoring would be required
                                                                   throughout the remediation                                                          throughout the remediation to en-
                                                                   to ensure the removal of the                                                        sure the removal of the sediments
                                                                   sediments identified as a                                                           i d e n t i f i e d as a potential public
                                                                   potential public health risk.                                                       health r i s k .




                             £00    NIA
1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      TABLE 15 (Cont'd)
                                                          OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                               SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors            Alternative 36                 Alternative 3C                  Alternative 3D                 AIternati ve 5
Reduction of Toxicitv.
Mobility, or Volume (Cent1)
-Irreversibility of       Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A.     No treatment.
 The Treatment
-Type and Quantity of     Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A,     No treatment.
 Residual Waste



Implementabil it*
o Technical Feasibility
-Ability to Construct     Same as Alternative 3A.       Same as Alternative 3A.           Same as Alternative 3A.     Standard equipment and material

-Reliability of           Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative :>A.    Reliability of effectiveness of
 Technology                                            Reliability of lake depo-          Reliability of plant site   sand cover is unknown. Expected
                                                       sition of delisted sedi-           deposition is high.         to be fai rly good.
                                                       ments is high.
                          Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A.     Same as Alternative 3A.




-Ease of Undertaking      Same as Alternative 3A,       Same as Alternative 3A.           Same as Alternative 3A.     Same as Alternative 3A.
 Additional Remedia-
 tion, If Necessary
-Moni toring              Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A.     Same as Alternative 3A.
 Considerations           Long-term monitoring for on-
                          site landfill required.
                          Monitoring analysis techni-
                          ques available.
                          Same as Alternative 3A.      Same as Alternative 3A.            Same as Alternative 3A.     Same as Alternative 3A.




                      zoo MIA
1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 15 (Cont'd)
                                                                         OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                              SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE
Assessment Factors                    Alternative 1                       Alternative 2A                       Alternative 2B                               A1 t e r n a t i v e 3A

o Administrative F e a s i b i l i t y
-Ability to Obtain                   Permits not required.            Delisting approval     required        Deli sting approval required             Delisting approval required from
 Approvals                                                            from NODEP.                            from USEPA Region II.         As the     NJDEP
                                                                                                             s i t e is a CERCLA s i t e , per-
                                                                                                             mits for on-site landfill
                                                                                                             are not required.

-Coordination wi th                  Coordination required.           Coordination required.                 Intensive coordination required          Coordination required for identi-
 Other Agencies                                                                                              for on-site landfill f a c i l i t y .   f i c a t i o n of o~'f-site nonhaz;irdous
                                                                                                                                                      landfill and o f f - s i t e hazardous
                                                                                                                                                      treatment and disposal f a c i l i t y .

-Availability of Services
 and Materials
-Availability of       Not required.                                   Treatment capacity and storage        Same as Alternative 2A. On-site          Treatment capacity and storage
 Treatment Capacity                                                    capacity are all adequately           landfill provides higheT availa-         are all adequately available.
 and Disposal Services                                                 available. O f f - s i t e landfill   b i l i t y for disposal.                O f f - s i t e nonhazardous and
                                                                       requires administrative                                                        hazardous landfill requires
                                                                       acquisition.                                                                   administrative a c q u i s i t i o n .

-Availabi lity of                    Not required.                     Standard equipment and                Same as Alternative 2A.                  Standard equipment and opera-
 Necessary Equipment                                                   operations. No specialists                                                     tions. No s p e c i a l t i e s required.
 and Specialists                                                       required.
-Availability of                     Not required.                     Prospective technologies are          Same as Alternative 2A.                  Prospective technologies are
 Prospective                                                           available. Technologies are                                                    available. Technologies are pro-
 Technologies                                                          proven in Bench-Scale Tests.                                                   ven in Bench-Scale Studies. Pi-
                                                                       Pilot studies would be                                                         lot-Scale studies required to op-
                                                                       required to optimize process.                                                  timize process.

Cost

Lake At Its Full Condition

o Total Capital Cost                 $ 44,450                          $ 34,591,000                          $13,742,000                              $ 25,740,000
o Annual Operation and               $ 49,455                          $      13,000 Long-term               $    90,000 Long-term                    $       13,000 Long-Term
  Maintenance Cost                                                     $ ;!0,562,000 Short-term              $20,562,000 Short-term                   $   1 ,832,000 Short-Term


o Present Worth                 5874,245                               $ 71,247,000                          $51,414,000                              $ 29,227,000

Lake At Drawdown C o n d i t i o n

o Total Capi tal     Cost.      !>ame as Above                         $ 32,317,000                          $11,467,000                              $ 23,973,000

o Annual Operation ;ind Same as Above                                  $     13,000 Long-term                $    90,000 Long-term                    $      13,000 Long-Term
                                                                       $ 20,487,000 Short-term               $20,487,000 Short-Term                   $   1,808,000 Short-Term

o P                       200         NIA                              $ 68,840,000                          $49,006,000                              $ 27,417,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                       TABLE 15   (Cont'd)
                                                                            OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                           SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE


Assessment Factors                  Alternative 3B                             Alternative 3C                   Alternative 3D                       Alternative 5
o Administrative F e a s i b i l i t y
-Abi1i ty to obtain               Delisting approval required                 Same as Alternative 3A.          Same as Alternative 3A.          Should not pose a problem.
 Approvals                        from USEPA Region II. As the                Approval for lake deposition     Approval for plant site depo-
                                  site is a CERCLA site, per-                 may be difficult to obtain.      sition may be difficult to obtain.
                                  mits for landfill are not
                                  requi red.
-Coordination with                Intensive coordination required Intensive coordination                       Coordination required for             Coordination required.
 Other Agencies                   for on-site landfill facility   required for approval of lake                approval of plant s i t e depo-
                                  and identification of off-site deposition and identification                 sition and identification of
                                  hazardous treatment and dis-    of hazardous treatment and                   o f f - s i t e hazardous treatment
                                  posal facility.                 disposal facility.                           and disposal f a c i l i t y .
-Availability of Services
 and Materials
-Availabi 1 i ty of               Same as Alternative 3A. On-                 Treatment capacity, storage      Same as Alternative 3C.               No treatment or disposal.
 Treatment Capaci ty              site nonhazardous landfill                  capacity and disposal capacity
 and Disposal Services            provides higher a v a i l a b i l i t y     are all adequately available.
                                  or disposal.
-Availabi1i ty of                 Same as Alternative 3A.                     Same as Alternative 3A.          Same as Alternative 3A.               Same as Alternative 3A.
 Necessary Equipment,
 and Specialists
-Availabi 1 ity of                Same as Alternative 3A.                     Same as Alternative 3A.          Same as Alternative 3A.               Not required.
 Prospective
 Technologies
Costs
Lake At Its FulLCo.r,di tion
o Total Capital Cost              $16,017,000                                 $11,265,000                      $14,746,000                           $   3,145,000

o Annual Operation i              $    60,000 Long-term                       $    13,000 Long-term            $     13,000 Long-Term                $      13,000
  Maintenance Cost                $ 1,832,000 Short-term                      $ 1,832,000 Short-term           $   1,832,000 Short-Term

o Present Worth                   $20,133,000                                 $14,752,000                      $18,233,000                           $ 3,369,000
Lake At Drawdown Condition
o Total Capital Cost              $14,249,000                                 S 9,498,000                      $12,978,000                           $   2,176,000

o Annual Operation 8              $    60,000 Long-term                       S    13,000 Long-term            $    13,000 Long-Term                 $      13,000
  Maintenance Cost                $ 1,808,000 Short-term                      S 1,808,000 Short-term           $ 1,808,000 Short-Tern

o Presen                                   >    nnn                           512,942,000                      $16,422,000                           $   2,400,000

                                  200          NIA
 1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                     TABLE 15   (Cont'd)
                                                                         OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                             SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors                      Alternative 1                     Alternative 2A                    Alternative 2B              A1 ternatiyj? 3A
Compliance with ARAR;
-Compliance wi th                      No contaminant-specific ARARs   No contaminant-specific ARARs       Same as Alternative 2A.    No contaminant-specific ARARs
 contaminant-speci f i <:              established for arsenic con-    established for arsenic con-                                   established for arsenic.
 ARARs                                 taminated sediment. Will        taminated sediments. Will                                      Treated sediment will meet
                                       not meet health based levels.   meet health based levels.                                      health based levels.
-Appropriateness of                    Not justifiable.                Treatability variance may be        Same as Alternative 2A.    Treatability variance may be
 waivers                                                               requi red.                                                     requi red.
-Compliance wi th                      All appropriate and relevant    All action-specific   ARARs         Same as Alternative 2A.    All action-specific ARARs will
 a c t i o n - s p e c i f i c ARARs   RCRA closure/post-closure       would be met.                                                  be met.
                                       requirements in 40 CFR 264,
                                       110-264, 120 would not be
                                       met.
-Compliance with ap-                   Not in compliance with state    Would be in compliance with         Same as Alternative 2A.    Will be in compliance with state
 propriate c r i t e r i a ,           and local criteria and fed-     state and local criteria                                       and local criteria and federal
 advisories, and                       ural advisories.                and federal advisories.                                        advisories.
 guidance

Overall Protection of                  Risk of direct contact with     Risk of sediment ingestion re-      Same as Alternative 2A.    Risk of sediment ingestion re-
Human Health and_thi;                  contaminated sediment and       duced. Contaminants removed                                    duced. Contaminants removed and
Envi ronment                           water controlled but not        and chemically fixated to                                      converted to nonhazardous form.
                                       eliminated. Contaminants        reduce mobility. Volume of                                     Volume of contaminants slightly
                                       remain on-site and their        fixated solids will increase                                   reduced. Cancer risk lev*! for
                                       toxicity, mobility or           by 17X. Cancer risk levels                                     those sediments identified as a
                                       volume unaltered.               for those sediments identified                                 public health risk reduced to
                                                                       as a public health risk re-                                    target levels.
                                                                       duced to target levels.
State Acceptance                       State comments indicated        General comments received           Same as Alternative 211.   General comments received from
                                       that the no action alterna-     from the State include the                                     the state include the need for
                                       tive would be protective of     need for sampling prior to                                     sampling prior to the i n i t i a t i o n
                                       human health through the        the initiation of the action                                   of the action to confirm the lo-
                                       restricted access to the        to confirm the location of                                     cation of the contaminated sedi-
                                       lake.                           the contaminated sediments.                                    ments.
                                                                       The state also identified the
                                                                       need for an environmental
                                                                       assessment to determine the
                                                                       impacts of dredging.

Community AcceB.taO':g                 No public comments have been    Community expressed that no         Same as Alternative 2A.    Same as Alternative 2A.
                                       received to date.               action would be the preferred
                                                                       alternative in the lake.




                                       ZOO    NIA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         TABLE 15     (Cont'd)
                                                              OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
                                                  SUMMARY OF EVALUATIONS AND COST INFORMATION FOR EACH ALTERNATIVE

Assessment Factors            Alternative 3B                   Alternative 3C                      Alternative 3D          Alternative 5
Compliance with ARARs
-Compliance with             Same as Alternative 3A.        Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.   Hill not meet health based level,
 contaminant-speci f i c .
 ARARs

-Appropriateness of          Same as Alternative 3A.        Treatability variance may be         Same as Alternative 3A.   Not required.
 wai vers                                                   requi red.
-Compliance with             Same as Alternative 3A.        Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.   Same as Alternative 3A,
 action-specific ARAF'.s
-Compliance with ap-         Same as Alternative 3A.        Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.   Same as Alternative 3A.
 propriate criteria,
 advisories, and
 guidance
Overall Protection of        :3ame as Alternative 3A.       Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.   Risk of sediment ingestion reduced.
Human Health and the                                                                                                       Mobility of contaminants reduced.
Envi ronment                                                                                                               Cancer risk l?vel for those sedi-
                                                                                                                           ments identified as a public health
                                                                                                                           risk reduced to target levels.
                                                                                                                           These contaminants remain on-';ite.
State Acceptance             Same as Alternative 3A.        Same as Alternative 3A.              Same as Alternative 3A.   Same as Alternative 3A.
Community Acceptance         Community expressed that       Same as Alternative 3B.              Same as Alternative 3B.   Same as Alternative 38.
                             no action would be preferred
                             alternative in the lake.




                             £00

1174K

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              TABLE 16
           OPERABLE UNIT ONE (PLANT SITE SOURCE CONTROL)
             ALTERNATIVE SC-5: IN SITU SOIL FLUSHING
                    COST ESTIMATES (1989 DOLLARS)

CAPITAL COSTS
FACILITY/CONSTRUCTION                    DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST, $
I.     SITE PREPARATION                              57,120
II.    SUPPORT FACILITIES                           78,000
III.   SOIL EXCAVATION                           1,569,763
IV.    SOIL FLUSHING SYSTEM                         765,875
V.     CHICKEN COOP DECONTAMINATION                 252,900
VI.    CLOSURE OF LINED LAGOON                      373,782
VII.   CLOSURE OF CONCRETE LINED LAGOON             453,196
VIII. ELECTRICAL                                     30.000

       TOTAL DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST (TDCC)     3,581,836
       CONTINGENCY @ 20% OF TDCC                   716,367
       ENGINEERING @ 5% OF TDCC                    179,092
       LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE @ 2% OF TDCC        71,637
       TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                  4,548,932
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
       SHORT-TERM                                   68,521
       LONG-TERM                                    11,970
PRESENT WORTH COST                               5,158,870
(Calculated at a 5% discount rate)




                                                                       p
                                                                       o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 TABLE 17
        OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
       ALTERNATIVE MOM-4A: SITE PUMPING/TREATMENT/REINJECTION/
                    DISCHARGE TO THE MAURICE RIVER
                     COST ESTIMATES (1989 DOLLARS)

CAPITAL COSTS
FACILITY/CONSTRUCTION                       DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST, $
I.      SITE PREPARATION                               28,560
II.     SUPPORT FACILITIES                             78,000
III.    SITE AREA PUMPING AND COLLECTION              849,800
IV.     CHEMICAL OXIDATION SYSTEM                    252,050
V.      CHEMICAL PRECIPITATION                      1,010,510
VI.     ION EXCHANGE SYSTEM                           726,900
VII.    ACTIVATED CARBON ADSORBER SYSTEM             373,750
VIII. PROCESS PIPING AND I&C                 Included in above items
IX.     TREATED GROUNDWATER SYSTEM                   241,400
X.      DISCHARGE PIPING SYSTEM TO THE
        MAURICE RIVER                              1,232,610
XI.     INSTRUMENTATION AND CONTROLS                  103,000
XII.    ELECTRICAL                                     30,000
XIII. UTILITIES                                      220,000




                                                                          o
                                                                          o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            TABLE 17 (CONT'D)
        OPERABLE UNIT TWO (PLANT SITE MANAGEMENT OF MIGRATION)
       ALTERNATIVE MOM-4A: SITE PUMPING/TREATMENT/REINJECTION/
                    DISCHARGE TO THE MAURICE RIVER
                    COST ESTIMATES (1989 DOLLARS)
CAPITAL COSTS    (CONT'D)
XIV.    BUILDINGS, PLATFORMS AND STAIRS             200,000
XV.     FOUNDATION AND PADS                         410.200

        TOTAL DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST (TDCC)   5,504,730
        CONTINGENCY @ 20% OF TDCC               1,100,946
        ENGINEERING @ 5% OF TDCC                  275,237
        LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE @ 2% OF TDCC     110.095
        TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                 6,991,008
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS*                5,155,053
PRESENT WORTH COST                              34,147,808
(Calculated at a 5% discount rate)
*
      As the arsenic contaminant plume drops below 0 . 3 5 m g / 1 ,
      e x t r a c t i o n wells in these areas may be shut off t h u s
      decreasing the annual operation and maintenance cost. The
      present worth is calculated considering this.




                                                                    O
                                                                    o
                                                                    hJ



                                                                         t-A

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 TABLE 18

              OPERABLE UNIT THREE (RIVER AREAS SEDIMENTS)
      ALTERNATIVE BC: DREDGING/EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/FLOODPLAIN
       REDEPOSITION OF SEDIMENTS/PLANT SITE DEPOSITION OF RIVER
             SEDIMENTS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
                     COST ESTIMATES (1989 DOLLARS)
CAPITAL COSTS
FACILITY/CONSTRUCTION                       DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST, $
I.      SITE PREPARATION                              288,592
II.     SUPPORT FACILITIES                             78,000
III.    SEDIMENT HYDRAULIC DREDGING                  417,352
IV.     SEDIMENT EXCAVATION                           747,061
V.      SEDIMENT EXTRACTION SYSTEM                  1,052,030
VI.     EXTRACTANT TREATMENT SYSTEM                 1,683,715
VII. FLOODPLAIN DEPOSITION                          1,069,514
VIII. PLANT SITE DEPOSITION                           709,858
IX.     OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS DISPOSAL                 1,693,125
X.      PROCESS PIPING AND I&C                        163,800
XI.     ELECTRICAL                                   373,400
XII.    BUILDINGS, PLATFORMS AND STAIRS               268,400
XIII. FOUNDATIONS AND PADS                            182.300

        TOTAL DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST (TDCC) 8,727,146
        CONTINGENCY @ 20% OF TDCC             1,745,429
        ENGINEERING @ 5% OF TDCC                     436,357
        LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE @ 2% OF TDCC        174.543
        TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                   11,083,476
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
        SHORT-TERM                                  1,586,899
        LONG-TERM                                      13,020

PRESENT WORTH COST                                 14,136,109
(Calculated at a 5% discount rate)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 19
            OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (UNION LAKE SEDIMENTS)
 ALTERNATIVE 3C: REKGVAL/EXTRACTION/REDEPOSITIGN OF SEDIMENTS/
                OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
                    COST ESTIMATES (1989 DOLLARS)
CAPITAL COSTS
FACILITY/CONSTRUCTION                     DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST, $
I.     SITE PREPARATION                             288,592
II.    SUPPORT FACILITIES                            78,000
III.   SEDIMENT EXCAVATION                        1,067,791
IV.    SEDIMENT EXTRACTION SYSTEM                 1,052,030
V.     EXTRACTANT TREATMENT SYSTEM               1,683,715
VI.    SEDIMENT REDEPOSITION                        352,641
VII.   OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS DISPOSAL                1,967,755
VIII. PROCESS PIPING AND I&C                        163,800
IX.    ELECTRICAL                                   373,400
X.     BUILDINGS, PLATFORMS AND STAIRS              268,400
XI.    FOUNDATIONS AND PADS                        182.300

       TOTAL DIRECT CONSTRUCTION COST (TDCC)     7,478,424
       CONTINGENCY @ 20% OF TDCC                 1,495,685
       ENGINEERING @ 5% OF TDCC                    373,921
       LEGAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE @ 2% OF TDCC       149.568
       TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                    9,497,598
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS
       SHORT-TERM                                1,808,043              <
       LONG-TERM                                    13,020              Z
PRESENT WORTH COST                              12,941,849               g
(Calculated at a 5% discount rate)                                      to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                 Vineland Chemical Company Site
                      Vineland, New Jersey
This responsiveness summary, as required by Superfund policy,
provides a summary of citizen's comments and concerns received
during the public comment period following the release of the RI
and FS reports and the Proposed Plan. The public comment period
was held for 30 days, from July 1, 1989 through August 1, 1989.
The RI and FS reports, and the Proposed Plan, can be found at one
of the information repositories listed below:
     Vineland City Hall       Vineland Public Library
     7th and Wood Streets     1058 East Landis Avenue
     Vineland, NJ 08360       Vineland, NJ 08360
     (609) 794-4060           Reference Director:
                              Mr. Anthony Agnesino
                              (609) 794-4244
     Millville City Hall      Millville Public Library
     1800 South High Street   210 Buck Street
     P.O. Box 609             Millville, NJ 08360
     Millville, NJ 08332      Reference Director:
     (609) 825-7000           Nancy Forester
                              (609)   825-7087

The EPA held a public meeting on July 18, 1989 at the Vineland
City Hall to outline the remedial alternatives presented in the
FS reports and to present EPA's proposed plan to clean up the
Vineland Chemical Company Site. The EPA also conducted a public
availability session on July 19, 1989 to allow concerned citizens
an opportunity to discuss issues related to the site on a one on
one basis with EPA.
The comments received during this interfacing with the public,
written comments received from the public, and written comments
received from the Vineland Chemical Company are summarized in
this Responsiveness Summary. EPA's responses to these comments
are also provided.
There are four appendices attached to this document: the
Proposed Plan; EPA community relations activities at this site to
date; sign-in sheets from the public meeting and public
availability session; and the comments received from the Vineland
Chemical Company to the RI/FS reports and the Proposed Plan.
Background on Community Involvement and Concerns
There was a high level of community concern regarding the
Vineland Chemical Company site in 1980, following the closure of
Union Lake to fishing and swimming. The closing was the result

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

of high arsenic levels detected in the lake by the NJDEP. The
decision was reevaluated, and the ban was lifted by the 1981
recreational season. In June 1984, a citizens' group called
Watch Toxic Effluent Residues (WATER) requested and obtained a
Vineland City Council resolution demanding action on all of the
Cumberland County Hazardous Waste sites. The resolution was sent
to EPA's Region II Regional Administrator.
In May, 1986, members of a statewide environmental coalition, the
New Jersey Environmental Federation, organized a protest on the
steps of Vineland City Hall. Local members of WATER, which is a
member organization of the coalition, also attended the rally.
The event was organized to focus attention on a public hearing
that citizens scheduled for June regarding the Vineland Chemical
Company's requests for operating permits from the NJDEP for its
arsenic removal system to treat discharge water. The
organization presented two goals:
     o    Initiate immediate actions to clean up the Vineland
          Chemical Company site; and
     o    Provide stricter enforcement to prevent further
          contamination.
In June, 1986, the NJDEP held a public hearing on the proposed
denials of NJPDES and RCRA permits at the Vineland Chemical
Company plant. Later that month, the EPA sent an informational
letter to Vineland residents explaining the agency's involvement
with the site.
In December, 1986, the EPA held a public meeting in the Vineland
City Hall to present the agency's work plan for the RI/FS
activities which would be conducted for the site. The public was
generally pleased that the investigation was going to proceed.
The primary concerns citizens have raised about the site include:
     o    Perceived cleanup delays of the Vineland Chemical
          Company plant site and affected waterways.
     o   Potential contamination of the Cohansey aquifer and
         several private wells resulting from contaminated
         groundwater spreading to nearby residential areas.
    o     Potential closing of waterways, which would prohibit       <
          residents from using them for boating, fishing, and        ^
          swimming.
                                                                     o
                                                                     o
    o    Potential health risks associated with exposure to         NJ
         contaminated groundwater and soils.
                                                                     1
    o     Continuation of the Vineland Chemical Company's            *

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          operations. Residents would like to see severe
          penalties assessed to the company, commensurate with
          the perceived regulatory noncompliances.
     o    Lack of information from government officials to the
          community.
Summary of Manor Questions and Comments Received Purina the
Public Comment Period and EPA Responses to these Comments
Comments raised during the public comment period and during the
public meeting and public availability session are summarized
below. The public comments and responses are organized into five
categories: Technical Questions/Concerns Regarding Remedial
Alternatives; Recreation; Health Risk Assessment; Costs/Funding
Issues; and Enforcement. The comments received from the Vineland
Chemical Company are presented as an appendix to this document,
with EPA responses to these comments presented as the last part
of this section.
A.   TECHNICAL QUESTIONS/CONCERNS REGARDING REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

Comment: A resident asked why EPA was using methods that
required waste removal, rather than in situ vitrification which
would turn the waste into a glass. The resident later presented
EPA with the name of a company that the resident knew was engaged
in marketing the in situ vitrification technology, and suggested
that the EPA contact this company for more information.
EPA's Contractor Response: EPA has evaluated a number of
treatment technologies, but in situ vitrification was screened
out at an early stage in the Feasibility Study because it was
considered less cost-effective than other methods.
Comment: As part of their Proposed Plan, EPA said that they
would allow the Maurice River to flush for a period of three
years to allow the contaminants an opportunity to flush
naturally. The three year waiting period would begin after the
Remedial Design is completed. A resident asked if EPA could
extend the three year waiting period, or start it after cleanup
in the Blackwater Branch is finished. This would allow sediment
suspension to be reduced and give the Maurice River ample time to
naturally flush itself.
EPA's Response: EPA responded that the Proposed Plan was
designed to minimize sediment suspension in the Maurice River.   A     M
dredge is proposed which would minimize sediment resuspension.         ^
The amount of sediment suspension would be controlled by
adjusting the amount of water and sediment in the dredge. If          o
                                                                      M
this method cannot be used, then silt curtains would be placed
downstream to catch suspended sediments.                         f-•„
                                                                     •'n

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA expressed confidence that by cutting off the source of the
arsenic contamination that is currently leaving the plant site
via the Blackwater Branch, natural cleansing mechanisms in the
Maurice River would reduce the arsenic level.
Comment; A resident commented that a higher level of remediation
should occur on the west side of the lake because it recently
came under state ownership and has become more accessible to the
public.
EPA Responses EPA replied that it would consider this concern as
well as any other additional information on the use of the west
side of the lake before making a final determination on the
remediation to be conducted.
Comment: A resident asked if there were any differences between
the level of contamination at the West Side Park (which was
capped with sand ten years ago) and other sites along the river.

EPA Response: EPA confirmed that the level of arsenic
contamination located near West Side Park was found to be lower
than the levels found in the rest of the river.
Comment: A resident asked if EPA will be digging up the asphalt
at the site.
EPA Response: EPA said that they would be looking at the soil
under the asphalt during the design phase. As part of the
design, further sampling will be conducted to further
characterize the contamination at the site.

Comment: A resident asked how EPA would know that the
contamination is cleaned up and that there are no other
pollutants affecting the area.
EPA's Contractor Response: EPA replied that it would conduct
ongoing monitoring after completion of the remedial action to
ensure that the Vineland Chemical Company Site has been cleaned
satisfactorily. The ongoing monitoring will be conducted, at a
minimum, in five year intervals for the next 30 years.

B.   RECREATION
Comment: Several residents commented that they would prefer that     <
EPA let the river flush itself naturally rather than dredging it,    3
They feel that dredging would cause ecological and aesthetic
damage.                                                              °
                                                                         IsJ
EPA Response: EPA recognizes the community's concern about the
potential ecological effects of dredging on the Maurice River and
Union Lake. As part of EPA's Proposed Plan, an environmental        KA
assessment would be conducted during the Remedial Design phase to   l£

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

evaluate the effects of dredging on the ecosystem if it is
determined to be necessary. EPA expressed its preference that
the river would flush itself naturally.
Comment: A resident asked if EPA will reopen the lake for
recreational use after the dam is completed.
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protections'a (NJDEP)
Response: NJDEP replied that the completion of the new dam at
the lake should be finished by the fall of 1989 at which time the
lake would be reopened for fishing and boating. Additionally,
NJDEP will take sediment samples to see if the lake would be safe
for swimming in the summer of 1990.
Comment: A resident asked if EPA could conduct the remediation
when the lake is full so that residents could use the lake for
recreational purposes.

EPA Response: EPA expressed confidence that a much better
cleanup of Union Lake could be conducted when the lake water
:--vel is lowered. With the lake at the lower level, contaminated
  -.as can be located more easily, cleanup conducted much more
  rliciently, and material from the cleanup redeposited more
quickly. If cleanup is done with the lake at its full condition,
EPA expressed fear that a few "hot" spots might be missed.
However, if new technology becomes available that would make it
more feasible to do the cleanup with the lake at its full
condition, then EPA said it would consider it.

C.   HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT
Comment: A resident asked why the waterways had to be cleaned up
since they are not used as a drinking water source.
EPA Response: EPA responded that the decision to clean up the
Vineland Chemical Site, Blackwater Branch, Maurice River and
Union Lake was based on a Risk Assessment. The Risk Assessment
looked at the concentrations of the arsenic in the sediments and
made a determination of how often people would come in contact
with the arsenic. A Risk Assessment is a conservative tool to
ensure the community's safety. In this case, the waterways were
found to be a potential risk for residents who might use them for
recreation.
Comment: Several residents said that they would like to see
studies that compare the health of pecpls living near the
contaminated waterways with the health of those who do not.
EPA Response: EPA recognized the residents' concern and said
that they will discuss it with the New Jersey Department of
Health.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Comment: A resident asked if there have been any studies done on
the health of workers at Vineland Chemical Company.
EPA«s Contractor Response: EPA's contractor stated that in the
early 1980 's the New Jersey Department of Health did a survey of
the workers at the Vineland Chemical Company and found they had
elevated levels of arsenic in their system. One employee
exhibited minor symptoms of arsenic poisoning, and as a result,
NJDEP ordered changes in the plant's operating procedures.
Comment: Several residents expressed concern over discolored
drinking water upstream from the site.
EPA Response: During the remedial investigation, EPA said that
it did not find elevated levels of arsenic in the soil or water
upstream from the Vineland Chemical Company plant. However, EPA
indicated that it will do further investigation during remedial
design.
Comment: Several residents asked why EPA chose the arsenic
cleanup level of 20 milligrams of arsenic per kilogram of
sediment (mg/kg) for the river and lake.
EPA Response: EPA replied that its Proposed Plan consists of
cleaning the river and lake sediments to 120 mg/kg, but this
level is reduced to 20 mg/kg in more accessible areas such as
Almond Beach, the Blackwater Branch floodplain, Union Lake beach,
the Sailing and Tennis Club beach, and residential areas. After
studying these areas, EPA had found that many people use the
river and lake for swimming, wading, fishing and boating. While
intentional ingestion of water and sediment during these
activities was unlikely, people, especially children,- may contact
contaminated soil/stream sediment while eating, playing, or
swimming. For that reason, EPA proposes to use the action level
of 20 mg/kg arsenic when cleaning accessible areas of the river
and lake.
D.   COSTS/FUNDING ISSUES
Comment:   A resident asked who was going to pay for the site
cleanup.
EPA Response: EPA replied that it has already set aside money in
their budget to pay for the studies conducted to date and the
remedial design. However, through administrative and legal
actions, the Enforcement Branch of EPA will try, if possible, to
recover the costs of both the study and cleanup from any
potentially responsible parties (PRPs) .

Comment: A resident asked if the cost of the proposed remedial
program reflected the cost after a ten year period of inflation.

                                                                     tfl

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

EPA Response: EPA said that the costs shown in the Feasibility
Study and the Proposed Plan represent present worth. Present
worth is the amount of money EPA would have to invest now in
order to have the appropriate funds available at the actual time
the remedial action is implemented, assuming that the money
invested now earned interest at 5% above the inflation rate.
Comment: A resident inquired as to whether the EPA had received
bids from contractors for the cleanup, or whether the proposed
budget was an estimate.
EPA Response: EPA explained that the proposed budget was an
estimate for a relative evaluation of cost; therefore, the actual
cost could be 30% less or 50% more than the cost presented.
E.   ENFORCEMENT
Comment: A resident inquired whether Vineland Chemical Company
is still dumping arsenic into the Blackwater Branch.
NJDEP Response: NJDEP replied that a small amount of arsenic is
still being released in the effluent discharge emanating from the
site. However, the majority of contamination coming off the site
into the Blackwater Branch is through the contaminated
groundwater. Vineland Chemical is allowed a small amount of
effluent discharge into the Blackwater Branch, however, this
discharge contains arsenic at allowable levels. Activities at
the Vineland Chemical Company Plant are being closely monitored
by the state.
F.   REMAINING CONCERNS
One remaining concern voiced by residents was the possible
dredging of the Maurice River and Union Lake. The residents
expressed opposition to the proposed dredging because of its
potential ecological and aesthetic damage. Residents have
requested the opportunity to participate in the final decision-
making on the dredging issue.
Comment: A resident asked if EPA would hold another public
meeting prior to initiating any dredging of the Maurice River or
Union Lake.
EPA Response: EPA responded that as part of EPA's ongoing
Community Relations program- EPA will continue to keep residents
informed of site activities= This will include a fact sheet and
press release after the Record of Decision is signed. The
Community Relations Plan will be revised during the design phase
and a fact sheet and public meeting will be held prior to
initiating the remedial action.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

J u l y 31, 1989


Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
EPA' Rm. 759
26 Federal Plaza
New York, NY 10278

Dear Sir:

     I believe that the proposed "cleanup" of the Vineland Chemi-
cal site is unnecessary and w i l l create many more problems than
it w i l l solve.

    In the current hysteria over soil pollution by arsenicals, no
one seems to mention that arsenic in native form or as its salts
(eg. scorodite, proustite etc) is found w i d e l y distributed in
nature.

        Moreover arsenicals have been used extensively and success-
f u l l y in medicine over the centuries in dosages many orders of
magnitude greater than those contemplated today in the worse case
(i.e. consuming the sediment of Union Lake!). Surely Professor
E h r l i c h , inventor of arsphenamine (salvarsan) the first disease-
specific medicine, must be turning over in his grave!

        Lastly d r e d g i n g Union Lake for such a quixotic project is
f i n a n c i a l l y wasteful at best and destructive of the environment
at worse. EPA has done enough to destroy the small businessman in
America. Let us for once listen to the voice of reason instead of
those that are after the quick buck and the election vote.


                                           Sincerely yours,




                                           George Inglessis, Ph.D.
                                           P.O. Box 2310               <
                                           Vineland. NJ 08360          £

                                                                       o
                                                                       to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     J1

          UNITED S T A T E S E N V I R O N M E N T A L PROTECTION A G E N C Y
                                       REGION II
                             JACOfi K. JAVITS FEDERAL BUtDING     v     /
                               NEW YORK. NEW YORK 10278            .   , .




September 27, 1989

Mr. George Inglessis, Ph.D
P.O. Box 2310
Vineland, New Jersey       08360
Dear Mr. Inglessis:
This is in response to your July 31, 1989 letter regarding the
Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site, which includes the
plant site, the Maurice River areas, and Union Lake.
In your letter, you express concern that the cleanup covered by
the Proposed Plan is unnecessary and could harm the environment.
You also indicate that arsenic is common in nature and has been
used medicinally.
Regarding the need for the cleanup, the remedial investigation
and feasibility study (RI/FS) shows that the cleanup is necessary
to mitigate the long-term threat to public health and the
environment caused by arsenic contamination. The decision by the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to remediate is based
on a risk assessment.
A risk assessment involves determining possible routes of human
exposure to contaminated media (air, water, soil) at a site,
then estimating possible intake levels. Contaminants within
those media are determined. The toxicological properties of
those contaminants are then evaluated. Finally, semi-
quantitative estimates of potential health risks are determined
using the potential routes of exposure, contaminants of concern
and their intake levels, and the toxicological properties of
those contaminants.
Arsenic compounds are carcinogens. The risk assessment shows
that lifetime exposure to contaminated site soils, or sediment <
in the impacted water bodies, is associated with unacceptably ^
high excess lifetime cancer risks.
                                                                                o
Your observation that certain »rser.icals have been Tirtra as                   ^
medicines is correct. However, the carcinogenic perfc*fftial of
long-term exposure to arsenic compounds is relatively new                           ^*
knowledge.                                                                          Op

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Although arsenic is widely distributed in nature, it is generally
found at concentrations much lower than those in the media
requiring remediation at the Vineland Chemical site.
EPA acknowledges that the proposed remedial activities could
cause environmental damage, in this regard, as described in the
RI/FS, steps would be taken during remedial design to avoid or
minimize damage to the environment or to historic cultural
resources .
Please write to me at the following address if you have any
further comments or questions concerning the Vineland Chemical
Company site:

              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                        26 Federal Plaza
                            Room 711
                   New York, New York 10278
Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo, Project Manager
Southern New Jersey Remedial Action Section




                                                                    o
                                                                    10G
                                                                          •

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 J. H. C R E S S O N
                            FORTY EAST SECOND STREET
                            MOORESTOWN, N. J.
Dr.Ferdinand Cataneo                 //24/S9
Project Manager
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Room 759, 26 Federal Plaza
New York, N.Y. 10278
                    re: Proposed Cleanup Alternatives for Vineland Chemical Site
Dear Dr. Cataneo,

As a member of the archaeological community here in southern N.J. for more than
25 years I am extremely concernedfor the known, as veil as, unknown archaeological
resources that will surely be threatened if not impacted in the course of the
Maurice River and Union Lake cleanup program.
Having worked in this region of the state for more than 10 years its without question
clear that very significant cultural resources (prehistoric and historic) lie ad-
jancent, along and under the waters from the upper tributaries of Blackwater Branch
to the Union Lake empoundment. Also, beyond this critical point, down to the bay
archaeological resources have been well documented along both banks.

No matter which alternatives are chosen (with the exception of No Action) regionally
significant cultural resources will be at risk unless appropriate safeguards are
implemented to protect in place or mitigate impacted resources.

Your attention to this serious situation is greatly appreciated.
      x
       - —*
Jact.Cressou




                                                                                   o
                                                                                   to

                                                                                        '-i'
                                                                                        C.'
                                                                                        c

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        I   UNITED S T A T E S E N V I R O N M E N T A L PROTECTION A G E N C Y
                                         REGION !!
  Ht0
    ^                          JACOB K. JAVfTS FEDERAL BULGING
                                 NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10276




September 27, 1989

Mr. Jack Crosson
40 East Second Street
Moorestown, New Jersey         08057
Dear Mr. Crosson:
This is in response to your July 24, 1989 letter concerning the
Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site.
We share your concern for the cultural resources located in and
near the Maurice River and Union Lake. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) is aware that these resources may exist
and will conduct a Stage 1A Survey for cultural resources during
remedial design. This will allow EPA to take steps to preserve
the prehistoric and historic cultural resources of the waterways
during remedial activities.
If you have any further comments or questions, please write to me
at the following address:

                  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                            26 Federal Plaza
                                Room 711
                       New York, New York 10278
Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo, Project Manager
Southern New Jersey Remedial Action Section




                                                                                  §

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                R. D. #2, Port Cumberland Rd.
                                                Millville, NJ 08332
                                                July 26, 1989
Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Project Manager
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
N. J. Remedial Action Branch
26 Federal Plaza, Room 759
New York, NY 10278

 Dear Dr. Cataneo,
     I am writing to you regarding the propo^d cleanup of Ihion Lake, which
 has been systematically polluted by the Vineland Chemical Company over a
 period of decades. Like many residents of the Millville area, I grew up swimming
 and boating on Union Lake, as did my mother and her father before her. The
 Lake's importance , therefore,surpasses that of a recreational facility and
is part of our heritage.
     Since my first years around the Lake (approximately 25 years ago), I have
observed numerous changes in the water, such as fewer turtles and snakes,
while algea levels increased. As a personal note, I also experienced a contact
dermatitis from the Lake in the last several years. Throughout this time, the
conventional wisdom has held that these changes were symptoms of the pol-
lution from the Vineland Chemical Company.
     Our region of the state is poor , both in human and financial resources.
However, the area of the Lake, the Maurice River, the Manumuskin River,
and the Menantico River are all treasures. We need a strong governmental
agency to help us protect these irreplaceable jewels, both for our human
population and the wide variety of rare flora and fauna found here.
    I cannot state emphatically enough to you my anger that the Vineland
Chemical Company's violation of this area was allowed to continue for so
many years - even after your agency was aware of it. The Company's
persistence in this desecration discredits any governmental claims to protect
our environment.
    I am, however, most gratified that action is finally being considered which
can rectify, at least to the extent possible, this situation. As I told represent-
atives of the EPA at a recent hearing in Vineland, I haverto expertise with which
to form an opinion about the cleanup alternatives.
    Instead, my purpose in writing to you is to urge that the Lake be rendered
useable and that our region in general be protected from forces that threaten
our fragile environment. For example, Atlantic Electric Company is building
a station at the edge of Maurice River Township, near what may be the state's
only pristine water: in 25 years, will I be writing to you about that? Truly, we
need your agency's support there, as well. I hope you can help us in the fight
to preserve our area.


                                               Sincerely,                            M
                                                                                     2




                                               Christine Ward Garrison, Ph.D.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         UNITED S T A T E S ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION A G E N C Y
                                   REGION !!
                         JACOB K. JAVrTS FEDERAL BULDING       V
                           NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10278        -   £




September 27, 1989

Ms. Christine Ward Garrison, Ph.D
R.D. |2, Port Cumberland Road
Millville, NJ 08332
Dear Ms. Garrison:
This is in response to your letter of July 26, 1989, concerning
the Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site.
In your letter you ask that Union Lake "be rendered usable" and
that the Maurice River system be protected from further
environmental damage.
We share your concern for the environmental quality of the
Maurice River and Union Lake. The actions included in the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Proposed Plan to
remediate the Vineland Chemical Co. plant site will halt the flow
of arsenic-contaminated groundwater to the Blackwater Branch and,
thereby, begin the river system's restoration.
Remediation of the heavily contaminated floodplain and sediments
of the Blackwater Branch will follow. During the clean up of the
Blackwater Branch and subsequent clean up of the Maurice River
and Union Lake, as necessary, EPA will take all required steps to
protect the quality and ecology of those water bodies.
In the short term, any discharges from the Vineland Chemical
plant will continue to be monitored by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) . Further, Union Lake will be
opened for boating and fishing sometime this fall after the lake
water level returns to normal, as recently announced by NJDEP.
Finally, we understand that sections of the Maurice River south
of Union Lake to the Delaware Bay, and its Kenantico $£ree)c and
Manususkin P.iver tributaries, are eligible for Seaniesgad
Recreational status, according to a June 1988 reporv^fer the
National Park Service. If they are eventually plaoai^tn 'the
National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, they will b* permanently
protected for the benefit and enjoyment of the people.
                                                                    CD
                                                                    Co

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

If you have any further comments or questions concerning the
Vineland Chemical Company site, please write to me at the
following address:

              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                        26 Federal Plaza
                            Room 711
                   New York, New York 10278

Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo, Project Manager
Southern New Jersey Remdial Action Section




                                                               O
                                                               o


                                                                   GD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   Merrill Lynch Consumer Markets
                                                   200 West Lancaster Avenue
                                                   Wayne, Pennsylvania 19087
                                                   11C CO-: TOl O
                                                   A. 1 ^ *_K3 I I 3 i O
                                                   800 235 3922 In State
                                                   800 523 2755 Out of State



     Merriii Lynch                                 Helen B.
                                                   Assistant Vice President




July 18,1989.
Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Project Manager, USEPA
Rm 759, 26 Federal Plaza
New York, N.Y. 10278
Dear Dr. Cataneo:
I read with interest the proposed clean up of the bottom of Union
Lake in Millville, New Jersey. Please proceed with haste.
My parents have owned a water- front property at Union Lake since
1944 and I have enjoyed many years of swimming, sailing and
fishing (I eat what I catch).
During the 1950s we noticed scum streaks and detergent buildup on
the beaches in addition to an unlovely algae bloom in August in
the dry summers. My father, retired from his legal practice to
live at the lake, repeatedly approached the N.J. EPA about the
scum and often foul smelling water emerging from the rivermouth
at the head of the lake. (His favorite fishing spot for large-
mouth bass was at the gatehole across from the Union House now
owned and occupied by George Woods.)
The City of Vineland operates a sewage treatment facility near
the junction of Blackwater creek and the Maurice River very close
to the bridge at Sherman Avenue. As a child, my family often
canoed up the river on a hot summer day to swim in the cold water
of the little stream with the clear sand bottom. Several summers
ago, the year before the lake was drained, my son and I made a
sentimental journey, complete with picnic basket, up the river to
swim and enjoy the cold water. The river was blocked with sever-
al large trees but we were able to portage. 300 yards downstream
of the bridge we notice the odor of untreated sewage. Angry and                r
curious, we paddled to the bridge and the little creek and saw                 £
brown foul smelling water emerging from the little creek. The
clear sand was brown and many dead trees were on the bank.                     0
Shreds of paper and assorted debris floated by our canoe.                      °
Upon returning to my Mother's home, I spoke with her neighbor,
State Representative Hurley and asked him to travel up the stream
to see the mess. Shortly thereafter, I returned to my home.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

My family has watched the delay in the rebuilding of the dam. We
are anxious for the return of the lake. However, clean water is
of paramount importance to me. On several occassions when I have
travelled on Route 55 to Millville, I have lowered my windows to
do a " sniff" check of the sewer facility. Bad odors and dead
trees proliferate in the area near the bridge at Sherman Avenue
which was still a mess this early summer.
Please, while you are doing your dredging of the bottom of the
lake, do a bacteriophagic test on the Blackwater branch and the
area surrounding that sewage treatment plant.
  ,~ ** w^ 4- -J « »-    V* -»«»**  *~ *• •% 4~ **. *3  4-1* «. 4.  4»U — 1 ~ 1» _   ..£11    _-»..__  l*~  ~.l__
S WC^      U0.v~£>      41UVC      Oh.ah.CV4        1.110 L.    v-ilC  J.QA.C   W J. J. J. IICVC1.  J_>C WJ.CO1

that it is not important. If a city like San Diego can produce
clean water from a sewage treatment plant, the City of Vineland
can learn from them. The EPA will have to insist that all dump-
ing from any and all sewage treatment plants be stopped.
Please call me at my home on 215 649 8398 should you need further
information. Please believe that in the group of hostile proper-
ty owners you do have some friends.
Sincerely:



Helen Borz McHenry Gibjsrson




                                                                                                                    M



                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                    o




                                                                                                                    C'.'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      *O   UNITED S T A T E S E N V I R O N M E N T A L PROTECTION AGENCY
      f                                REGIONII
                             JACOB K. JAyfTS FEDERAL BULDING
                               NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10278




September 27, 1989

Ms. Helen Borz McHenry Giberson
200 west Lancaster Avenue
Wayne, Pennsylvania 10087
Dear Ms. Giberson:
This is in response to your letter of July 18, 1989 concerning
the Maurice River and Union Lake portions of the Vineland
Chemical Company Superfund site.
In your letter, you ask that the proposed clean-up of Union Lake
proceed with haste. You also express concerns about observations
associated with the effects of local sewage treatment plant
effluents on the Maurice River and Union Lake.
The Proposed Plan by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to
clean up the arsenic contamination at the Vineland Chemical site
will be implemented as expeditiously as possible.
However, problems related to your concerns about the effects of
the sewage treatment plant effluents on the Maurice River and
Union Lake are outside the scope of the Superfund cleanup and are
best handled on a local, State or city level.
If you have any further comments or questions concerning the
Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site, please write to me at
the following address:

                 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                           26 Federal Plaza
                               Room 711
                      New York, New York 10278

Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo, Project Manager
Southern New Jersey Remedial Action Section

                                                                            ..ay

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                            \i
                                                                           fc/*•""
                                                                            f <-*


       CUMBERLAND CONSERVATION LEAGUE
               2!0 K. H!SH ST. NILLVILLE, K. J. Q8332


                                                       July 16,1989



Dr. rerdr.and Cotonec, Project Manager
U. S. Environmental Protection Agency
N. J. Remedial Action Branch
26 Federal Plaza, Room 711
New York, N. V. 10278

Re: Vineland Chemical Co. Superfund site

Deer Dr. Cataneo:

The Cumberland Conservation League is a group of approximately 150
members formed in 1974 to preserve and protect the natural resources of
Cumberland County.

We are particularly concerned that none of the remedial action proposed
includes the closing of the Vinelend Chemical Co. In the Daily Journal
article, "Union Lake: Arsenic and laced" on July 12, 1989; it was reported
that 500 metric tons of arsenic have flowed from VinChem since 1949.
According to the 1980 census there were about 132,000 people in the county
which gives each and every person in the county a "share" of about 8.3
pounds of arsenic.

And, that "approximately 150 (metric) tons of arsenic was bound to Union
Lake's sediments." If we look at this figure in the same way, each Millville
resident's share (based on a population of 25,000 ) is 13.2 pounds of arsenic.

The pioni is still in operation even though the DEP began monitoring in 1966         o
                                                                                     to
and has over the years fought legal battles to force the company to comply
with regulations. Vineland Chemical has shown a flagrant disregard for the                   ^
health end safety of the residents of Vinelend, hillville. Commercial end                 QD
                                                                                           CD

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Maurice River Townships. There is no reason to believe that as they
continue operation they will operate in any manner other than their pest
actions indicate.

Of primary importance is the closing of this plant and the cleaning of the 54
acre plant site. This should include removing arsenic from groundwater at
the site to keep it from seeping into the Bleckweter Branch of the Maurice
River. At that time a thoughtful reassessment should be conducted to
determine if further draining, dredging or excavating of arsenic laden "hot
spots* down the river would be advisable. It is possible that some delicate
ecological areas could be damaged more by the clsan-up than by the arsenic
Itself.

Above and below Union Lake the following plants are either listed as
threatened (LT) or are being reviewed for inclusion by the federal
government (C2).

Swamp Pink               HeloniesBullata              LT
Curly-grass Fern         SchizeeePusille              C2
New Jersey Rush          Juncus Caesahensis           C2
Torrey's Muhly           MuhlenbergleTorreyene        C2
Resinous Boneset         Eupatohum Resinosum          C2
Parker's Pipewort        Erioceulon Parkeri           C2

It is important not only to remove the arsenic risk from these sites, but to
not cause further damage through clean-up efforts.

                                                Sincerely,

                                                                  —
                                                Dienn Ewan, Secretary


cc: Mayor James Parent, Millville
    Mayor Harry Curley, Vineland
    Vineiorid Health Dcpt.



                                                                                GD
                                                                                ts
                                                                                to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         UNITED S T A T E S E N V I R O N M E N T A L PROTECTION A G E N C Y
                                      REGION II
                            JACOB K. JAVfTS FEDERAL BUU3ING
                              NEW YORK. NEW YORK 10276




September 27, 1989

Ms. Diann Evan
Secretary
Cumberland Conservation League
210 North High Street
Millville, New Jersey 08332
Dear Ms. Ewan:
This is in response to your July 18, 1989 letter concerning the
Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site.
In your letter you raise two issues. First, you are concerned
because the proposed remedial actions do not include closing of
the Vineland Chemical Company which you feel would stop arsenic
flow from the site. Second, you express concern that the cleanup
of arsenic contamination in the river could cause environmental
damage.
Regarding the first issue, the forced closing and/or regulation
of operating facilities is outside the scope of a Superfund
cleanup. However, effluents from the Vineland Chemical plant
site are being monitored by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, so that arsenic release is minimized,
except for the arsenic in groundwater flowing from the site to
the Blacfcwater Branch. The groundwater flow will be stopped when
groundwater remediation begins.
On the second issue, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
shares your concern that further damage to the environment which
could occur during cleanup efforts should be minimized. This
concern is demonstrated in the Proposed Plan which seeks to
minimize the need for dredging.
The plan allows the Maurice River time to flush itself clean         <
after the flow of arsenic contaminated groundwater to the           £
Biackwater Branch is stopped. During a three year,.flashing test
period, the natural cleansing performance of the riva^ would be     o
assessed through sampling studies. if the testing viqjVB that the £3
river's natural cleansing is adequate or that such cleansing
could be accomplished within a reasonable additional time period, -(.A
no dredging would be needed. However, should the testing suggest                rg
remediation, any dredging required would be subject to an                      (jg
                                                                               - O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Environmental Assessment of its effects on the Maurice River
ecology including downstream contamination. In addition, a field
survey would be done to comply with the Endangered Species Act,
and a Stage 1A survey would be done to ensure that important
historic cultural resources are identified and preserved.
Remediation of Union Lake under the Proposed Plan would be
accomplished largely through excavation after the lake water
level is lowered, thereby avoiding dredging. Any remediation of
Union Lake would be subject to an Environmental Assessment as for
the Maurice River.
If you have any further comments or questions concerning the
Vineland Chemical site, please send them to me at the following
address;
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                        26 Federal Plaza
                            Room 711
                   New York, New York 10278

Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo, Project Manager
Southern New Jersey Remedial Action Section




                                                                    o
                                                                    o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                   REGION II
                         JACOB K. JAVITS FEDERAL BULDING
                              ' YORK. NEW YORK 10278

 SEP 2 9 1999
Mr. Franklin J. Riesenburger
Greenblatt 6 Riesenburger
200 North Eighth Street
Vineland, New Jersey 08360-00883
Dear Mr. Riesenburger:
This is in response to your letter of July 31, 1989 which
contains comments on the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility
Study (RI/FS) on the Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site.
Your letter is included in the Record of Decision as Appendix D,
and responses to the comments are presented below.
Page 1. Para.l and 2
A public comment period of no less than 21 days for reviewing
RI/FS reports and the proposed plan is required by the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act and the National Contingency Plan. This period was extended
to 30 days for the Vineland Chemical Company site.
Page 2. Para. 1
The examples of "technical deficiencies" are primarily editorial
in nature and have little or no impact on the results of the
RI/FS.

Page 2. Para 2 through Page 3. Para 2
These two pages present a summary of a previous legal case
between the Vineland Chemical Company and NJDEP. The EPA has no
comment on the proceedings of this case.
Page 3. Para 3 through Page 4. Para 1
The ATSDR was asked by EPA to assess the potential public heal «
issues relating to the drawdown of Union Lake's water level \ft £
was planned as a part of the Union Lake dam rehabilitation
project.
f" ,      The two conclusions of their assessment are repeate oo
below:                                                        isj
     1)   ATSDR evaluated the above chemicals of concern      r*
          [arsenic] in relationship to possible pathways of   OS
          exposure and concludes that there is not a signif: C5.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          public health threat associated with the lowering of
          the water level at Union Lake.
     2)   The source of arsenic contamination should be addressed
          to prevent further contamination.
These two conclusions are entirely consistent with the results of
the RI/FS, and do not contradict the RI/FS as the comment
suggests.
The first conclusion is that there are no increased health risks
from the lake at its lowered water level condition. The risk
assessment in the Union Lake RI report reached the same
conclusion, stating that there was no increased health risk from
the lake being at its lowered water level for a short period of
time ranging from three to five years. However, the risk
assessment in the RI report also evaluated risks from 70 years of
exposure to the lake, and determined that there were indeed
increased potential health risks from this long-term exposure.
The ATSDR report did not consider these long-term exposure risks,
only the risks from the lowered water level condition.
The second conclusion, that the source of arsenic contamination
into the lake should be addressed to prevent further
contamination, is the focus of the RI/FS reports and the proposed
remediation plan. The remediation plan addresses the
contamination caused by the Vineland Chemical Company.
Page 4, Para. 2;
On the issue of potential health risks, the risks calculated from
human exposure to the soils, groundwater, surface water, and
sediment within the Vineland Chemical Company site are presented
in the RI reports. These risks were calculated using EPA
approved methods for determining potential health risks at
Superfund sites.
Page 4. Para. 3 through Page 6. Para. 2
Several points were raised in these paragraphs.   The major points
are addressed below.
a)   Every tributary to the Maurice River between the Blackwater
     Branch and Union Lake was sampled in the RI/FS. The samples
     were obtained as close to the confluence between the
     tributaries and the Maurice River as possible to be able to
     determine the input of arsenic into the basin from all
     sources.
     The comment is misleading since it alleges that samples were
     not taken from the Tarkiln Branch, and does not acknowledge

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     that samples were taken from the Parvin Branch. The Parvin
     Branch and the Tarkiln Branch are the same stream. The
     stream is named the Tarkiln Branch to the east (upstream) of
     Orchard Road and is naned the Parvin Branch to the west
     (downstream) of Orchard Road. Both names apply to the same
     body of water.
     Surface water and sediment samples were obtained from the
     Parvin Branch (downstream of the alleged source in this
     comment) in Phase I in 1986 and in Phase II in 1987. The
     sampling results are presented in the River Areas Rl report.
     The results showed that the sediment and surface water had
     low to undetected arsenic concentrations. If the alleged
     previous source did exist, evidence of its existence was not
     present, in the form of elevated arsenic concentrations in
     the downstream surface waters and sediments. This was
     clearly not the case with the surface waters and sediments
     downstream from the Vineland Chemical Company site, which
     showed elevated arsenic concentrations.
b)   The River Areas RI report presented a discussion that an
     estimated 500 metric tons of arsenic had been released into
     the Maurice River drainage basin through time. This
     estimate was based on data obtained by the Vineland Chemical
     company that was presented in its RCRA Part B permit
     application. This data was obtained in the Blackwater
     Branch immediately downstream from the Vineland Chemical
     Company Site, and was cross-checked with data collected by
     USGS at its stream gaging station on the Maurice River at
     Norma, downstream of the Blackwater Branch.
     Considering the above, the alleged presence of another
     source of arsenic into the basin (which was not detected
     downstream of this alleged source) would in no way alter the
     estimate of 500 metric tons of arsenic being released from
     the Vineland Chemical Company site through time. This
     estimate was based on data obtained by the Vineland Chemical
     Company well upstream of the alleged other source of
     arsenic.
c)   The EPA was not afforded an opportunity to observe the
     sampling allegedly performed by the Vineland Chemical
     Company in the Tarkiln Branch, although the Vineland           <
     Chemical Company was afforded an opportunity to observe all z
     EPA sampling in Phase II and declined. The data presented
     by the Vineland Chemical Company are not verified by           o
     independent data. This is in contrast to the data submitted to
     by the Vineland Chemical Company that was used to estimate
     the release of arsenic from the site which could be verified A
     by other data including the EPA's data from this RI/FS.      ^
                                                                 &

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

d)   Finally, the NJDEP does not certify any laboratory to
     perform arsenic sampling, including the Vineland Chemical
     Company's laboratory. Certification may be granted for
     analysis only.
Page 6. Para 3 through Paae 7. Para 2
Low to undetected arsenic concentrations were found in the EPA
sampling stations downstream from this alleged source.
Paae 7. Item
No arsenic was detected at the sampling points downstream of this
alleged source, whether it existed or not.
Paae 7. Item (B)
Since the Parvin/Tarkiln Branch is not downstream of the Vineland
Chemical Company site, it is not within the area of contamination
caused by the site. As such, it is not under consideration in
the Vineland Chemical Company site cleanup plan.
Paae 7. Item (C)
The form of arsenic in Union Lake cannot be used to trace the
form in which the arsenic was when it was released into the
environment. This is because arsenic in the lake is involved in
the biological cycle and is converted readily between organic and
inorganic forms, as discussed in the RI reports. The form of
arsenic in the lake is a function of the time of year and the
phase of the biological cycle at the time of sampling. It is not
a function of the form in which the arsenic was when released
into the environment.
The EPA has no basis for believing that there is or has been
another source of arsenic into the Maurice River Basin.
Page 7. Item fD)
(a) The fact that speciation tests cannot be used to trace a
    source is discussed above. There is no evidence to indicate
    that there is another source of arsenic into the basin.
                                                               <
(b) The EP Toxicity test for arsenic is not used to determine z
    whether or not an area requires remediation. The decision
    to remediate is based on the risk assessment and other      2
    environmental factors. The EP Toxicity "characteristic"   K>
    test may be used in conjunction with other factors to
    determine the method of final disposal of the remediated
    sediments. It is not used to determine the need for
    remediation. The sediments in Union Lake are within the     '

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     areal extent of contamination caused by the Vineland
     Chemical Company Superfund site. Thus they may be
     considered when evaluating remedial strategies for this
     site.
Page 8. Item (El
The inability to use the form of arsenic in the lake as a tracer
of the source of arsenic has been discussed in previous
responses.
Page 8. Item (T)
The EPA's preference for remedial actions in the lake is based on
health based concerns which were evaluated through a risk
assessment. • The use of the word hazardous in this comment is
misleading. This word refers to a waste classification for
disposal only. This does not determine whether a site requires
remediation. The need for remediation is determined by a risk
assessment and other environmental factors.
Page 8. Item (G)
The Vineland Chemical Company was shown to be the only source of
arsenic into the basin. The form of arsenic in Union Lake has
been discussed in previous responses.
Page 9. Para. 1 fltem 3)
The cleanup goals for the sediments were set after considering
the risk assessment results. The risk assessment was not
constructed to yield a predetermined cleanup goal.
Page 9. Para. 2
There is no Page 3-8 in the Executive Summary of the Final Draft
Feasibility Study Report for Union Lake. However, Page E-6 in
the Executive Summary of this report does provide a summary of
the findings of EPA Headquarters personnel relative to the
classification of treated materials for disposal purposes. This
classification has no association with the establishment of
cleanup goals, rather it is considered when determining where to
dispose of treated materials. Cleanup goals are set
independently of this classification.                               <
                                                                    2
Faae 9. Para. 3                                                     o
                                                                    o
The NJDEP's 20 ppm department guidance value for arsenic is         ^
explained in the FS reports and is identified as a "To Be           .A
Considered" guideline.                                              ^
                                                                    .6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 9. Para.4
The sediment cleanup goal in Union Lake is 120 ppm in certain
less accessible portions of the lake (corresponding to an
increased cancer risk of 1x10(-5)), and is 20 ppm in certain more
accessible portions of the lake (corresponding to a increased
cancer risk of 2x10(-6)) to afford a greater degree of health
protection. The risk assessment was not constructed to arrive at
these levels, rather these levels resulted from the findings of
the risk assessment.
T%— __   ^ f\   T>«.H.—   ^




CERCLA mandates th'at state regulatory agencies be involved in the
RI/FS process conducted by EPA under the Superfund program.
Page 10. Para. 3 (Item A)
The ATSDR report for Union Lake is in complete agreement with the
RI/FS risk assessments in that no increased health risks were
calculated for the lake being dravndovn, as was discussed
previously. The RI/FS risk assessments considered this scenario,
as veil as the scenario of long-term exposure to the lake.
Long-term exposure was determined to pose increased potential
health risks.
Page 10. Para. 4
The RI/FS reports never speak of the positive effects of "natural
cleansing" of the Union Lake sediments, nor do the reports ever
state that the amount of arsenic on the surface sediments will
decrease through time through natural cleansing dynamics. On the
contrary, the reports clearly identify the need to determine the
rate of arsenic desorption from the sediments because the rate of
desorption is unknown.
EPA recognizes that the distribution of contaminated sediments in
the lake say change. EPA's intention to resample the sediments
in the lake is clearly indicated in the RI/FS reports, the
proposed plan, and the ROD. The need to resample the sediments,
however, does not invalidate the risk assessment. Rather, with
the risk assessment in place it will be far easier to determine
the risks from the lake in the future. Since the exposure models      <
have been developed, all that is required to evaluate the future
risks in the lake, after resampling, is to incorporate the
appropriate concentrations into the exposure models. The risks        o
that are produced by various sediment arsenic concentrations will     °
be known very quickly.
                                                                     h*
                                                                     &
                                                                     CC

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Page 11. Para. 2. 3. and 4 (First three Para of Item B)
The information requested by the comment (protocol, quality
assurance/quality control documents and procedures, laboratory
results, and chain of custody documents for the NJDEP's August
1986 sampling) is quite voluminous and is available for review by
interested parties. This information is typically not provided
within an RI/FS report simply because of its volume.
Page 11. Para. 5
The comment is misleading in that it takes statements designed to
explain data validation in general out of context, and does not
indicate the conclusion of the discussion that follows the
statements. For completeness, the conclusion of the data
validation discussion is presented below, as it appears on Page
4-12 of the Final Draft Union Lake RI Report.
     "Therefore, rather than lose some pertinent site data, these
     data have been appropriately footnoted and included within
     the report. Although rejected data were included in the
     report, no conclusions were based upon rejected data."
The reader is therefore clearly aware of the quality of the
analytical results, and which analytical results were used when
drawing conclusions about site contamination.
Page 12. Para. 1
The EPA believes that the two referenced analytical results (29
versus 107 ppm) are not at "highly unacceptable variances" as the
comment alleges. Given the reasons outlined in the RI report,
high matrix variability and the high arsenic levels in the lake
sediment samples, these two results are not unacceptable and are
in fact reasonable for the given conditions.
Pace 12. Para. 2
The reasons for individual data rejections, or for
non-rejections, has not been provided for any of the data
obtained by Ebasco. This is due to the sheer volume of material
which would have had to be presented. Both the Plant Site and
River Areas RI reports note that this information was not
provided in the reports for this reason, and indicate that this
data is available for inspection*




                                                                    05
                                                                    0?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  8
Page 12- Para. 3 and 4 (Item C)
The statement that the data has not been appropriately plotted is
misleading. The referenced results for stations EL-3 and EL-5
are plotted in their appropriate locations, as can be seen by
reviewing Figure 4-1. The higher arsenic concentrations from
both stations were plotted and included in the windsorized mean
calculation. The lower concentrations from both samples could
also have been plotted. However, considering the size of the
data set used in obtaining the windsorized mean, the mean
concentration would have been essentially no different.
Furthermore, since the risk assessment reports risks to plus or
minus one order magnitude (as noted in the RI reports), adding
the lower set of data would have had no significant effect on the
risks estimated from the sediments in the lake.
The comment asserts that a different "testing procedure" was used
when obtaining the two different arsenic results for stations
El-3 and EL-5. This is not correct. The same analytical
protocol was used for both samples. The divergent results from
these samples support the conclusion that the sediments are
highly variable.
Page 12. Para. 5 through Page 13. Para. 1 (Item D)
The ATSDR report has been discussed previously.
Page 13. Para. 2 through Page 14. Para. 1 (I tern El
The risk assessment was not used to wwork back" and attain a
predetermined cleanup level. Rather, the cleanup levels were
determined after reviewing the results of the risk assessment.
The worst-case sediment risk calculation used the maximum
sediment arsenic concentration found in the lake, 1273 ppm. EPA
realizes that sediments are mobile within the lake, and that
sediment arsenic concentrations are highly variable. Therefore,
as a worst case, it is prudent to assume that the highest
sediment arsenic concentration found in the lake may actually
exist in the area of concern since (a) the contaminated sediments
may be moved into the area of concern by natural processes, and
(b) the highly contaminated sediments may already exist within
the area of concern, but were not sampled. The mean sediment
arsenic concentration was used for the most probable case risk      <
estimate. This im appropriate since the sediments are mobile and    z
may distribute to the area of concern.
                                                                    o
                                                                    o
Page 14. Para 2. (Item 4)                                           K>
Speciation of arsenic was not performed in the RI/FS for the     -—-
reasons noted in the referenced paragraph, namely that there are
significant experimental and analytical uncertainties in

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

determining the speciation, and the uncertainty in the metabolism
of the various arsenic compounds. The conservatism of this
approach in the risk assessment was clearly stated in the report.
There is no corroborated data that indicates that there is
another source of arsenic into Union Lake.
The form of arsenic in the lake, as this relates to tracing the
source, was discussed in previous responses.
Page 14. Para. 3 fltem 5)
Sediment lead analyses in the Maurice River upstream and
downstream of the confluence with the Parvin/Tarkiln Branch show
no increase in the lead concentration downstream from the
confluence. DoVnstream from the confluence the lead
concentration is 14 ppm. Upstream from the confluence, the lead
concentration ranges from 2 to 33 ppm, averaging approximately 22
ppm. If the alleged source of lead exists, it is not apparent
from the sediment data.
There is no corroboration of another source of arsenic into the
Maurice River basin besides the Vineland Chemical Company site.
Page 14. Para. 4 fltem 6)
The FS reports clearly state the basis for considering the soils,
sediments, and groundwater from the Vineland Chemical Company as
listed hazardous wastes. The EP Toxicity Test referred to in the
comment is an applicable test to classify wastes as hazardous or
nonhazardous for disposal purposes, but is not used to determine
the need for remediation.
The comment incorrectly asserts that arsenic is tightly bound to
the soils at the Vineland Chemical Company Plant site.
Treatability tests presented in the Plant Site RI report showed
that the arsenic was easily leached with a water extraction.
The soils and sediments are eligible for remediation under CERCLA
since they pose a present public health risk and/or environmental
risk and are within the area of contamination of a Superfund
site. The overall protection of human health and the environment
is the central mandate of CERCLA.
                                                                      <
Page 14. Para. 5 to Page 15. Para 1                                   £
EPA Headquarters personnel determined that the soils, sediments, 0
»r.d grcur.dvstsr at ths Vir.eiar»d Cimaieal Company site were all     °
the listed hazardous waste K 031 because they were contaminated
by this listed waste, consistent with the requirements of 40 CTR
261.32. The conditions under which these materials must be            fi
treated and disposed of to be considered nonhazardous wastes are (£j
discussed in detail in the FS reports.                             ,. Q

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                10
The EPA never determined that "the EP Toxicity Test was an
appropriate measure to be used to determine risks and hazards" as
the comment suggests. EPA policy is to evaluate the need for
remediation via a risk assessment, which is not dependent on an
EP Toxicity Test.

Page 15. Para. 2 (Item 7)
The water arsenic concentration of 0.05 mg/1 is the Federal Safe
Drinking Water Standard for arsenic, and as such is an ARAR which
EPA correctly used to establish cleanup goals for various waste
streams and contaminated media.
Page 15. Para. 3 '
The application of the VHS model based upon the target
concentration of 0.05 ppm arsenic was correct, since this is the
Federal Safe Drinking Water Standard for arsenic.
Since the soils and sediments are considered the listed hazardous
waste K 031, the delisting criterion of 5 ppm arsenic in an EP
Toxicity Test is not applicable. The delisting criteria
discussed in the FS reports are appropriate for these listed
wastes.
TECHNICAL DEFICIENCIES

Page 1. Item 1 - The information supplied to EPA by the Vineland
Chemical Company previously was that the operations at this plant
began in 1949.
Page 1. Item 2 - The characterization of sediments as K 031 was
appropriately done under the "mixed in" rules cited in the FS
reports (40 CFR 261.32).
Page 1. Item 3 - The Vineland Chemical Company Superfund site is
considered the plant site itself, as well as the areal extent of
contamination resulting from the plant site.
Page 1. Item 4 - EPA assumed responsibility for the RI/FS after
the Vineland Chemical Company failed to produce an acceptable
Work Plan for the RI/FS in accordance with the scope and
standards of EPA superfund RI/FS projects.
Page 1. Item 5 - The systsa was originally designed to produce >
between 2,000 and 5,CCC cjalions p£r day of process water,
according to information supplied to EPA by the Vineland Chemic 0
Company. The RI/FS reports clearly stated that the water syst< • p
at the plant was later modified such that all process water wo> /^'
be included as inherent moisture in the product, again as        fr
reported by the Vineland Chemical Company.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                11
Page 2. Item 1 - EPA believes that the wording in the RI/FS
accurately summarizes the decision.
Page 2 . Item 2 - The comment correctly points out that the
Administrative Consent Order was dated December 21, 1981, not
December 22, 1981 as indicated in the text. This has no effect
on the RI/FS.
Page 2. Item 3 - EPA believes that the wording in the RI/FS
accurately summarizes the decision.
Page 3.- Item 1 - EPA believes that the wording in the RI/FS
accurately summarizes the site history.
Page 3 . Item 2 - The EPA believes that the discussions of the
potential impacts of contamination to drinking water supplies are
adequately and accurately presented in the RI/FS texts.
Page 3 . Item 3 - The Vineland Chemical Company was shown to be
the only source of arsenic into the basin. No arsenic was
detected downstream from the alleged other source of arsenic
discussed in this comment. The characterization of the sediments
in the Union Lake as the listed hazardous waste K 031 is based on
an appropriate application of the requirements in 40 CFR 261.32,
as discussed in the FS reports.
If you have any further questions or comments, please contact me
at the address below:
                  Ferdinand Cataneo, Ph.D, P.E.
                     Remedial Project Manager
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                          26 Federal Plaza
                        New York, NY 10278

Sincerely yours,


Ferdinand Cataneo
Remedial Project Manager




                                                               o
                                                               o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 168 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                APPENDIX A
EPA'S PROPOSED PLAN FOR REMEDIAL ACTION AT
      VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE




                                             o
                                             o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 169 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    Proposed Plan
                         For

        Vineland Chemical Company, Inc. Site




Prepared by
U.S. Environmental Protection Aeencv
JUIY

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 170 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            FOREWORD

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently issued
three draft Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study reports for
public review, dated June 1989. These reports cover the three
study areas of the Vineland Chemical Company, Inc. Superfund Site
As required by Section 117 of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as amended (CERCLA),
EPA is hereby presenting the Proposed Plan for remediation of
this site.   A public meeting vill be held to discuss the RI/FS
and the Proposed Plan on July 18, 1989 beginning at 7:00 pm in
the Vineland City Hall. A Public Availability session will be
held on July 19, 1989 from 9:00 am to 1:00 pm to provide
interested parties an opportunity to discuss the plan on an
individual basis.
EPA solicits comments to the draft RI/FS reports and to this
Proposed Plan. The public comment period vill extend until
August 1, 1989. After the specified comment period, EPA will
develop a final plan for the remediation of the site which will
be based on full consideration of all relevant information,
including public comments. EPA will document the final plan in a
Record of Decision which will include a response to each of the
significant comments, criticisms, and other information submitted
by the public during the review of the Proposed Plan or draft
RI/FS reports.

Comments should be addressed to:
                    Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
                    U. S. Environmental Protection Agency
                    Room 759
                    26 Federal Plaza
                    New York, New York 10278




                                                                  o
                                                                  o




                                                                  O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 171 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            CONTENTS
Section                                                 Pace
          FOREWORD
   1      INTRODUCTION                                  1
             SITE DESCRIPTION                           1
             SCOPE OF OPERABLE UNITS                    3
  2       SUMMARY OF ALTERNATIVES                       5
             OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site
             Source Control)                            5
             OPERABLE UNIT TWO (Plant Site Management
             of Migration)                              7
             OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas
             Sediments)                                 9
             OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (Union Lake Sediments) 10
  3       PREFERRED ALTERNATIVES                        13
             OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site Source
             Control)                                   13
            OPERABLE UNIT TWO (Plant Site Management
            of Migration)                               13
            OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas
            Sediments)                                  13
            OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (Union Lake Sediments) 14
  4       RATIONALE FOR SELECTION                       15
            OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site Source
            Control                                     16
            OPERABLE UNIT TWO (Plant Site Management
            of Migration)                               16
            OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas
            Sediments                                   17
            OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (Union Lake Sediments) 17
  5       COMMUNITY ROLE IN THE SELECTION PROCESS       19
  6       SUMMARY OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES              20


                                                               C)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 172 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Section 1
                          INTRODUCTION
This proposed plan is published in accordance with Section 117(a)
of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act, as amended (CERCLA). It describes the remedial
alternatives which were analyzed for the Vineland Chemical
Company, Inc. Superfund site and identifies and explains the
preliminary decisions on preferred alternatives. These
preliminary decisions are based on inforsation in the draft
Remedial Investigation (RI) and Feasibility Study (FS) reports.
Key information from the RI/FS reports is highlighted here.
However, for additional detail, the RI/FS reports should be
consulted.
The draft RI/FS reports are being distributed along with this
document to solicit public involvement in selecting the remedies.
SITE DESCRIPTION
The Vineland Chemical Co., Inc. plant is located in the northwest
corner of the City of Vineland in Cumberland County, New Jersey.
Situated alongside the Blackwater Branch, a tributary of the
Maurice River upstream of Union Lake, the plant has produced
organic arsenical and other agricultural chemicals since 1949.
Figure 1 shows a map of the local area.
Improper plant practices, which have been corrected through
enforcement actions by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP), have released contaminants to the
environment. Arsenic contamination now extends from the plant
soils and underlying groundwater, to the Maurice River and Union
Lake downstream of the plant to the Delaware Bay. The site was
placed on the National Priorities List in 1984. The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is the lead agency, and
NJDEP is the support agency for remedial activities at the site.
In accordance with CERCLA. the scope of the RI/FS includes the
plant site, the areal extent of contamination, and all related
public health and environmental impacts. Thus, in addition to
the plant site, the RI and FS reports deal with the Blackwater
Branch from the plant to its confluence with the Maurice River,
the Maurice River from the Blackwater Branch to Union Lake, and
Union Lake. Testing of the Maurice River below Union Lake to the
Delaware Bay did not indicate the need for further investigation.
The RI/FS was conducted to identify the types, quantities, and
locations of contaminants, and to develop ways to correct the
problems posed by the contaminants.   The RI/FS indicated the
following contamination problems:



                                                                 o
                                                                 to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 173 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           Figure 1
              Vineland Chemical Company, inc. Site
                         Location Map

      N




ALMOND ROAD




                            VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY PLANT
                            SITE LOCATION



                                 1 MILE


                                                              O
                                                              to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 174 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o Vineland Cheaical Plant mite
  - on-site soils above the water table are substantially
    contaminated with arsenic in certain localized areas.
  - the shallow groundwater beneath the site is contaminated with
    arsenic, and contaminated to a lesser degree with cadmium
    and trichloroethylene (TCE).
o River Areas
  - localized sediments and surface water in the Blackwater
    Branch have elevated arsenic concentrations downstream of the
    plant site, while having low to non-detectable levels
    upstream of the plant.
  - localized sediments and surface water in the Maurice River
    below, but not above, its confluence with the Blackwater
    Branch have elevated arsenic concentrations.
  - about six metric tons of arsenic per year currently enters
    the Blackwater Branch with the plant groundwater.
o Union Lake
  - Arsenic contamination in sediment is widespread in much of
    the lake. Contamination is surficial (up to 1 foot in
    sediment depth) with highly variable concentrations
    (undetected to elevated levels). Surface water has elevated
    arsenic concentrations.
SCOPE OF OPERABLE UNITS
As is true with many Superfund sites, the Vineland Chemical site
is complex with multiple contamination areas, namely, the plant
site, the Maurice River, and Union Lake. This complexity, and
the interrelationship of the areas, necessitates that the cleanup
be done in discrete phases which are called operable units. The
phases or operable units are planned for sequential execution
beginning with the plant site. Once the arsenic contaminated
groundwater from the plant site entering the Blackwater Branch
is stopped, the cleanup of the Blackwater Branch itself can
begin, to be followed by cleanup of the upper Maurice River, as
required, and finally Union Lake. The operable units for the
Vineland chemical site are:
1) Plant Site Source Control: clean up the arsenic-
   contaminated soil, which is a continuing source of groundwater
   contamination and public health and environmental impacts.
   The target cleanup level is 20 milligrams per kilogram
   (ssg/kg) , which is the NJDEP soil action level for arsenic.


                                                                 o
                                                                 O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 175 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

2) Plant Site Management of Migration: claan up the
   arsenic-contaminated underlying shallow groundwater and stop
   its migration to the Blackwater Branch. The groundwater
   cleanup goal is the drinking water standard, 0.05 milligrams
   per liter (mg/1), in the shallow aquifer.
3} River Areas Sediments: clean up those areas with unaceeptably
   high arsenic concentrations, as required to mitigate public
   exposure and environmental impacts. The health based target
   cleanup level is 120 ag/kg, but is reduced to 20 ag/kg in more
   accessible areas such as Almond Beach and the Blackwater
   Branch floodplain.
4) Union Lake Sediments: clean up those areas with unacceptably
   high arsenic concentrations, as required to mitigate public
   exposure and environmental impacts. The health based target
   cleanup level is 120 ffig/kg, but is reduced to 20 sag/kg in sore
   accessible areas such as the Union Lake Beach, the Sailing and
   Tennis Club Beach, and residential areas.
The cleanup plan for the Maurice River Areas will be based in
part on the results of a planned study of contaminated sediment
movement, natural restoration rates, and surface water quality,
after arsenic flow to the Blackwater Branch has been stopped.
An interim remediation of Union Lake is planned to protect the
public from exposure to contaminated sediment, during a period of
further study by EPA to determine the scope and nature of any
required further action. This study will address the dynamics of
sediment transport, to, within, and from the lake, and will
address the effect of arsenic on biota.




                                                                       •o
                                                                       o
                                                                       (O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 176 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             Section 2
                     SOTPfiRY OF ALTERHATTyKS
CERCLA mandates that the remedy which is selected for a site be
protective of human health and the environment, cost-effective,
and in accord with statutory requirements and the NCP. Permanent
solutions to contamination problems are to be achieved wherever
possible. The use of innovative technologies and on-site
treatment is evaluated as a means to attain this goal.
In the RI/FS process, three categories of general response
actions were considered for each operable unit: no action;
containment; and treatment and disposal. A vide range of
remedial technologies was identified and screened for use in
each applicable response action to aoet the cleanup objective of
each operable unit. The technically feasible technologies were
then grouped into potential remedial action alternatives, which
were initially screened for effectiveness, implementability and
cost. Those alternatives which passed the initial screening are
highlighted here. The following provides a description of all of
the remedial alternatives evaluated for the Vineland Chemical
plant site, the river areas, and Union Lake. The numbers
assigned to the alternatives correspond to those used in the FS
reports.

o OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site Source Control)
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-1: NO ACTION
The no action source control (SC) alternative provides the
baseline against which other alternatives for the first operable
unit may be compared. Potential public health risks would be
reduced by limiting access to contaminated soils using
restrictive fencing, warning signs, and educational programs.
Natural flushing would reduce the exposure hazard and potential
impacts on the groundwater over time. However, the contaminated
soils would continue to pose a risk to public health and the
environment for some years.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-2: MULTILAYER CAPPING SYSTEM
This is a containment action which would significantly reduce
human health and environmental impacts. The capping system would
consist of four layers: clay, geomembrane, sand, and a
vegetative layer. However, the contaminated soil would remain
on-site and untreated, requiring long-term management.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-3A: EXCAVATION/FIXATION/OFF-SITE NON-
HAZARDOUS LANDFILL
This involves excavating and treating soil, contaminated by a
listed (RCRA) arsenic waste, by fixation with cements and bind' r~1
                                                                <




                                                                      .(£

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 177 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

which reduce the mobility of contaminants to such degree that
they are no longer hazardous. This aeans that after treatment
the fixated product, could be "delisted" . A treated waste may be
"delisted," i.e., no longer considered to be a hazardous waste,
if the treated waste no longer meets the criteria under vhich the
waste was listed. Treated material would be deposited in an
existing off -site non-hazardous landfill after delisting. This
alternative would result in the removal of contaminated soils
from the site.

PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-3B: EXCAVATION/ FIXATION/ON-SITE NON-
HAZARDOUS LANDFILL
This alternative is identical to SC-3A axcept that the landfill
would be a new one built on the Vineland Chemical plant site
property. This alternative would leave the treated soils on-site
in the controlled environment of a landfill, and would require
long-term maintenance and monitoring.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-3C:   EXCAVATION/FIXATION/ON-SITE
REDEPOSITION
This is the same as SC-3A except that the treated soils, which
would no longer be hazardous, would be redeposited at their
approximate original locations. Long-term monitoring would be
required.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-4A: EXCAVATION/ EXTRACTION/ SOILS TO OFF-
SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This involves excavating and treating contaminated soils by
extraction with water to remove arsenic. The cleaned soils would
be delisted and deposited in an existing off-site non-hazardous
landfill. The arsenic-contaminated water would be treated to
remove the arsenic. The sludge by-product of the water treatment
would be sent to an existing off-site hazardous waste treatment
and disposal facility. This alternative vould result in the
removal of contaminated soils from the plant site. The excavated
areas would be restored using clean fill brought from an off-site
location.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-4B: EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/SOILS TO ON-
SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This alternative is the same as SC-4A except that the cleaned
soils would be deposited in a new non-hazardous landfill to be
built on the Vineland Chemical site property. This would leave
treated soils on-site in the controlled environment of a
landfill, which would require long-term maintenance and
monitoring.

                                                                      o
                                                                      o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 178 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-4C: EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/ON-SITE
REDEPOSITION OF SOILS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This is the sane as SC-4A except that the treated soils would be
redeposited at their former locations. Since the treated soils
would be delisted and no longer classified as waste, the site
would be restored to normal use.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-5: IN SITU SOIL FLUSHING
This alternative involves flushing the contaminated soils with
water. Some of the soils would first be excavated and
consolidated. All of the contaminated soils would then be
surrounded with a concrete bena and continuously flooded with
water. The water used to extract the arsenic froia the
soil would percolate to the underlying groundwater aquifer where
it would be pumped and treated. The groundwater treatment
process would result in an arsenic sludge residue which would
require off-site hazardous treatment and disposal.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE SC-6: IN SITU SOLIDIFICATION/FIXATION OF
UNSATURATED ZONE SOILS
This involves fixation in place, without excavation, using the
same fixation process as Alternatives SC-3A, SC-3B, and SC-3C.
Similar to Alternative SC-3C, the treated soils would remain at
their former locations.
o OPERABLE UNIT TWO (Plant Site Management of Migration)
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE MOM-1: NO ACTION
This alternative provides the baseline against which other
management of migration (MOM) alternatives for this second
operable unit may be compared. It includes a long term
monitoring program and an institutional control program to
regulate the use of the aquifer. Natural flushing would reduce
the potential health risks over time. However, the groundwater
would continue to impact the Maurice River system, and pose human
health risks requiring institutional controls on groundwater use.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE MOM-2B: DOWNGRADIENT CAPTURE/TREATMENT/
REINJECTION
This alternative involves pumping groundwater from wells located
close to the Blackwater Branch for downgradient capture, thereby
minimizing migration to the Blackwater Branch. Pumping would be
followed by treating the groundwater to the drinking water
standards for arsenic, cadmium, and TCE by one of three treatmen
options to be described later. Treated water would be reinjecte<
to the aquifer at an upgradient on-site location. This process
would continue until the maximum groundwater arsenic plume

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 179 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

concentration falls to 0.35 rng/1. At that concentration,
groundwater flowing to the Blackvater Branch would not cause the
instream standard of 0.05 ing/1 to be violated, while the aquifer
naturally flushes to Beet the drinking water standard goal.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE MOK-3A: DOWNGRADIENT CAPTURE AND SOURCE
AREA PUMPING/TREATMENT/DISCHARGE TO THE MAURICE RIVER
This entails a combination of the dovngradient pumping scheme of
MOM-2B with additional pumping from extraction wells in the
higher concentration source area to «horten the cleanup time.
Treatment would be done as in MOM-2B, and the treated water would
be discharged through a pipeline to the Maurice River.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE MOM-3B: DOWNGRADIENT CAPTURE AND SOURCE
AREA FUMFING/TREATMENT/REINJECTION
This alternative is the same as MOM-3A except that the treated
water would be reinjected to the aquifer instead of being
discharged to the Maurice River.
PLANT SITE ALTERNATIVE MOM-4A: SITE
PUMPING/TREATMENT/REINJECTION/ DISCHARGE TO THE MAURICE RIVER
This involves the use of additional extraction wells in the high
concentration source area to achieve a higher pumping rate than
with the other MOM alternatives and significantly hastens the
cleanup. Treated groundwater would be reinjected to the aquifer,
at an upgradient on-site location, to the maximum extent
practicable, with the remainder discharged to the Maurice River.
As in the other MOM alternatives, the process would continue
until the maximum groundwater arsenic plume concentration falls
to 0.35 mg/1. At that concentration, groundwater flowing to the
Blackwater Branch would not cause the instream standard of 0.05
mg/1 to be violated, while the aquifer naturally flushes to meet
the drinking water standard goal.
              GROUNDWATER TREATMENT PROCESS OPTIONS
The following are treatment options for removing arsenic, cadmium
and TCE.
TREATMENT PROCESS OPTION Tl: CHEMICAL PRECIPITATION/ AIR
STRIPPING/VAPOR PHASE ACTIVATED CARBON* ADSORPTION/LIQUID PHASE
ACTIVATED ALUMINA ADSORPTION
TREATMENT PROCESS OPTION T2: CHEMICAL OXIDATION/CHEMICAL
PRECIPITATION/ ION EXCHANGE/LIQUID PHASE ACTIVATED CARBON
ADSORPTION

                                                                    o
                                                                    <^j
                                                                    to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 180 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TREATMENT PROCESS OPTION T3: DV-H202 OXIDATION/CHEMICAL
PRECIPITATION
All three process options would clean the contaminated
groundwater to the Federal Safe Drinking Water Standards for
arsenic, cadmium, and TCE. Common to all three is a chemical
precipitation step, which uses iron salts to remove the arsenic
and cadmium from the water. The three options differ in the
method used to remove the TCE, i.e., process Tl employs air
stripping, while T2 uses carbon adsorption, and T3 uses oxidation
to destroy the TCE. The three options also differ in the method
used as a final step to "polish" the treated water and remove any
residual arsenic or cadmium down to the Safe Drinking Hater
Standards.
o OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas Sediments)
RIVER AREAS ALTERNATIVE i: NO ACTION
This alternative provides the baseline against which other
alternatives for the third operable unit may be compared.
Potential public health risks from river sediments would be
reduced by limiting access through sign posting and educational
programs. Existing environmental contamination would continue,
but could be decreased at a significant rate through natural
processes, after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is
stopped. Monitoring would be required to document the nature and
scope of the natural processes.
RIVER AREAS -ALTERNATIVE 2A: DREDGING/EXCAVATION/THICKENING/
FIXATION/OFF-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL
This entails dredging submerged sediments in the Blackvater
Branch and the Maurice River, and excavating exposed sediments in
the Blackwater Branch floodplain. The dredged sediments would
require thickening to remove excess water prior to fixation.
Fixation would utilize cements and binders to reduce the mobility
of the contained arsenic. The fixated product would be delisted
and sent to an existing off-site non-hazardous landfill, clean
fill would be used to restore the floodplain to its original
physical condition.
RIVER AREAS ALTERNATIVE 2B: DREDGING/EXCAVATION/THICKENING/
FIXATION/ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL
This alternative is the same as Alternative 2A except that the
disposal of treated sediments would be in a new landfill which
would be built on the Vineland Chemical Company property.
RIVER AREAS ALTERNATIVE 3A: DREDGING/EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/
SEDIMENTS TO OFF-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARD01
SLUDGE DISPOSAL                                                <
                                                               i-i
                                                                 2!
                                9
                                                                 o
                                                                 o
                                                                 to


                                                                 r&t


                                                                 £7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 181 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

This uses the sane dredging and excavation activities as
Alternatives 2A and 2B. However, in place of fixation,
extraction with water is used to remove arsenic from the
contaminated sediments. The cleaned sediments, after delisting,
would be sent to an existing non-hazardous landfill. Arsenic in
the extraction water would be converted to a sludge during
treatment and the sludge would be disposed in an existing
off-site hazardous waste facility. The treated water would be
returned to the river.
RIVER AREAS ALTERNATIVE 3B: DREDGING/EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/
SEDIMENTS TO ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS
SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This alternative is the same as 3A except thst the cleaned and
delisted sediments would be disposed of at a new non-hazardous
landfill to be built on Vineland Chemical Company property.
RIVER AREAS ALTERNATIVE 3C:
DREDGING/EXCAVATION/EXTRACTION/FLOODPLAIN
DEPOSITION OF EXPOSED SEDIMENTS/PLANT SITE DEPOSITION OF RIVER
SEDIMENTS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This is the same as Alternative 3A except that the cleaned and
delisted sediments would be disposed of as follows: floodplain
sediments (non-submerged) would be redeposited as fill to replace
remediated floodplain areas; and submerged sediments from the
Blackwater Branch and the Maurice River would be deposited at the
Vineland Chemical Company property in appropriate undeveloped
areas.
o OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (Union Lake Sediments)
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 1: NO ACTION
This alternative provides the baseline against which the other
alternatives for the fourth operable unit may be compared.
Potential public health risks from lake sediments would be
reduced by sign posting and educational programs. Existing
environmental contamination would continue, but could be
decreased in the lake through natural processes, e.g., by
dissolution, after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is
stopped, or by sediment resuspension and transport. Monitoring
would be required.
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 2A: REMOVAL/FIXATION/OFF-SITE NON-
HAZARDOUS LANDFILL
This entails dredging and/or excavating contaminated sediments ii <
the lake's periphery, treating them by fixation with cements and £
binders to reduce arsenic mobility, and disposing of the treated
                               10                                   §
                                                                    NJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 182 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

sediments at an existing non-hazardous landfill. Excavated areas
would be restored using clean fill, as would be done in all the
alternatives except 3C and 5. Contamination in sediments in the
deeper areas of the lake would remain, but could be decreased
through natural processes, e.g., by dissolution, or by sediment
redistribution, after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is
stopped. Monitoring would be required prior to remedial action
to gain an understanding of sediment redistribution as it would
affect remediated areas, and sediment redistribution and arsenic
dissolution as it would affect the natural restoration of Union
Lake.
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 2B: REMOVAL/FIXATION/ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS
LANDFILL
This is the same as Alternative 2A except that the fixated and
delisted sediments would be disposed of at a new non-hazardous
landfill built on Vineland Chemical Company property.
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 3A: REMOVAL/EXTRACTION/SEDIMENTS TO OFF-
SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This uses the same sediment removal activities as Alternatives 2A
and 2B. However, in place of fixation, extraction with water
would be used to remove arsenic from the contaminated sediments.
The cleaned sediments, after delisting, would be sent to an
existing non-hazardous landfill. Arsenic in the extraction water         j
would be converted to a sludge during treatment, and would be
disposed of at an existing off-site hazardous waste facility.
The treated water would be returned to the lake. Long-term
monitoring would be required.                                           I
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 3B: REMOVAL/EXTRACTION/SEDIMENTS TO               *•&?:•
ON-SITE NON-HAZARDOUS LANDFILL/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This alternative is the same as 3A except that the extracted
sediments would be disposed of at a new non-hazardous landfill to
be built on Vineland Chemical Company property.                         ,;
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 3C: REMOVAL/EXTRACTION/LAKE REDEPOSITION
OF SEDIMENTS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL
This alternative is the saae as 3A except that the extracted
sediments would be redeposited as fill for remediated areas in
the lake. Long-term monitoring would be required.
UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 3D: REMOVAL/EXTRACTION/PLANT SITE
DEPOSITION OF SEDIMENTS/OFF-SITE HAZARDOUS SLUDGE DISPOSAL          <
This alternative is the same as 3A except that the cleaned and
dalisted sediments would be deposited at the Vineland Chemical      o
Company plant site in appropriate undeveloped areas.                S
                               11

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 183 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

UNION LAKE ALTERNATIVE 5: IK SITU SAND COVER
This provides a kind of containment by capping areas of contam-
inated sediments with a one foot layer of clean sand. This would
significantly reduce human health and environmental impacts.
However, the contaminated sediments would remain in the lake.




                                                                   o
                                                                   o
                               12                                  >°

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 184 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Section 3
                        PRJ
After careful consideration of the remedial alternatives, EPA and
NJDEF have made preliminary choices of preferred alternatives for
the four operable units. These choices, which could change as a
result of public comments, are as follows:
o OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site Source Control)
The preferred alternative is Alternative SC-5, In Situ Soil
Flushing. This alternative would accelerate natural coil
flushing in four active zones, which would be berned and flooded
to provide continuous water flushing. The flushing water would
dissolve and carry the arsenic from the soil to the underlying
groundwater. Groundwater pumping and treatment, which must also
be implemented at the plant site, will convert the arsenic to a
sludge for off-site hazardous treatment and disposal.
Plant site remediation also includes cleaning and closing of the
storage buildings and the two lined RCRA surface impoundments.
o   OPERABLE UNIT TWO    (Plant Site Management of Migration)
The preferred alternative for the groundwater is MOM 4A. This
alternative involves pumping groundwater at a high flow rate from
a larger number of wells to be located in high contamination
zones in addition to dovngradient capture wells. The preferred
treatment alternative is T2, which would remove the contaminants,
i.e., arsenic, cadmium, and TCE to meet the drinking water
standards for the lowest cost. After treatment to drinking water
standards, the treated water would be recharged to the aquifer at
the maximum rate practicable while the remainder is discharged to
the river. Some of the treated water would provide the flushing
water required for Operable Unit One, In Situ Soil Flushing
(SC-5),
o   OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas Sedinents)
The preferred alternative is 3C. Operations on the exposed
Blackwater Branch floodplain sediments, which would begin soon
after arsenic flow in the groundwater to the Blackwater Branch is
stopped, entails excavation of "hot spots", extraction with water
to remove arsenic from the sediments, and redeposition of treated
sediments in the floodplain. At about the same time,
contaminated submerged sediments in the Blackwater Branch would
be dredged, extracted with water to remove arsenic, and then
deposited in appropriate undeveloped areas of the Vineland
Chemical Company plant site. After extracting arsenic from th
sediments, the arsenic-laden water would be treated to remove <j
arsenic in the form of a sludge, which would be transported ti M
existing off-site hazardous waste facility for treatment and
                                                                o
                                 13                             o
                                                                M

                                                                H
                                                                C
                                                                H

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 185 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

disposal.
Contamination in the submerged sediments of the Maurice River is
expected to be significantly reduced by the natural scouring and
dissolution effects of the river, over time, especially after
arsenic flow from the plant site is stopped. Therefore,
remediation of these submerged sediments would occur, if
necessary, beginning three years after the arsenic flow from the
plant site has stopped. Remediation would entail dredging,
extraction with water to remove arsenic from the sediments, and
deposition of the cleaned sediments in undeveloped areas of the
plant site.
o   OPERABLE UNIT POUR (Union LaXe Sediments)
The preferred alternative is 3C. This involves levering the
lake's water level, dredging, and excavating those portions of
the lake's periphery which contain arsenic at concentrations that
present an unacceptable exposure risk to the public.
In the high access public areas, which include the Public Beach
and the Tennis and Sailing Club, "hot spots" with arsenic
concentrations above 20 mg/kg would be remediated from the
shoreline to a distance at which the lake water depth is 5 feet.
In the high access residential areas, "hot spots" above 20 mg/kg
would be remediated to a minimum lake water depth of 2.5 feet,
continuing to either a maximum distance of 150 feet from the
shoreline, or a lake depth of 5 feet.
In the low access areas, e.g., the lake's western shore, "hot
spots" above 120 mg/kg would be remediated to a minimum lake
water depth of 2.5 feet, continuing to either a maximum distance
of 150 feet from the shoreline or a lake depth of 5 feet.
The removed materials would be extracted with water to remove
arsenic, and, after treatment, would be returned as fill for the
remediated areas. The extraction water would be treated to
convert the arsenic to a sludge for offsite hazardous treatment
and disposal. The treated water would be returned to the lake.




                                                                    O
                                                                    o

                                14


                                                                    r*
                                                                    4?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 186 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            Section 4

The nine criteria used to evaluate all remedial alternatives fall
into four categories, namely, environmental/public health;
compliance with cleanup standards; technical performance; and
cost. In addition, the selected remedies should result in
permanent solutions and should use treataent to the aaxisum
extent practicable. The criteria are summarized below:
  - Overall protection of human health and the environment
    addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
    protection and describes how risks posed through each pathway
    are eliminated, reduced or controlled through treatment,
    engineering controls, or institutional controls.
  - Compliance with ARARs addresses whether or not a remedy will
    meet all of the applicable or relevant and appropriate
    requirements (ARARs) of Federal and State environmental
    statutes and/or provides a basis for a waiver.
 - Long-term effectiveness refers to the ability of a remedy to
   maintain reliable protection of human health and the
   environment over time once cleanup goals have been met.
 - Reduction of toxicitv. mobility or volume is the anticipated
   performance of the remedy in terms of reducing the toxicity,
   mobility, or volume of the contaminants of concern in the
   environment.
 - Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed
   to achieve protection, and any adverse impacts on human
   health or the environment that may be posed during the
   construction and implementation period until cleanup goals
   are achieved.
 - Implement ability refers to the technical and administrative
   feasibility of implementing a remedy, including the
   availability of materials and services required to implement
   a particular option.
 - Cost includes estimated capital and operation and maintenance
   costs of the remedy, and the net present worth cost.
 - State Acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of
   the RI/FS and Proposed Plan, the State concurs in, opposes,
   or has no comment on the preferred alternative at the presr--1-
   time.
                                                                 <
 - Community Acceptance will be assessed in the Record of        2
   Decision following a review of the public comments receive
   on the RI/FS report and the Proposed Plan.                    o
                                                                 o
                                                                M
                               15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 187 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The lead agency (EPA), together with the support agency (NJDEP),
is required to select for each operable unit the remedial
alternative which offers the best balance among the nine
criteria. However, the selected remedy mist Beet the first two
criteria: protection of human health and the environment, and
compliance with ARARs unless a waiver im granted. The Banner in
which the preferred alternatives meet the criteria will be
addressed briefly below. The State has indicated its concurrence
with the preferred alternatives. Community comment and
acceptance are being solicited at this time.
o   OPERABLE UNIT ONE (Plant Site Source Control)
Flushing of contaminated soil in place would be effective in
the long-term and permanent once the arsenic passes from the
soil to the underlying groundwater and is subsequently removed.
Fewer short-term impacts are expected than with competing
alternatives because less excavation is required. Toxicity,
mobility and volume of contaminants would be reduced once cleanup
goals are met. Implementation is not complex, with further
testing required prior to design. Cost is significantly lower
than the other alternatives.
Competing alternatives are less attractive because they are not
permanent (e.g., the containment alternative); less effective,
(e.g., the fixation alternatives, which do not reduce toxicity or
volume); less implementable due to the uncertainties of available
off-site non-hazardous landfill sites; or more costly.
O   OPERABLE UNIT TWO (Plant Site Management of Migration)
The use of groundwater pumping at a high flow rate (site
pumping), with treatment to remove the contaminants, followed by
reinjection and discharge, meets the criteria successfully.
Long-term effectiveness and permanence would be achieved once the
groundwater cleanup goal is reached. Toxicity, mobility and
volume of the groundwater contaminants would be reduced, and the
flow of arsenic to the Maurice River system would be stopped.
Short-term effectiveness is achieved in that the short-term risks
to on-site workers during installation and the time to halt
groundwater flow to the Blackvater Branch after installation of
the system are minimal.
Implementability is high in that reliable commercially available
operations are employed for pumping and treatment. The cost for
this alternative is significantly lower than that of the other
alternatives, because the higher pumping rate results in the
shortest time to finish the cleanup.


                                                                     o
                                16                      •           ;S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 188 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

o   OPERABLE UNIT THREE (River Areas Sediments)
For the exposed Blackvater Branch floodplain area, excavation of
the contaminated zones followed by water extraction to remove
arsenic, and redeposition of the cleaned sediment as fill
material in its former locations aeets the criteria. By removing
the contaminants from the sediments to a safe level and disposing
of contaminants at an off-site hazardous waste facility, this
alternative would permanently protect human health and the
environment, comply with ARARs, and reduce the toxicity, mobility
and volume of contaminants in the river areas. The
implementability would be simple because only commercially
available equipment would be required, and the cleaned and
delisted sediments are no longer regarded as a waste and present
no threat to human health or the environment. This alternative
is the least costly of the competing alternatives.
The submerged sediments contaminated above cleanup goals in the
Blackwater Branch would be dredged. Any submerged sediments
contaminated above cleanup goals remaining in the Maurice River
above Union Lake would be dredged. The remediation of the
submerged river sediments would begin after the three year period
to assess the river's natural cleansing performance. The dredged
material would be extracted with water to remove arsenic, and the
cleaned sediments deposited in appropriate undeveloped areas of
the plant site. Comments regarding the performance of this
alternative relative to the criteria are the same as above
regarding remediation of the exposed floodplain sediments.
However, owing to the greater ecological sensitivity of the river
system to dredging as compared to dry excavation, an
environmental assessment early in the design of the dredging
operation would be required to assure acceptable short-term
effectiveness. In addition, because disposal of the cleaned
sediment as clean fill for the remediated river areas is not
easily implementable, disposal would occur at the Vineland
Chemical Company plant site where cost would be somewhat higher.
Still, the overall cost is the lowest of the implementable
alternatives.
The competing alternatives are less desirable because they are:
less effective, e.g., the fixation alternatives, which do not
reduce toxicity or volume; less implementable due to uncertain
availability, e.g., the alternative employing existing non-
hazardous off-site landfill disposal; or more costly.
o   OPERABLE UNIT FOUR (Union Lake Sediments)
This will be an interim remedy to protect the public while
further study is done. The interim remedy would begin after th
submerged river sediments have been remediated (if this is dees ^
necessary after assessing the river's natural cleansing         ~
                                "                                   o
                                                                    fo


                                                             £••;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 189 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

performance), to avoid recontaminating areas of the lake. An
interim remedy aay be used in appropriate situations provided it
does not result in any of the following: directly cause
additional migration of contaminants; complicate the site
cleanup; present an immediate threat to public health or the
environment; or interfere with, preclude, or delay the final
remedy, consistent with EPA's priorities for taking further
action. All of the alternatives could be designed to Beet the
foregoing limitation except Alternative 5 (In Situ Sand Cover),
which could complicate or delay any final remedy. Therefore, the
remedy choice criteria were used to select the best interim
remedy from the remaining alternatives.
Removal of sediments in Union Lake's periphery containing arsenic
at levels above cleanup goals, followed by extraction with water
to remove arsenic, and returning of the cleaned sediments to
their former locations in the lake, would meet remedy choice
criteria. By reducing the sediment arsenic concentration to an
acceptable level, human health would be protected. The remedy
would reduce arsenic toxicity, nobility, and volume in the lake.
Redistribution of the remaining arsenic contaminated sediments is
possible. In addition, the remaining arsenic contaminated
sediments may be mitigated by natural processes, such as sediment
resuspension and transport, or arsenic dissolution, especially
after the flow of arsenic from the plant site is stopped. Long-
term monitoring is required. Short-term effectiveness is high
with minimal and controllable adverse impacts during removal and
redeposition. To ensure the controllability of these impacts, an
environmental assessment of the excavation and redeposition steps
would be conducted early in the design process. This alternative
is simple to implement since it uses available commercial
equipment and reliable technology. Cost for this alternative is
lowest among those which use treatment.
Competing alternatives are less attractive because they are: less
effective, e.g., the fixation alternatives, which do not reduce
toxicity or volume; less implementable due to uncertain
availability, e.g., the alternative employing existing non-
hazardous off-site landfill disposal; or more costly.
In summary, at this time, the preferred alternative for each of
the four operable units is believed to provide the best balance
among the alternatives with respect to the criteria used to
evaluate remedies. Based on the information available at this
time, EPA and NJDEP believe the preferred alternatives
would be protective, would attain ARARs, would use permanent
solutions and treatment technologies to the maximum extent
practible and would be cost-effective.


                                                                        O
                                                                        o
                                                                        to
                               18



                                                                  »*.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 190 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            Section 5
            COMMUNITY ROLE IK THE
EPA relies on public participation to ensure that the remedies
selected at each Superfund site meet the needs of the local
community in addition to being an effective solution to the
problem. To this end, this Proposed Plan is being distributed
to the public during the 30-day public comment period which will
end on August 1, 1989. Written and oral comments on the Proposed
Plan and on the RI/FS reports will be documented in the
Responsiveness Summary section of the Record of Decision.
All written comments should be submitted to:
                          Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
                          Project Manager
                          U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                          New Jersey Remedial Action Branch
                          26 Federal Plaza, Room 759
                          New York, New York 10278
After consideration of all comments, the final selections will be
made and documented in the Record of Decision. A public meeting
will be held at the Vineland City Hall on Tuesday evening, July
18, 1989 beginning at 7:00 p.m. to present the results of the
RI/FS, and the proposed remedies. A public availability session
will be held on Wednesday morning, July 19, 1989, from 9:00 a.m.-
1:00 p.m. to allow one on one discussions with EPA about the
RI/FS and the Proposed Plan.
FURTHER INFORMATION
Copies of the RI/FS reports, and all other documents comprising
the site Administrative Record are available for review at:
Vineland City Hall                    Millville Public Library
7th and Wood Streets                  210 Buck Street
Vineland, NJ 08360                    Millville, NJ 08332
(609) 794-4060                        Reference Director:
                                      Ms. Nancy Forester
                                      (609) 825-7087


Vineland Public Library               Millville City Hall
1058 East Landis Ave                  P.O. Box 609
Vineland, NJ 08360                    Millville, NJ 08332
Reference Director:                   (609) 825-7000                M
Mr. Anthony Agnesino
(609) 794-4244                                                      o
                                                                    o
                                                                    to

                                 19

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 191 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          Section 6
                    VINELAND CHEMKBL CCMPANY, INC. SUPERFCND SITE
                                     OF
                             PRESENT
                             WCRffi       DURA3TCN
REMEDIAL                     COST         OF REMEDIAL
ALXERNWIVE                   ($1,000)     ACTION (YEARS)
• OPilKASZ HOT CHE (PIAKT gTTg SCEUCE
SC-l:   No Action             1,122                        Inadequate to protect
                                                           human health and the
                                                           snvircrnissnt.
SC-2: Multilayer             7,232                         Protective, but not
Capping System                                             permanent; contaminants
                                                           retain en-site.
SC-3A: ESccavation/         62,937                         Protective,   permanent
Fixation/Off-Site                                          since pon^>on'' "at-pd a^i ig
Non-Hazardcws                                              roioved; availability of
Lardfill                                                   landfill uncertain;
                                                           enlisting required;
                                                           highest cost.
SC-3B: Bocavation/          35,466                         Protective; contaminants
Fixaticn/On-Site                                           immcifri i i rj^ and placed in
Ncn-Hazardcaos                                             controlled enviroranant;         .-SJK
LanflfiU                                                   no reduction in toxicity
                                                           cor volume; site
                                                           topography affected;
                                                           delisting required; high
                                                           relative cost.
SC-3C: Bccavation/          26,484                         Protective; contaminants
Fixation/On-Site                                           immobilized but retain
Redeposition                                               en-site; no reduction in
                                                           tcocicity car volume; site
                                                           topography affected;
                                                           delisting required.
SC-4A: Docavaticn/          44,560                         Protective; permanent;
F^traction/Soils to                                        availability of landf
Off-Site Hen-Hazardous                                     uncertain; delisting
Landfill/Off-Site                                          required; high relat: <
Hazardous Sludge Disposal                                  cost.                  "z
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    o

                                            20

                                                                                    v

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 192 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            PRESENT
                            HCRIH      DERATION
REMEDIAL                    COST       OF REMEDIAL
ALTERNATIVE                 ($1,000)   ACTION (YEARS)           CO-MENTIS


SC-4B: Excavation/          25,102                         protective; permanent;
Extraction/Soils to                                        contaminated soil cleaned
Cn-Site Nan-Hazardous                                      and placed in controlled
Landf ill/Off-Site                                         environment; contaminants
Hayjtf^jnig Sludge                                         rtiisp-»vd off -site; site
Disposal                                                   topography affected;
                                                           delisting required.
SC-4C: Excavation/          16, 934                        Protective; permanent;
Extraction/On-site                                         oontaminated soil
Redeposition of Soils/                                     cleaned; contaminants
Off-Site Hazardous                                                  off -site; site
Sludge Disposal                                            tcpography affected;
                                                           delisting required.
SC-5: In Situ                5,159                         Reoannended alternative
Soil Flushing                                              for plant site soils.
                                                           Protective; permanent;
                                                           contaminated soil
                                                           r?)ft^r>g(j|j contaminants
                                                           renoved from groundwater
                                                           and transported off-site
                                                           for (tiBpnfal; longest
                                                           tlffie to remediate; low
                                                           relative cost. .
SC-6: In Situ               24,872                         Protective; contamnants
Solidification/                                                         but
Fixation of                                                on-site; no reduction
Unsaturated Zone                                           in toxicity or volume.
Soils
• OPERABLE HOT TWO (PLANT       MANAO4ENT OF MZGRATJDON)

hEM-1:   No Action             289            250          Inadequate to protect
                                                           human health and the
                                                           envxrorcisnt.
KM-2B: Downgradient         44,981            75           Minimizes migration to
Capture/Treatanent/                                        Blackwater Branch;
Reinjection                                                treatment reduces
                                                           toxicity; delistir
                                                           required for treat
                                                           water; longest til <
                                                           remediate; highest 2:
                                                                               O
                                         21                                    o
                                                                               to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 193 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              PRESENT
                              WCKEH           DURATION
    MMHDIAL                   COST            OF REMEDIAL
    ALTERNATIVE               ($1,000)        ACHCN (YEARS)

MCM-3A: Downgradient          44,181           30             Minimizes migration to
capture and Source Area                                       Blackwater Branch;
Punping/Treataent/                                            treatment reduces
Discharge to the Maurice                                      tcodcity; delisting
River                                                         required for treated
                                                              water; long timp to
                                                              ranadiate; high relative
                                                              cost.
MCM-3B: Downgradient          39,936           25             Minimizes migration to
Capture and Source                                            Blackwater Branch;
Area Pumping/Treatment/                                       treatment reduces
Reinjection                                                   tcocLcity; delisting
                                                              required for treated
                                                              water; shorter tine to
                                                              remediate; high relative
                                                              cost though lower than
                                                              1CM-3A.
MCM-4A: Site Purrping/       34,148           13              Reccranended alternative
Treatment/Reiirjection/                                       for groundwater
Discharge to the
Maurice River                                                 migration to Blackwater
                                                              Branch; treatment reduces
                                                              tcocLcity; delisting
                                                              required for treated
                                                              water; shortest time and
                                                              lowest cost to remediate.
•     OPERABLE HOT TTCTPK (RIVER AREAS SH3IKHGS)

ALTERNATIVE 1:                  874                       Exposed sediments would
No Action                                                 remain a threat to human
                                                          health and the
                                                          environment. However,
                                                                     sediment
                                                          contamination expected to
                                                          be significantly reduced
                                                          by natural river flushing
                                                          while human health c
                                                          be protected by       ^
                                                          institutional auntie M
                                                                                z
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    o
                                                                                    to

                                         22



                                                                                    •y

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 194 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                           PFESEOT
                           KCKIH      DERATION
REMEDIAL                   COST       OF REMEDIAL
ALTERNATIVE                ($1,000)   ACTION (YEARS)           CCfrMENTS
ALTERNATIVE 2A:            60,809                      Protective unless
Dredging/Excavation/                                   remaining contamination
Piickening/Fixat ion/                                  re-collects; landfill
Of f-Site Non-«azardous                                availability uncertain;
                                                       delisting required;
                                                       highest cost.
ALTERNATIVE 2B:            43,666                      Protective unless
Dredging/Excavation/                                   remaining cm|*'*m'' "**" ^ T*
Thickening/Fixation/                                   re-collects; contaminants
On-Sitc Non-Hazardous                                  ^nwnnh't i •f *&A and placed in
landfill                                               tjLi iLi pi 1 pri environnient;
                                                       no reduction in toxicity
                                                       or volume; delisting
                                                       required; high relative
                                                       cost; plant cite
                                                       topography affected.
ALTERNATIVE 3A:            24,710                      Protective unless
Dredging/Excavation/                                   renaining contamination
Extraction/Sediments to                                re-collects; landfill
Off-Site Non-Hazardous                                 availability uncertain;
Landfill/Off-Site                                      delisting required; high
Hazardous Sludge                                       relative cost.
Disposal
ALTERNATIVE 3B:            16,875                      Protective unless
Dredging/Excavation/                                   remaining contamination
Extraction/Sedijnents to                               re-collects; delisting
On-Site Non-Hazardous                                  required; site topography
Landfill/Off-Site                                      affected.
Hazardous Sludge
Disposal
ALTERNATIVE 3C:            14,186                      Reoccnended alternative
Dredging/Excavation/                                   for Blackwater Branch
Extraction/Flcodplain                                  Floodplain remediation
Deposition of Exposed                                  and River Areas
Sediments/Plant Site                                   sediments. Protective;
Deposition of River                                           nt; contaminants
Sediments/Off-Site                                     disposed off-site;
Hazardous Sludge                                       delisting required; low
Disposal                                               relative cost.




                                                                              o
                                                                              o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 195 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            PRESENT
                                            DURATION
 REMEDIAL                   COST            OF REMEDIAL
 ALTERNATIVE                ($1,000)               (YEARS)           COMMENTS


 •   CFERABt£ TKET POOR (HOCK LMOE fiEODfEKES)

ALTERNATIVE i:                874                            Potential exposure to
No Action                                                    contaminated p**^ Trent's
                                                             ronains. Protective if
                                                             access to lake
                                                             successfully restricted,
                                                             and lake naturally
                                                             flushes clean.
ALTERNATIVE 2A:             68,840                           Protective unless any
Removal/Fixation/                                            remaining contamination
Off-Site Non-                                                re-distributes;
Hazardous Landfill                                           availability of landfill
                                                             uncertain; delisting
                                                             required; highest cost.
ALTERNATIVE 2B:             49,006                           Protective unless any
Renoval/Fixation/                                            remaining contamination
On-Site Non-                                                 re-distributes;
Hazardous Landfill                                           mnf yn i Tymhefynmrfrii1 i yfA,
                                                             and placed in controlled
                                                             environroent; no reduction
                                                             in toxicity or volume;
                                                             delisting required; plant
                                                             site topography affected;
                                                             high relative cost.
ALTERNATTVE 3A:             27,417                           Protective unless any
Removal /Extraction/                                         remaining contamination
Sediments to Off-Site                                        re-distriJaites ;
Non-Hazardous Landfill/                                      availability of landfill
Off-Site Hazardous                                           uncertain; delisting
Sludge Disposal                                              required; high relative
                                                             cost.

ALTERNATIVE 3B:             18,323                       Protective unless any
Removal/Extraction/                                      remaining contamination
Sediments to On-Site                                     re-distributes; delisting
Non-Kazardous Landf in/                                  required for on-site
Off-Site Hazardous Sludge                                landfill; plant site
Disposal                                                 topography affected;
                                                         relative cost.        2;

                                                                                      o
                                                                                      o
                                       24                                             Nj



                                                                                    CO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 196 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                        PRESENT
                        VCRM            DERATION
REMEDIAL                COST            OF REMEDIAL
ALTERNATIVE             ($1,000)        ACTION (YEARS)          OMONTS


ALTERNATIVE 3C:         12,942                                        alternative
Removal/Extraction/                                      for Union Lake.
Lake Deposition of                                       Protective unless
Sedurents/Of f-Site                                      remaining omit Ami nation
           Sludge                                        re-distributes;
                                                         delisting required; low
                                                         oost.
ALTERNATIVE 3D:P                                         Protective unless any
Removal/Extraction/                                      re-saining eorrtsaiination
Plant Site Deposition                                    re-distrilxitcs; delisting
of Sediments/Off-Site                                    required; plant site
Hazardous Sludge                                         topography affected; low
Disposal                                                 relative cost.
ALTERNATIVE 5:          2,400                            Contaminated sediments
In Situ Sand Covering                                    above action levels
                                                         remain en-site;
                                                         reliability of sand cover
                                                         unknown although
                                                         promising; no treatment;
                                                         lowest cost.




                                   25                                           o
                                                                                o
                                                                                to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 197 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               APPENDIX B
EPA COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES AT THE
     VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE




                                            o
                                            K>

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 198 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           EPA COMMUNITY RELATIONS ACTIVITIES AT THE
                 VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY SITE

          ACTIVITY                               DATE
EPA Community Relations Plan                September 1986
released to public
Fact Sheet on the remedial                  November 8, 1986
investigation and feasibility study
(RI/FS) released to the public
Public Meeting on RI/FS Work Plan held      December 1986
Public Meeting Summary released             April 1987
Proposed Plan released                      June 30, 1989
Public Notice placed in local newspaper     July 12, 1989
Public Meeting held                         July 18, 1989
Public Availability Session held            July 19, 1989
Public Comment Period conducted             July 1 - August 1,
                                                 1989




                                                                 o
                                                                 o


                                                                     Cj

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 199 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         APPENDIX C
                       SIGN-IN SHEETS
The following Sign-In Sheets are from the Public Information
Meeting held 7/18/89, and the Public Availability Session
held 7/19/89 in Vineland City Hall, Vineland, New Jersey.




                                                               o
                                                               to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 200 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            UNITED S T A T E S ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY


                          JACOB K. JAVTTS FEDERAL BULWNG
                            NEW YORK. NEW YORK 10276



                        MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET

                              PLEASE SIGN

     NAME                          ADDRESS fc AFFILIATION




2C                                             ^ -/<L^*-f>
                                               ~^J
                                                                 t*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 201 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   UNITED S T A T E S ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
(£B
                                       K. .wvrrs
                                    NEW YOftK. NEW YO«K 10276




                               MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET
                                      PLEASE SIGN

            NAME                           ADDRESS fc AFFILIATION




3.




9.
io .
11 .                            J
u'
13.
14.
16.




     • -J




                                                                        CJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 202 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

f t&* I
\m
v,*^    f
               UNITED S T A T E S ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
                                       fSOIONl
                             JACOB R. JAVITB reDOUi tULOIKG
                               MEW YORK. NEW YO*K 10276




                          MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET
                                  PLEASE SIGN

        NAME                          ADDRESS £ AFFILIATION




 l.^J^^JJ^^>-
 2.         y^L>'




 13.

 14.           y._ n^t^pt^^U^—•




 18..
                                                                    o
                                                                    o

 20.




                                                                        CJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 203 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        *    U N I T E D S T A T E S E N V I R O N M E N T A L PROTECTION A G E N C Y
      '<f                                        REGIONII
                                  JACO6 K. JAVfTS PHJERAL BUUWNG
                                    ftEW YORK. NEW YORK 10276




                              MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET

                                       PLEASE SIGN

      HAKE                                 M>DRESS & AFFILIATION




2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
16.
17.
                                                                                        o
18.                                              __                                     o


20.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 204 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      J),
            fy   ^<d^X^<5^t*At^^^^^4/ f^-.




N.
is-



ri-


                                             o
                                             o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 205 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPENDIX D

COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM THE
VINELAND CHEMICAL COMPANY




                             O
                             o


                                 fc -<:»
                                 Q

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 206 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   GREENBLATT 6 RIESENBURGER, P. A.
                                            ATTORNEYS AT LAW
                                                                              COIXM1 TO T>« FDU*
JAY H CREENBbMT                                                           M JOSEPH CREENBLATT
  cni/miLD cr^i TIUM M-ron^n
  UlU»l*. Of WJ AND FLORJD* tAA
                                                                         2OO NORTH EIGHTH STREET
FRANKUNJ RJESENBliRGER
MITCHELL H K1ZNER                                                           POST OFFICE BOX M3
  CEJITUHD CrVIL TTUAA ATTOILXr'
                                                                      WNELAND, N. J O836O-O883
CERALDW Li EC HERMANN. JR
                                                                               (6O9! 69I-O424
EOCENE F JENSEN JR
                                                                               FAX 0Ca MA-ftOO




    July 31st, 1989


    Project Manager
    U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
    New Jersey Remedial Action Branch
    26 Federal Plaza, Room 711
    New York, New York 10278

    RE:          RI/FS on Vineland Chemical Co., Inc.
                 Plant Site Source Control, Plan Site Management,
                 RAy er _ Area _S_e dijtten t s, and Union Lake Sediments

    Dear Dr. Cantaneo:

    The 11 volumes on REM III Program RI/FS as above noted have been
    reviewed to a limited extent during the 30 day public comment
    period provided.    A period of time far longer than 30 days is
    necessary to adequately and fully analyze all of the data,
    reports,    recommendations,   and   assumptions   made  in  the
    volumes.

   Reference is made to Table 1-1, Page 1-2 of the "Vineland Chemical
   Company Site, Final Draft, Feasibility Study Report, Union Lake,
   Vineland, New Jersey" (1). The time period required by EBASCO to
   move from its Draft Document to Final Draft Document for "Plant
   Site RI," "River Area R/I," "Union Lake R/I," for the most part
   covered at least an 11 month time period. The time period
   required for EBASCO to move from the draft stage to the final
   draft on the "Plant Site F/S," on the "River Areas F/S," and
   "Union Lake F/S" for the most part covered a period of at least
   10 months. It is improper to assume that an adequate and ful"
   response to the final documents can thereafter be made within a 3
   day period. Accordingly, in making this response to the RI/FS
   the Vineland Chemical Co., Inc.       (hereinafer referred to a
   "ViChem")   will attempt to assert what appears at this time to b
   the most objectionable and questionable aspects of the RI/F o      o
   without waiving its rights to comment upon or assert othe
   criticisms and inadequacies of the RI/FS in future proceedings.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 207 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT s KIESENBURGER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 2
July 31st, 1989
There are so many technical and factual inaccuracies, in the
11 volumes of reports that months of time would be needed to
correct those deficiencies. Only as an example of some of the
inaccuracies a "technical deficiency" sheet is appended for
illustration purposes (2).
Beyond the "technical deficiencies" examples (2), the following
presently appear as substantive inaccuracies or inadequacies of
the 11 volume RI/FS:

      (1)  Page 1-20 of the "Vineland Chemical Company Site, Final
Draft, Feasibility Study Report, Union Lake, Vineland, New Jersey"
notes that in April, 1986 "The NJDEP advised Vineland Chemical
Company of its intent to deny" the NJPDES Permit.    Under permit
issued in 1979, and again in 1981, [Administrative Consent Order
of December 21, 1981] (3), ViChem was authorized by the New Jersey
Department   of Environmental Protection to discharge 200,000
gallons per day of non-contact cooling water into an unlined
lagoon, and to treat ground waters and surface waters   containing
arsenic for discharge to the same unlined lagoon provided the
treated effluent prior to discharge was at a level of .7 ppm
arsenic, or less. Various grounds were provided by the NJDEP for
denial of the already existing permit and allowance to treat as
above noted. The RI/FS notes that the "NJDEP permit denial is
being appealed by ViChem."
As Project Engineer, you should be aware that an extensive trial
took place before the Office of Administrative Law of the State of
New Jersey on the claim by the NJDEP that ViChem's permit to
discharge should be denied. In a decision dated July 10, 1988,
Judge David J.- Monyek, A.L.J. reversed all aspects of the NJDEP
determination and held that ViChem had since 1979 been issued an
appropriate Discharge Permit as specified above, and that the DEP
had not taken the position that ViChem had ever violated the same.
Judge Monyek further determined at Page 19 of his Opinion, that:
          "The proofs, when viewed in their totality, do
     not support respondent's (NJDEP) reasons for the denial
     of appellant's (ViChem) application. Respondent (NJDEP)
     failed to present competent credible evidence to support
     its position that appellant's (ViChem) discharges push
     contaminated groundwater to the Blackwater Branch and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 208 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT s RIESENBURGER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 3
July 31st, 1389
     downstream faster than would otherwise be the case.
     Respondent (NJDEP) neither knows nor determined how
     much more arsenic enters the Blackwater Branch in any
     given time frame with or without discharges.   Respon-
     dent (NJDEP) further acknowledged that terminating
     appellant's (ViChem) discharges would not improve water
     quality in the Blackwater Branch and would not eliminate
     the potential need for a Superfund cleanup downstream of
     the site. Furthermore, respondent (NJDEP) acknowledges
     that there is no evidence that the upper and lower
     aquifers are hydraulically connected under the site.
     Respondent (NJDEP) further failed to support its position
     that the deep aquifer and the City of Vineland's water
     supply are in any way threatened by or because of
     appellant's (ViChem) discharges, and further failed to
     demonstrate that private wells in the shallow aquifer
     are threatened. In sum, respondent's (NJDEP) proofs
     were, at best, hypothetical, speculative and conjectural,
     and therefore its reasons for the denial were not compe-
     tently supported. On the other hand, appellant's
     (NJDEP) proofs were both credible and convincing. The
     totality of the proofs, as well as the applicable
     regulatory provisions, preponderate in favor of
     appellant (ViChem)." (4)
Judge Monyek, at Page 15 of his Opinion, also determined that:
          "Respondent (NJDEP) produced no competent credible
     evidence to support a hypothesis that arsenic found in
     Union Lake and its sediments poses a significant threat
     to public health, safety or the environment, and there-
     fore the denial of a permit based upon such a hypothesis
     is untenable."
Similarly, the United States Department of Health and Human
Services through the Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease
Registry in June, 1987, determined (based upon 1986 and 1987 data
collected by the NJDEP and EBASCO) that:
     "The   Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry does <
not believe that the exposure of the Lake bottom sediments 2;
presents a significant opportunity for excessive exposure to
arsenic or a threat to public health to the community by any route o
of exposure."  (5)                                                 to

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 209 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       GREENBLATT fi RIESENBURGER, P. A.

    Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
    Page 4
    July 3Ist, 1383
    Accordingly, Judge Monyek's Opinion, and the Risk Assessment
    Report of the Department of Health and Human Services points to
    two fundamental and substantive comments that need be made: (a)
    ViChem's NJPDES Permits were appropriately granted in 1379, and
    ViChem has at all times properly operated its treatment plant and
    discharges of treated effluent and non-contact cooling waters, as
    well; (b) The only two independent bodies (Judge Monyek and the
    Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry for the United
    States Department of Health and Human Services) hearing evidence
    and removed from the political motivations of the EPA and DEP as
    they relate to ViChem have determined that on the basis of real
    scientific   evidence,   (and not    supposition, conjecture and
    assumptions which has been the practice of the EPA and DEP, and
    which continues in the RI/FS to be the overriding rule) the
    arsenic found in Union Lake and its sediments pose no threat to
    public health or to the community by any route of exposure.
    A third opportunity to present evidence to an independent body
    {the Office of Administrative Law of the State of New Jersey) on
    the issue as to whether the soils at the plant site pose any
    threat to the public health or community has been thwarted by the
    recent withdrawal of the NJDEP of its Closure Order of September
    13th,  1988, concerning a "lined .lagoon" and lined "concrete pit."
    On the eve of trial set for August 2, 1989, the NJDEP after
    receiving   great "political fanfare" in issuing a $7 million
    Closure Order, has unilaterally withdrawn it, full well realizing
    that it would again lose its case if competent scientific
    information was allowed to be presented to an independent body.
    The scientific fact remains that the plant site soils and ground
    waters, the. river area, and Union Lake waters and sediments
    present no threat to public health or to the community by any
    route of exposure as a result of the small amounts of arsenic and
    species of arsenic contained and fixed therein.
    Similarly, in the event the RI/FS as presented to date were at
    some future time to be reviewed by an independent body, the
    arbitrary and capricious assumptions and political motivatir
    which are its driving force would and, will become clear, as •
    result of the fundamental and credible scientific facts which 1 ^
                                                                    z
    EPA and DEP continue to ignore.
           (2)   On May 9th, 19S6, the EPA authorized EBASCO Servict g
    Inc.    (E5ASCG) to conduct the RI/FS which is now subject       f°

            In discussions with the DEP, the EPA has relied upon t
•   same employees of DEP who have continually made improper a
    erroneous assumptions regarding this matter.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 210 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   GREENBLATT 6 RlESENBURCER, P. A.


D r . Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 5
July 31st, 1989
comment. The final drafts of the RI/FS were not completed until
June 23, 1989, a period of over three years since  authorization.
Despite that length of time, and the sampling collected and
analyzed for or by EBASCO, and other data reviewed by EBASCO, the
EPA has presented a fundamentally flawed RI/FS because of the
following erroneous determination:

          "The ViChem plant was shown to be the only    significant
source of arsenic to the Maurice River drainage basin. All river
sections downstream from the site showed elevated levels of
arsenic in both water and sediments. The levels of arsenic in all
of the other tributaries studied were very low to undetected.
Small sources below the Union Lake Dam cannot be ruled out but no
evidence exists for any inputs." (Vineland Chemical Company, Union
Lake Study at Page 1-34.)

EBASCO erred by failing to sample every branch and tributary for
the possible presence of arsenic in its waters or soils to
ascertain whether other significant sources of arsenic may have
contributed to the Maurice River drainage basin.       The surface
water and sediment "collection stations" are detailed as "Phase
I" and "Phase II" at Pages 210 through 218 of the "Vineland
Chemical Company Site, Final Draft, Remedial Investigation Report,
River Areas, Vineland, New Jersey" (6). Conspicuously absent from
any surface water and sediment "collection stations" and surface
water and sediment sampling is the area close to or approximating
the source of the Tarkiln Branch.
ViChem, having received some information that EBASCO believed that
hundreds of metric tons of arsenic had flowed from the ViChem site
into the Maurice River drainage basin, set upon an extensive
investigation of the tributaries and branches leading into the
Maurice River Drainage Basin. In the event it were accurate that
EBASCO was estimating that hundreds of metric tons of arsenic had
flowed from the ViChem site into the Maurice River Drainage Basin,
it was evident to representatives of ViChem         that   another
significant source of arsenic had to have been present for those
amounts could not possibly have come from the ViChem site.
Accordingly, the comprehensive water and sediment sampling of the
branches was implemented, and as noted, has not been conducted b} ^
EBASCO.                                                            2
Sampling of the soil sediment at the source of the Tarkiln Branch  ?
near the intersections of Chestnut Avenue and         South   Wes fo



                                                                       cs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 211 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT 6 PJESENBUP.C-ER., P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 6
July 31st, 1989

Boulevard consistently measured at levels approaching 100 ppm
arsenic. The water covering the sediments at that location is far
less than two and one-half feet, and the Tarkiln Branch passes
near two apartment developments, a Little League field, and a
number of business locations.      Other sampling points of the
sediments in the middle portion of the Branch show levels at 45
ppm arsenic, and at 98 ppm arsenic      near the Tarkiln Branch's
confluence with the Parvins branch.    (7). The Windsor mean of
sediment samples taken at Union Lake is 74.2 ppm arsenic.
ViChem's laboratory performing      the   sampling      is   certified   in
arsenic sampling by the NJDEP.
Realizing that the results of the sediment samples taken at the
source and in the Tarkiln Branch suggested the possibility of a
significant source of arsenic to the Maurice River Drainage Basin,
representatives of ViChem reviewed    the records of the Vineland
Historical Society to determine whether any arsenic manufacturing
plant may have been present at the South West or South East
Boulevard intersections with Chestnut Avenue. A Monograph of the
Mercantile Industrial and Professional Interests of Pictorial
Vineland dated 1920 was found in the Vineland Historical Society
files (8). The Monograph contained an advertising for the "Kil-
Ton Company", manufacturers of agricultural sprays and chemicals
including Sulpho Arsenate and Cross Green Arsenate of Lead,
inorganic arsenical compounds (8). Boyd's Directory of Vineland,
New Jersey (1921) at Page 118 noted the officers of Kil-Tone
Company and its business of manufacturing agricultural chemicals
being located at Chestnut Avenue and South East Boulevard      (9).
Folk's    Vineland   Directory   (1924-1925)    provided   similar
information (10). A title search on the property located at the
South East Boulevard and Chestnut Avenue revealed that the owner
prior to the Kil-Tone Company was an organization known as Fowler
Waste Manufacturing Company, a New Jersey Corporation which in
1917 deeded the property to the Kil-Tone Company. The Kil-Tone
Company and the Lucas Kil-Tone Company owned and appeared to have
operated the agricultural chemicals manufacturing plant at the
site for over twenty years (11).
Within a short period of time that ViChem has had to investigal
this significant source of inorganic arsenic to the Maurice Riv«
Drainage Basin, ViChem has none the less located a witness w!
recalls that a white powder v»s on the streets and reefs cf tl
manufacturing plant, and in the Tarkiln Stream flowing past tl
area.   The witness recalls disposals of Paris Green, an inorgan:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 212 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT 6 RIESENBURGER. P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 7
July 31st, 1989

copper arsenic compound, being placed into the Tarkiln' Stream.
The witness* observations were made during the time the company
was doing business as Lucas Kil-Tone. The witness also recalls
Lucas Kil-Tone having manufactured calcium compounds and that the
discharge practices into the stream caused a large area to be
stunted of tree and vegetation growth from the Lucas Kil-Tone site
to a point down Tarkiln Stream at an area where the Tarkiln Senior
Citizen complex is currently located.

The historical confirmation provided by the literature search thus
far conducted corroborates the evidence of the source of inorganic
arsenic to the Maurice River drainage basin. The presence to this
day of soil/sediments in the Tarkiln Branch at levels close to and
exceeding 100 ppm arsenic suggests the following:

          (A)   A significant source of inorganic arsenic, the
arguable effects of which are apparent more than a half century
after   production,   have   not been    discovered, ascertained,
quantified and factored into the analysis of the RI/FS.

          (B)   While ViChem disagrees with the EPA recommended
remedial action for treating sediments in Union Lake and the
Rivers Area, ViChem must point out that the criterion adopted for
sediment treatment would apply as well to the Tarkiln Branch.

           (C)  The RI/FS at 1-23 of the        "Vineland Chemical
Company Site, Final Draft, Feasibility Study Report, Union Lake,
Vineland, New Jersey" expresses concerns that anaerobic conditions
developing on the bottom of Union Lake would readily convert the
claimed ViChem organic arsonicals into the more toxic inorganic
arsenic forms; Indeed, at Page 1-34 of the same RI/FS report, a
determination is made that the inorganic arsenicals, arsenate
species,    and  the   arsenite species    are the predominating
arsenical forms, although fixed in the sediments.       While some
limited conversion of the claimed ViChem arsonicals may be
expected, the more toxic forms of inorganic arsenicals   developed
on the bottom of Union Lake would appear to be the Kil-Tone and
Lucas Kil-Tone discharges.

          (D)   That being the case, (a) extensive speciation (12)
and column layer studies differentiating the presence of organic
and inorganic arsenic over time, are necessary to ascertain the
extent of any claimed contribution from the two potential sources,
and  (b) the only appropriate test under CERCLA to determine the
hazardous nature or non-hazardous nature of the arsenic present in




                                                                     M

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 213 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT & RIESENBURGER, P. A,

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 8
•July 31st, 1989
the sediments from the two potential sources is the best for
"characteristics" by the EP Toxicity Test for arsenic. Under that
test, as the EPA and DEP is aware, none of the sediments in Union
Lake are hazardous (13), and none of the sediments in Union Lake
can be brought under Superfund Remediation Programs.
          (E)   No risks can be attributable to the claimed ViChem
organic arsonicals that may be present in the sediments of Union
Lake, and any risks determined in the RI/FS as a result of the
presence   of arsenic in the      sediments of Union Lake      are
attributable solely to the far more toxic inorganic arsenicals of
which ViChem is not the source.
           (F)  As will be more fully discussed in a separate
section, the Risk Assessment in the RI/FS is seriously flawed even
in evaluating its concerns with inorganic arsenic.       None the
less, no risk of exposure is present even as to the inorganic
arsenic found in the sediments. The appropriate remedial action
in the Union Lake is no action and no sediment treatment, allowing
nature to proceed on its course. That is what has occurred over
the last 50 years with the Kil-Tone discharges of inorganic
arsenic and wastes placed into the Tarkiln Branch and the
Maurice River drainage basin.      The natural process     is   so
effective, no one over the years has even been aware of any
potential risks. The wisdom of that approach is again fostered by
reference to the EP Toxicity Test which is the only possible
applicable criterion set by law for determining whether the
sediments in Union Lake are hazardous. As previously referenced,
the application of the EP Toxicity Test to the sediments in Union
Lake has uniformly determined that the sediments         are   not
hazardous.
           (G)   Should the EPA, however, continue to assert that
the preferred option for the Union Lake area is            sediment
treatment,    further   speciation  and   column    layer   studies
differentiating the presence of organic and inorganic arsenic
species over time are also necessary in the event the EPA attempts
to attribute responsibility for the Union Lake treatment to
ViChem.    ViChem was not the manufacturer of the more toxi
inorganic arsenicals, any responsibility for which belongs to Kil
Tone and Lucas Kil-Tone, the mixed funding provisions of CERCLJ <
and the State of New Jersey as the owner of Union Lake (see Pas 2;
E-5 and 1-4 of "Vineland Chemical Company Site, Final Draft
Feasibility Study Report, Union Lake, vineiand. Hew Jerssy.")       g

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 214 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT 6 RIESENBURGER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 9
July 31st. I3SS

      (3)   The RI/FS Risk Assessment is seriously flawed. Instead
of performing an objective Risk Assessment on current data, the
EPA/DEP in the RI/FS has performed a biased Risk Assessment on old
data. The goal of requiring sediment treatments in certain
locations to meet "clean up" standard of 20 ppm arsenic in the
sediments was set by the NJDEP in its draft conference with the
EPA-    Thereafter, the Risk Assessment was constructed, and indeed
manipulated, to reach the previously determined "clean up" goal of
20 ppm set by the NJDEP.

Page 3-8 of the Executive Summary found in "Vineland Chemical
Company Site, Final Draft, Feasibility Study Report, Union Lake,
Vineland, New Jersey" more than suggests that prior to DEP's
comments into the RI/FS, the EPA was going to use the correct and
legally authorized EP Toxicity Test of 5 ppm arsenic to determine
risks and whether the sediments and soils were hazardous under
CERCLA.   As previously noted, none of the sediment samples, and
none of the samples at the Vineland Chemical site exceed EP
Toxicity limits.

To the contrary, the NJDEP has been using an "Informal Guideline"
of 20 ppm arsenic, and not the legally required EP Toxicity
Testing, for a clean-up standard in soils and sediments.       The
"Informal Guideline" is not based upon any regulation or law.
However, the NJDEP has adopted that number in its ECRA clean-ups,
and other clean-ups required under other laws.       The "Informal
Guideline" has no basis in the scientific literature, and indeed
is a "secret law" component of what the NJDEP does in clean-ups.
No one knows the basis upon which the 20 ppm "Informal Guideline"
has been set.    The NJDEP consistently has used the "Informal
Guideline" in setting clean-up goals and standards, but the DEP
has also claimed that "it really isn't doing so" because the 20
ppm standard is only an "Informal Guideline," yet it controls and
drives the DEP policy on clean-up.

The fact that the 20 ppm "Informal Guideline" would be used in
this RI/FS as a clean-up treatment standard for the sediments a*
certain locations was predictable. The fact that it is beim
used is particularly disturbing for the above-noted reasons, a <
well as the EPA review of actual arsenic standards that i -z
is currently inclining to conclude that arsenic standards hav
been too stringently set. However, guided by the NJDEP "Inform? g
Guideline," the Risk Assessment was constructed in a manner 1 NJ
assure that its results "backed into" the previously set objecti'
by the NJDEP of a 20 ppm clean-up threshold for certain of t' fni
sediments at Union Lake.                                          t&

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 215 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             S RIE5ENBURGER, r. s~\.


Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 10
July 31st, 1989

The DEP had other reasons, as well, to become actively involved in
setting the clean-up threshold, and other key measurement criteria
used in the RI/FS. The DEP owns Union Lake. The DEP is a
potentially responsible party. Its active and biased
participation in the process of the RI/FS with the EPA is
essential to assuring that (a) the DEP will not be determined a
potentially responsible party, and (b) at the same time clean-up
its lake well beyond any requirements of law. As the result of
DEP's ownership position of" Union Lake, its bias resulting
therefrom, as well as its insistence to impose the "Informal
Guideline" of 20 ppm as the clean-up standard for certain areas of
Union Lake, the DEP should not have been allowed to participate at
all in the RI/FS process by way of field sampling, and active
comment in the drafting of the RI/FS.
The manner in which EBASCO used a "back door" approach in its Risk
Assessment to result in the predetermined conclusion that 20 ppm
arsenic would compose a portion of the clean-up standard for Union
Lake, follows:

     A. ANTIQUATED DATA. The Risk Assessment for the sediments
of June 1989 is based upon 1982, 1983, 1986 data compiled by both
the NJDEP and EBASCO. With the exception of the 1982, 1983 and
April 1986 data, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry of the Department of Health and Human Services thoroughly
reviewed the June and August 1986 data and issued its report in
June 1987 determining that there was no threat to public health by
any route of exposure including injestion and/or inhalation of
Union Lake sediments.
One of the key focal points even recognized by EBASCO is the need
to determine the extent of the positive effects of "natural
cleansing" of the Union Lake sediments. It is therefore necessary
to use and develop the most recent data possible. EBASCO and the
NJDEP have failed to do so. The Risk Assessment is based upon
data developed 3 1/2 years ago, and in all probability has no
applicability to current conditions.    Clearly, from the work of
the Department of Health and Human Services previously referenced,
it is possible to develop a Risk Assessment within one year of the
collection of data. To attempt to rely upon a Risk Assessment,

                                                                     o
                                                                     o
                                                                     NJ




                                                                      • C1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 216 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT 6 RJESENBURCER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 11
July 31st, 1989
however otherwise flawed, developed 3 1/2 years after 6btaining
sample   data points and     the data information   is  totally
unacceptable, legally and scientifically, particularly    given
EBASCO's recognition of the natural cleansing dynamics and the
decreasing amounts of arsenic that can be expected to be found,
over time, on the surface sediments.

     B.   SUSPECT DATA. No validation of the NJDEP's surface
sediment sampling data appears other than the conclusory statement
in the RI/FS executive summary that "the NJDEP's data have been
reviewed and validated."

No discussion describing the validation of the NJDEP's surface
sediment data developed in August 1986 has been made part of the
RI/FS.   Indeed, the protocal , quality assurance/quality control
documents and procedures, laboratory results, and chain of custody
documents of the NJDEP August 1986 series of the surface sediment
sampling have not at all been made a part of the RI/FS with the
exception of two maps, Figures 4-3 and 4-4, showing sample
stations and the results of sampling. No other key critical
information    is  provided so that a review of the quality
control/quality assurance of that series of samplings can be
accomplished during the comment period, or even observed by a
reader of the RI/FS.
The limited amount of information provided in the RI/FS about the
sediment core sampling taken by the NJDEP in August 1986  (pp. 4-
17, 4-18 and Table 4-3} raises even more concerns concerning the
quality   control/quality   assurance of    the surface sediment
samplings of. that year.
The limited discussion of the 1986 EBASCO data on page 4-12 raises
concerns as well as to the quality assurance/quality control and
validity of the June 1986 EBASCO data. The suggestion is raised
at page 4-12 that the EPA's data validation standard operating
procedures were violated.     Nonetheless, EBASCO determined its
sampling results to be appropriate. Quoting from the RI/FS at
page 4-12: "the high concentration levels present in the Union
Lake sediment samples in relation to the levels found within the
blanks (generally several orders of magnitude difference) , negate
the severity of violating these criteria set forth in EPA's dat
validation standard operating procedures."      Additionally, th
EBASCO report notes, again at page 4-12, that "some concentratior
were estimated due to poor precision among laboratory duplicates


                                                                   40
                                                                 ,1'f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 217 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT 6 RIESENBURGER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 12
July 31st, 1989

Indeed, the duplicate sediment samples taken at EL-8 on June 29,
1986 were at highly unacceptable variances given their results as
being 29 ppm arsenic, and 107 ppm arsenic. The RI/FS attempts to
dismiss   such high variability      by stating at    Page   4-12,
"considering the high arsenic levels found in the Lake samples (up
to 107 mg/1) , the high variability seen within the duplicates is
not anomalous or unexpected." But, indeed it is. For example,
the Storch results, presumably validated (the basis of which has
not been provided) , of the April 1986 DEP testing show its
duplicate sediment samplings with low variability at 96.3/117 ppiri
and 24.5/13.9 ppm (13).

At the conclusion of page 4-12, the RI/FS notes that some data has
been rejected but does not indicate the reasons for the rejection,
nor the reasons why other data has not been rejected, and has been
accepted .

     C. IMPROPER DATA PLOTTING. There is no ability to determine
whether the August 1986 NJDEP data, even         without   quality
control/quality assurance, has been appropriately      plotted on
Figure 4-4. The matter is of concern because the small number
(11) of EBASCO June 1986 sediment surface sampling results have
not ever been appropriately plotted.      Eleven sediment sample
results from the June 1986 EBASCO sampling round are noted on
Table 4-5 under "total arsenic." As examples, the result noted in
Table 4-5 for sample point EL-3 is "non-detectable,"      and for
sample point EL-5 is 12 ppm arsenic. However, the amounts plotted
on Figure 4-4 for sample point (for windsoring calculations) EL-3
is 31 ppm arsenic, and for EL-5 is 111 ppm arsenic. The latter
results were obtained by EBASCO from a         different   testing
procedure, HSL Inorganics, and should not appear on Figure 4-4 to
assure consistency that only total arsenic levels obtained from
the same testing series appears on Figure 4-4.

The divergence of results from samplings taken at stations    EL-3
(ND and 31) and EL-5 (12 and 111) depending upon the total arsenic
sampling protocal series or the use of the HSL Inorganics protocal
series, raises additional concerns with the high variability of
the duplicate sample results, and more than suggests, once aga
that EPA's data validation standard operating procedures have b <£
clearly violated.                                                 ^

     D.    RISK ASSESSMENT OF THE _ DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUM)
SERVICES .   Even assuming the validity of some or most of the dat
generated by EBASCO in June 1986, and by the DEP in August 1986

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 218 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 GREENBLATT s R.IESENBURGER. P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 13
July 31st, 1989
the United States Department of Health and Human Services in June
1987, determined that based upon that data, no threat to public
health existed as the result of any route of exposure, including
injestion or inhalation of the sediments. The June 1987 analysis
appropriately realized the small number of sediment surface
samples appearing above 500 ppm arsenic, and compared the average
concentration of arsenic in the sediments to studies that provided
even iiicre of an opportunity for exposure to arsenic soils and
sediments   than the assumptions adopted by the EBASCO Risk
Assessment at Section 7 of the "Vineland Chemical Company Site,
Final Draft, Remedial Investigation Report, Union Lake, Vineland,
New   Jersey."   The determination made by the United States
Department of Health and Human Services has already been noted.



     E.   EBASCO RISK ASSESSMENT. The EBASCO Risk        Assessment
compares "apples to oranges" in its attempt to "work back" and
reach the determination that some risk from the sediments exists
to justify a 20 ppm clean-up "standard."        The Risk Assessment
adopts a series of untenable assumptions. The Risk Assessment
sets up the scenario that swimmers are possibly at risk from
investing and contact with sediments, primarily at depths less
than 2 1/2 feet. To determine what the risk would be at depths of
less than 2 1/2 feet, the Risk Assessment computes a "worst case
exposure assumption" based not upon the conditions found in 1986
at a depth of 2 1/2 feet or less, but on the one data point of the
highest one measurement of arsenic in sediment surface (1273 ppm)
found miles from any beach area or level of water at 2 1/2 foot
depth or less.      Similarly, the windsorized mean value used by
EBASCO to de-termine the most probable case exposure assumption to
arsenic sediments at a depth of 2 1/2 feet or less (the defined
area of concern at which supposed exposure to the sediments can
assumedly occur), was the windsorized mean value for all of the
lake sediments including points miles from any beach area and
miles from the actual conditions as they existed in 1986 at depths
of 2 1/2 feet or less (instead of the windsorized mean value for
the conditions found in 1986 at a depth 2 1/2 feet or less or near
the beach). Due to the high variability of sediment samples which
the RI/FS theorized as reason to attempt validation of the EBASCO
1986 sediment sampling, the only reasonable "worst case exposure
assumption" that can objectively be made, would be based upon the
windsorized ir.ean value for all of the Lake sediments (worst case
exposure assumption risk st SX 10-6). The most probable case o
exposure assumption using the conditions occurring in 1986 at th« o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 219 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 GREENBLATT 6 RIESENBURGER, P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 14
July 31st, 1989
                                                         t
at the area of concern being less than 2 1/2 feet in depth has not
been computed in the RI/FS because upon that basis no risk of
exposure exists through injestion or inhalation of the sediments
or any other route of exposure, as corroborated by the June 1987
study (5) .

          4.   The failure to speciate sediment samples (Vineland
Chemical Company Site, Final Draft, Remediation Investigation
Report, Union Lake, Vineland, New Jersey at pages 7-18}  resulted
in adopting erroneous assumptions basing the Risk Assessment upon
the assumed overwhelming presence of the most toxic form of
arsenic, inorganic arsenic. While the Kil-Tone Company and Lucas
Kil-Tone Company provided a source of inorganic arsenic into the
Maurice River drainage basin, speciation of sediment samplings
should have taken place to determine the exact extent of any
inorganic arsenic in the sediment samples.

          5. The RI/FS Risk Assessment suggests that lead was the
"other indicator chemical of concern." The source of any lead
would have been the Kil-Tone Company and Lucas Kil-Tone from its
disposals and handling of Green Cross Arsenate of lead.       Any
presence of lead, again corroborates a significant source of
inorganic arsenic in the Maurice River drainage basin sediments
as being from the Kil-Tone Company.


           6- As previously noted (13), the EP Toxicity Test for
arsenic conducted upon the sediments in the Union Lake resulted in
the determination that the sediments of the Union Lake are not
hazardous.    Similarly, the EP Toxicity Test determined that the
soils at the Vineland Chemical site are also non-hazardous because
the arsenic is so firmly bound in the soils that a toxic amount
does not leach from the soils when exposed to waters and rain
(14).   Accordingly, not only the Union Lake sediments, but the
soils at the Vineland Chemical site are not hazardous, and cannot
be remediated under CERCLA.

In an attempt to avoid this result, the DEP has, contrary to law,    <;
made the assumption that all arenic present at the ViChem site and    ^
off site is K031 .  There is no law or regulation which so states.
The only applicable test to determine toxicity and possible          o
applicability of CERCLA to the arsenic in the sediments and soils    °
is the characteristic test of EP Toxicity for arsenic        (13).
Indeed, in 1987, the DEP formally characterized the sediments of
the Union Lake as non-hazardous under the EP Toxicity Test   (13).
Prior to the final draft stage of the RI/FS, it appears that the
                                                                     C-7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 220 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  GREENBLATT a RIESENBURGER. P. A.

Dr. Ferdinand Cataneo
Page 15
July 31st, 1989

EPA made a similar determination that the EP Toxicity Test is the
appropriate measure to be used to determine risks and hazards (see
page 3-8 of the "Vineland Chemical Company Site, Final Draft,
Remedial   Investigation   Report,   Union Lake,    Vineland, New
Jersey").
          7. The water threshold of 0.05 ppm arsenic adopted by
the EPA is also improper inasmuch as it assumes the presence of
inorganic arsenic, the more toxic form of arsenic   (12). Organic
arsenic is overwhelmingly present in the waters, and requires a
different standard, such as 0.7 ppm (3) (4)   (12).

Similarly, the delisting VMS model is based upon the wrong
"hypothetical 'in the well 1 concentration of .05 ppm arsenic"
which improperly assumes the presence of the most toxic form of
arsenic. The target delisting criterion originally adopted by the
EPA as the EP Toxicity Test of 5 ppm was the appropriate
criterion, and was controlling prior to the participation of the
DEP in the RI/FS procj




•RKKKLIli J. RIESENBURGER

FJR/fr
Enclosures
FEDERAL EXPRESSED 8/1/89




                                                                     O
                                                                     to




                                                                     ,*•*.
                                                                     «* f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 221 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

(2)

EXAMPLES OF TECHNICAL DEFICIENCIES




                                     o
                                     to



                                      C1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 222 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                       TECHNICAL DEFICIENCIES
                         (Illustrative Only)


Erroneous Executive Summary
Conclusions at Page:                       Correct   Information


E-l, 1-7, 1-18, asserting that         1953 - 1954
ViChem has manufactured organic
arsonicals at the ViChem plant
site since 1949.

E-6, characterization of sediments    Characterization cannot take
as KO31 based upon a "belief".        place upon a "belief". Reg-
                                      ulations require application
                                      of EP Toxicity Test. Sedi-
                                      ments in Union Lake are from
                                      multiple sources.

E-6, claiming that the Union           Only the ViChem site has been
Lake and Rivers are also part          placed on the NPL after MITRE
of the "area of contamination"         evaluation.
from the site and appropriately
a part of the RI/FS.



1-1, implying that the EPA            EPA illegally took over the
appropriately authorized EBA5CO       RI/FS process that had been
to proceed with RI/FS.                previously conducted in good
                                      faith by ViChem.



1-12, distribution of treatment       Process water design in treat-
system references 2,000 to 5,000      ment system was modified by
gallons per day of process water      subsequent filings and drawings
                                      after January 30, 1979.



                                                                     z
                                                                     o




                                                                         C/f

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 223 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Erroneous Executive Summary
Conclusions at Page:                    Correct Information


1-17, the RI/FS notes that the      No such words appear in the
interim standard for treatment      Administrative Consent Order
works was set at .7 ppm "agreed     of December 21, 1981, a copy
to and ordered by NJDEP in          of which is set forth as
December 22, 1981 with the          Item (3) appended hereto.
understanding that the .05 mg/1     Paragraph 12 of the Admin-
level would eventually be met.      istrative Consent Order of
                                    December 21. 1981, states
                                    as follows: "While the pro-
                                    posed experimental testing
                                    is being conducted and until
                                    such time as a decision is
                                    made by the NJDEP on the
                                    achievability of 0.05 mg/1
                                    effluent limit, ViChem may
                                    only discharge its treated
                                    water into the unlined lagoon
                                    at a level of total arsenic
                                    concentration of not more
                                    than 0.7 mg/1." See Judge
                                    Monyek's decision at page
                                    15, Item (4) attached.
1-17, the RI/FS references the      The correct date is
above noted Administrative          December 21, 1981.
Consent Order as being dated
December 22, 1981.


1-17, the RI/FS states that         ViChem never applied or requested
ViChem "ceased pumping and treat-   the right to cease treating
ing ground water in July 1987       and pumping the ground water.
with the consent of the NJDEP.      Because of its obligation to
One of the reasons the NJDEP        treat the ground water under
allowed ViChem to stop pumping      the Administrative Consent Order
and treating..."                    of December 21, 1981, ViChem
                                    was subjected to conflicting    ^
                                    obligations i.e. the treatmer H
                                    system which included approv< ^
                                    for the use of two linsS surf; 0
                                    impoundments was required to o
                                    treat and purr.p ground water;
                                    at the same time that a fed*
                                    action had been brought see1


                                                                /I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 224 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Erroneous Executive Summary
Conclusions at Page:                     Correct   Information


                                     to require ViChem. to cease
                                     using the two lined surf ace
                                     impoundments. As a result
                                     of those conflicting agency
                                     positions, the DEP on its own
                                     removed the obligation of
                                     ViChem to pump and treat
                                     ground waters.

1-18, suggests that a Court Order    Such was not the case. See
was in place as of February 8,       Judge Monyek's decision,
1971 requiring ViChem to install     Item (4) attached, at pps.
and provide an industrial waste      4-5.
water treatment facility.


1-29, suggests that the claimed      Such is not the case. Any
contamination may impact upon        contamination of the ground
drinking waters.                     waters under the ViChem site
                                     is limited to the upper water
                                     table aquifer as a result of
                                     the banded zone (1-24), and
                                     the Maurice River drainage
                                     basin is not a part of the
                                     municipal water well supplies
                                     of the City of Vineland and
                                     City of Millville, which draw
                                     down approximately 600 feet
                                     into the lower water table
                                     aquifer.


3-5, the RI/FS intimates that        No tests have shown that the
based upon its belief, the arsenic   sediments are contaminated by
in the sediments of Union Lake       the "by-product salts", or
are the K031 materials stored on     that the "by-product salts
the ViChem site. The RI/FS claims    are present on or in the s <
that the sediments contain the       ments. The identificatior g
"by-product salts", K031. Con-       a significant source of
sequently, all arsenic in the        inorganic arsenic from th< o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 225 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Erroneous Executive Summary
Conclusions at Page:                Correct Information


sediment has been determined   Kil-Tone site would make
to be KO31 per 40 CFR 261.32   such a determination, which
which requires that the        has never been made, impossible.
"sediments contaminated by     The only applicable test for
K031 are considered a listed   the soils and sediments is 40
hazardous waste because they   CFR 261.20 and 261.24. 40
are derived from a listed      CFR 261.32 does not contain
waste."                        the language attributed to
                               it in the RI/FS, nor was
                               constructed for or with the
                               purpose asserted in the RI/FS.
                               40 CFR 261.24 controls the
                               determination of whether removed
                               or treated sediments or soils are
                               to be classified as a hazardous
                               waste or a non-hazardous waste.




                                                          o
                                                          o




                                                              e? ..
