LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES, CALDWELL TRUCKING COMPANY SITE, FAIRFIELD TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/99877
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 76f249a40ddaf778581b4df429beba708bf50ab30205ae8455996340a644f65f
Source PDF pages: 7
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   SDMS Document




                                                                      99877

                    Explanation of Significant Differences
                        Caldwell Trucking Company Site
<i                      Fairfield Township, New Jersey
     Introduction

     The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
     presents this Explanation of Significant Differences (BSD) to
     explain modifications of the remedy selected in the
     September 28, 1989 Record of Decision (1989 ROD), for the
     contaminated ground water at the Caldwell Trucking Company
     Superfund Site (the Site). This ESD documents the decision to
     implement the contingency remedy identified in the 1989 ROD. In
     addition, this ESD explains a modification of the seep remedy and
     the deletion of the monitoring program for the municipal wells.
     EPA, supported by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
     Protection and Energy (NJDEPE), is responsible for cleanup
     activities at the Site.
     EPA is issuing this ESD in accordance with Section 117(c) of the
     Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
     Act (CERCLA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 9617(c), and Section
     300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
     Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) , 40 C.F.R. § 300.435 (c) (2) (i)..
     The ESD and those documents which form the basis for the decision
     to modify the response action will be incorporated into the
     Administrative Record maintained for the Site in accordance with
     Section 300.835(a)(2) of the NCP. The Administrative Record is
     available for review during business hours at EPA Region II,
     26 Federal Plaza, New York, New York 10278, (212) 264-8770, and
     at an information repository in the Town Clerk's Office,
     230 Fairfield Road, Fairfield, New Jersey 07004, (201) 882-2700.
     Site Location, History, and Contamination Problems
     The Site is located at or near 222 Passaic Avenue, Fairfield
     Township, Essex County, New Jersey. Deepavaal Brook (the Brook),
     a tributary to the Passaic River, and the Passaic River itself,
     are downgradient, and less than mile north of the Site. Caldwell
     Trucking Company, a sewage hauling firm, disposed of residential
     and commercial septic waste, as well as industrial waste, at the
     Site from the early 1950s until about 1984. The waste materials
     deposited at the Site contain significant amounts of hazardous
     substances. Many of these hazardous substances are also found in
     the soil and the ground water at the Site.
     Selected Remedy
     198(5 Record of Decision

     In June 1986, EPA completed a Remedial Investigation and
     Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the Site. The RI delineated the
     horizontal and vertical extent of the contamination in the former
     lagoons, and confirmed the presence of a downgradient contaminant
     plume in the ground water.

                                                             CAL   OO1        1684

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Based on the results of this RI/FS, EPA divided remediation of
the Site into four remedial components. Remedies were selected
for the first three components in a Record of Decision signed in
1986 (1986 ROD). The first component involved remediation of
Municipal Well No. 7. The second concerned supplying an
alternative potable water source to residents potentially
affected by the ground water contamination associated with the
Site. The third component included cleanup of the soil and
sludge contamination at the Site. Remediation of the
contaminated ground water, the fourth component, was deferred
pending the preparation of a supplemental RI/FS to identify the
extent, and other sources of ground water contamination.
Ground Water Contamination RI/FS
The supplemental RI/FS was conducted between 1987 and 1989.   The
results of this study are as follows:
    A plume of contaminated ground water extends from the Site
    to the Passaic River approximately 4,000 ft. away. The
    plume is approximately 2,000 ft. wide and is found in both
    the water table and bedrock aquifers.
    Sources contributing to the plume have been identified.    The
    sources include the Caldwell Trucking Company and the
    neighboring General Hose Products Company.
    Ground water is contaminated with hazardous substances,
    including trichloroethylene (TCE) and 1,1,1-trichloroethane.
    Additional contaminant plumes exist in close proximity to,
    and/or combine with, the plume originating from the Caldwell
    Site.
    A small seep recharged by the ground water was discovered
    and found to be contaminated with a concentration of TCE in
    the range of five parts per million. This seep discharges
    into a tributary of the Brook, both of which are
    contaminated with TCE.
1989 ROD Preferred Remedy
Based on the results of the supplemental RI/FS, EPA selected the
following as its preferred remedy in the 1989 ROD:
•   Ground water pumping and treatment to reduce contaminant
    levels throughout the vertical zones of contamination,
    thereby substantially reducing contaminant levels in the
    aquifers.
    Remediation of the contaminated seep and tributary to the
    Brook by filling the area with crushed stone and covering it
    with a layer of soil;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

•    Installation of new monitoring wells to safeguard Municipal
     Wells No.6 and No.8, which at the time of the 1989 ROD were
     major public water sources; and
     Institution of a program for the sealing of all wells
     impacted by contamination from the Site, some of which are
     still being used for non-potable (non-drinking) purposes,
     such as irrigation.
This selected remedy included the installation of ground water
recovery wells equipped with pumps at approximately 15 locations
throughout the study area. These wells would intercept
contaminated ground water in two water table and two bedrock
aquifers 'throughout the entire extent of the Caldwell contaminant
plume. The ground water would be treated via air-stripping, and
the treated effluent would be discharged to either the Brook or
the Passaic River.
EPA estimated in the 1989 ROD that it would take more than 100
years to clean up the ground water to the New Jersey drinking
water standard (MCL) of one part per billion (ppb) for TCE. The
1989 ROD also recognized that other unidentified sources
contributing to the contamination of the aquifers in the area
make remediation difficult. In view of these difficulties, EPA
decided that operating the pumping and treatment system for
30 years would achieve an acceptable cleanup level for the lower
water table aquifer. This aquifer cleanup level would allow for
the potable use of the ground water with minimal treatment.
Contingency Remedy
The 1939 ROD also states that if access to the properties needed
for implementation of the preferred pumping and treatment system
could not be obtained, EPA and NJDEPE would implement the
contingency remedy, which provides:
     Installation of ground water recovery wells to intercept
     contaminated ground water within the 10,000 ppb TCE limit of.
     the plume in the highly contaminated lower water table
     aquifer and the upper bed rock aquifer, and treatment to
     reduce the level of contaminants such that potable water
     could be obtained after 30 years with a moderate amount of
     treatment;
    Remediation of the contaminated seep and tributary to the
    Brook by filling the area with crushed stone and covering it
    with a layer of soil;
    Installation of new monitoring wells to safeguard Municipal
    Wells No.6 and No.8, which at the time of the 1989 ROD were
    major public water sources; and
     Institution of a program for the sealing of all wells
     impacted by contamination from the Site, some of which are

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     still being used for non-potable (non-drinking) purposes,
     such as irrigation.
Description of Significant Differences
In the 1989 ROD, EPA stated that successful implementation of the
preferred pumping and treatment system remedy depended on
community acceptance regarding installation of the ground water
extraction wells and construction of the associated piping on
numerous private residential properties. EPA held a public
meeting on this issue, requested and arranged by the Mayor of
Fairfield Township, in October 1989. Residents voiced strong
opposition to the preferred remedy, but consistent support for
the contingency remedy. In April 1991, EPA contacted over 100
property owners, requesting that they provide EPA with voluntary
access to their properties for implementation of the remedy
selected. EPA held a second public meeting on April 23, 1991, to
discuss this further. Only two property owners granted EPA
access to their properties for the purposes of implementing the
remedy selected; 45 property owners declined. The number of
voluntary access agreements EPA received was far short of the
number needed to implement the remedy selected.
EPA decided to reevaluate the selected remedy because of the
results of the April 1991 requests for access, and in light of
the Township of Fairfield's decision in late 1990 to close its
municipal wells. Since the remedy selected would not attain
MCLs, EPA has decided that it will not force access upon the
large number of unwilling property owners whose properties would
be needed to implement the pumping and treatment portion of the
remedy selected.
As previously noted, EPA identified a contingency remedy in the
1989 ROD. This contingency remedy includes pumping and treating
of the most contaminated portion of the ground water plume for
30 years. This treatment will allow use of the aquifers for
potable water after moderate treatment.
For the reasons stated above, the conditions specified in the
1989 ROD for selecting the contingency remedy have been met.
Therefore, EPA will implement the 1989 ROD contingency remedy.
Seep Remediation Modification
The 1989 ROD remedy also calls for reducing the potential for
direct contact exposure to contaminated water from the seep and
its drainage pathway by filling the area with crushed stone and
covering it with a layer of soil. EPA now believes that this
method may increase the level of contamination reaching the Brook
and, subsequently, the Passaic River. Currently, low levels of
VOCs are volatilizing over a period of time into the atmosphere,
thus reducing the contaminant levels in the water reaching the
Brook. If this seep were covered, the volatilization of VOCs

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

would be minimized, resulting in higher concentrations of
contaminated water .flowing into the Brook.
Therefore, EPA will modify the method by which the seep will be
remediated. The goal of this modification is to continue to
prevent the threat posed by direct contact with the contaminated
water, while also preventing the possibility that increased
amounts; of contaminants reach the Brook. The placement and
operation of extraction wells under the contingency remedy will
be adjusted to achieve this goal.
Deletion of Monitoring Wells for Municipal Wells 6 & 8
In 1990, "the Township of Fairfield decided to close its municipal
drinking water supply wells and purchase all of its water from
the Passaic Valley Water Commission. Therefore, installation of
monitoring wells to safeguard Municipal Wells No.6 and No.8, as
called for in the 1989 ROD remedy, is no longer necessary. This
component will be deleted from the remedy.
Modified Remedy
The modified remedy will include:
     Installation of ground water recovery wells to intercept
     contaminated ground water within the 10,000 ppb TCE contour
     in the lower water table aquifer and the upper bed rock
     aquifer (as described in the 1989 ROD contingency remedy).
     Remediation of the seep and the tributary to the Brook by
     adjusting the placement and operation of the ground water
     pumping and treatment system (a modification to the method
     described in the 1989 ROD).
     Institution of a program for the sealing of private wells in
     the area (as described in the 1989 ROD).
Analysis of Modified Remedy
In the 1989 ROD, EPA stated that the contingency remedy for
ground water remediation would comply with the requirements of
Section 121 of CERCLA, 42 U.S.C. § 9621. Section 121 requires
that the remedy meet nine specified criteria. In accordance with
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
Plan (NCP), EPA provided a detailed analysis of contingency
remedy with respect to each of the specified nine criteria in its
1989 ROD. All selected remedies must at least satisfy the
following two Threshold Criteria:
1.   Overall protection of human health and the environment
     addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
     protection and describes how risks posed through each
     exposure pathway (based on a reasonable maximum exposure

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     scenario) are eliminated, reduced, or controlled through
     treatment, engineering controls, or institutional controls.
2.   Compliance with ARARs addresses whether or not a remedy
     would meet all of the applicable or relevant and appropriate
     requirements (ARARs) of Federal and State environmental
     statutes and requirements and/or provide grounds for
     invoking a waiver.
As described below, the contingency remedy fully meets these
criteria.
Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
During the remedial design of the remedy, EPA will assess the
effects of the Caldwell contaminant plume on the Passaic River.
EPA expects that the contingency remedy will reduce and contain
the highly contaminated area of ground water, eliminating the
risk posed by the seep and minimizing the levels of contamination
reaching the river. This remedy will also prevent the least
contaminated zone, the lower bedrock aquifer, from degrading
further, and will allow the aquifers to be used for potable water
with moderate, treatment.  Sealing the private wells will
eliminate any health risks posed by contaminated water from these
wells.
Compliance with ARARs
The applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs)
identified for the ground water in the 1989 ROD are the Federal
and State Safe Drinking Water Act MCLs (Maximum Contaminant
Levels). Because of the extent and concentration of the ground
water plume, and the impact of other sources in the Fairfield
area, EPA estimated in the 1989 ROD that it would take more than
100 years to clean the aquifer to drinking water standards.
Accordingly, EPA invoked a waiver in the 1989 ROD based on
technical impractability, namely, that these MCLs are not
attainable within a reasonable time-frame with existing
technology. The 1989 ROD stated that the waiver applies equally
to both the preferred and contingency remedies.
The contingency remedy was designed to achieve a cleanup level
such that, after 30 years, the ground water could be used for
potable purposes with moderate treatment. The treated ground
water (effluent) will meet New Jersey surface water discharge
regulations, and the off-gas from the treatment units will meet
the New Jersey Administrative Code 7:27 air emission regulations
directly, or through the use of appropriate pollution control
systems.
If during the remedial design, EPA determines that the remedial
action will adversely affect nearby wetlands, EPA will comply
with the substantive requirements of the New Jersey Fresh Water
Wetlands Statutes and regulations.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Support Agency Comments
The NJDEPE concurs with this BSD.
Affirmation of statutory Determinations
EPA has decided to implement a modified version of the ground
water contingency remedy specified in the 1989 ROD. This change
from the remedy originally selected is warranted because the
Township of Fairfield closed down its municipal drinking water
supply wells and because the condition identified in the 1989 ROD
for selecting the contingency remedy have been met. This
includes the realization of the access problems foreseen in the
ROD. SPA believes that the remedy, as modified, is protective of
human health and the environment; complies with federal and state
requirements that were identified in the ROD, except as waived,
as applicable or relevant and appropriate to this remedial
action; and is cost effective. In addition, the revised remedy
utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment
technologies to the maximum extent practicable for the Site.




William J . JlGszynSj^ P     .      E     7     !     7   Bate
Acting Regional^Qministrator
