LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: RECORD OF DECISION, REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVE SELECTION, GOOSE FARM, PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY, (WITH ATTACHMENTS).
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/99982
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 260069a400dd022608e9531c9c38fcf9a0eeb7f8105072462e0885e2d9f5baab
Source PDF pages: 107
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       SDMS Document



                                                             99982
                         Record of Decision
                  .•Remedial Alternative Selection
Site
Goose Farm, Plumsted Township, New Jersey
Documents Reviewed
I am basing my decision primarily on the following documents
describing the analysis of cost-effectiveness of remedial
alternatives for the Goose Farm site.
            - Goose Farm Remedial Investigation Report and
              Feasibility Study (RI/FS), Elson T. Killam
              Associates, Inc., July 1985;
            - Staff summaries and recommendations.
            - Responsiveness Summary dated September 1985.
Description of Selected Remedy
1.     Flush the contaminated soil and groundwater underlying
       the site. The groundwater would be recovered using a
       wellpoint system and treated on-site prior to reinjection
       into the soil. Currently, it is estimated that recovering
       and flushing ten pore volumes will be required to remove
       the mobile contaminants from the soil and groundwater.
       Pilot studies to be conducted during design will optimize
       the required treatment system components.
2.     Following soil flushing and groundwater recovery and
       treatment, conduct an extensive testing program to
       determine the need to cap the site.
3.     During and after soil flushing and groundwater recovery
       and treatment activities, conduct an extensive testing
       program to determine the extent of PCB contamination in
       the former drum pit area. Based on this program, determine
       the need, if any, to remediate PCB-contaminated soil.
Declarations
Consistent with the Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) and the
National Contingency Plan (40 CFR Part 300), I have determined
that flushing of the contaminated soil in conjunction with
groundwater recovery and treatment, evaluating the need to
cap the site, and testing for PCB contamination in the drum
pit area constitute the selected remedial alternative for the
Goose Farm site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -2-

I have determined that implementation of this alternative
will provide protection of public health, welfare and the
environment. The State of the New Jersey has been consulted
and agrees with the proposed remedy.

I have also determined that the action being taken is
appropriate when balanced against the availability of Trust
Fund monies for use at other sites. Flushing of the
contaminated soil and recovery and treatment of underlying
groundwater in conjunction with evaluating the need to cap
the site and testing for PCB contamination in the drum pit
area is more cost-effective than other remedial action
alternatives, and is necessary to protect public health,
welfare and the environment.




Date      '                    Christopher "OJ. Dagdyett
                               Regional Administrator

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          Summary of Remedial Alternative Selection
                          Goose Farm
                     Plumsted, New Jersey
Site Location and Description
The Goose Farm site is located approximately two miles north-
east of the Town of New Egypt in Plumsted Township, Ocean
County, New Jersey. The site lies approximately one mile
north of the intersection of county routes 528 and 539.
Both solid and liquid hazardous wastes in bulk, 55 gallon
drums, 5 gallon pails and lab packs were disposed of at the
four acre site.
The site which has been previously excavated contains little
natural revegetation and is gently sloped. The site is
located adjacent to a pine/oak forest and a small stream
which flows north into Lahaway Creek. A vicinity map and
site location map are presented in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.
Site History
The Goose Farm was used as a hazardous waste disposal site
from the mid 1940's to the mid 1970's by a manufacturer of
polysulfide rubber and solid rocket fuel propellant. The
majority of wastes were dumped into a pit dug through the
fine sand. The dimensions of the pit were approximately
100 by 300 and 15 feet deep. Lab packs, 55 gallon drums,
and bulk liquids were dumped into this pit.
In January 1980, during an investigation of pesticide
contamination of local potable wells, the Plumsted Township
Sheriff's office informed the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) of the existence of the
Goose Farm site as well as several other disposal sites in
the area. From February to June 1980, the NJDEP conducted
an investigation of the site. The investigation included
the installation and sampling of 17 monitoring wells, and
metal detection and resistivity surveys. The results of this
work indicated that a contaminant plume originated in the
waste pit area and migrated north toward a nearby stream.
During the next phase of the investigation the NJDEP installed
and sampled 34 additional wells. The data indicated that a
contaminant plume less than 140 feet wide and approximately
35 feet deep, which is the approximate depth of a cemented
sand seam encountered in the Vincentown Formation, underlays
the site.
In September 1980, the NJDEP proceeded with remedial
activities at the site in an attempt to eliminate the dis-
charge of contaminants to the nearby stream. Approximately
5,000 containers of waste were removed from the waste pit
area as well as an estimated 9,000 gallons of bulk liquids.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -2-
These wastes were disposed of off-site. Another component
of the cleanup included the installation of a wellpoint
collection and spray irrigation system downgradient of the
disposal area and upgradient of the stream. The wellpoint
collection system created a central hydrologic drain of
groundwater through recovery headers, thus preventing further
contamination of surface water by contaminated groundwater
seepage.
Following the collection and treatment of groundwater, the
effluent was sprayed on the surface downgradient of the main
recovery header, and reinjected in the ground, thereby creating
a reverse flow of groundwater to further contain the plume.
A second spray irrigation system was located north of the
disposal pit to handle additional flow. In March 1981, the
operation of this flushing and treatment system was terminated
after treatment of approximately 7,800,000 gallons of contaminated
water.
A final component of past remedial activities included the
excavation of contaminated soil. Following testing of the
soil, approximately 3,500 tons were classified as grossly
contaminated. This soil, and an additional 12 drums of PCB
waste, were transported off-site for disposal.
In September 1982, EPA approved the NJDEP Cooperative Agreement
Application for the Goose Farm site. Federal funds in the
amount of $189,000 were provided to complete RI/FS for the
site. Subsequently, the State procured Elson T. Killam
Associates to undertake the work necessary to complete the
RI/FS.
Effectiveness of Initial Remedial Activities
The groundwater recovery and treatment system at the Goose
Farm site commenced operation on September 17, 1980. A total
volume of 7,800,000 gallons of contaminated groundwater was
treated prior to cessation of cleanup activities on March 20,
1981. Approximately 200 wells were installed to recover
groundwater and reinject treated water in two pneumatic
systems used during site cleanup. The groundwater treatment
system included the following unit operations:
    - vapor scrubbing to remove volatile organics
    - sedimentation with polymer addition for heavy metal
      removal
    - carbon adsorption
    - effluent aeration
During the treatment plant operation, total organic carbon
(TOO was used to monitor the contamination. The NJDEP
established an effluent criterion .of 100 mg/1 of TOC for the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -3-


system. In February 1981, a 21 day treatment plant study was
conducted in which analyses of additional chemical compounds
were performed. The results of this study indicated that the
treatment system was virtually 100 percent effective in
removing both toluene and benzene. However, methylene chloride
removal was poor (approximately 60 percent). In order to
remediate this problem, effluent aeration was added to the
overall treatment system. The total organic removal efficiency
during the evaluation averaged approximately 50 percent. Due
to the lack of comprehensive data during the six months of
operation of the treatment plant, a detailed evaluation of
the effectiveness of the treatment system cannot be performed.
Due to limited data, it is difficult to assess the overall
impact on groundwater recovery and treatment operation. Many
of the monitoring wells sampled in 1980 have been destroyed.
However, a comparison of the limited data from previous sampling
events and samples obtained during the remedial investigation
field activities was included in the remedial investigation
report. The general trend in concentrations of specific
volatile organic contaminants seems to be downward. This can
be considered to be a result of the previous remedial action
undertaken at the Goose Farm site.

Site Geology

The Goose Farm site is located in the Atlantic Coastal Plain
physiographic province. This province is characterized by
unconsolidated deposits consisting of alternating layers of
clay, silt, sand, and gravel that outcrop in parallel
northeast-southwest striking lands and dip gently to the
southeast. Surficial deposits at the site are of the Kirkwood
formation. The Kirkwood, in turn, is underlain by the
Manasquan and Vincentown formations.
The Kirkwood formation is composed of a lower dark silty
layer and upper sandy layer in the outcrop area. Downdip the
formation consists of thick clay and sand beds. The Kirkwood
is the most developed aquifer in Ocean County, primarily in
the coastal area.

The Manasquan formation consists of upper fine sand to clay
and a lower glauconitic clay. This formation is not considered
an important aquifer in Ocean County.
The Vincentown formation consists of an upper calcite-clay
and sand member and a lower glauconitic sand member. It is
utilized by typically low yielding domestic wells in its
outcrop area.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -4-


Underlying the Vincentown are the Hornerstown sand, Red Bank
sand, Neversink, Mount Laurel sand, Marshalltown formation,
Englishtown formation, Merchantville formation, Woodbury
clay, and the Raritan and Magothy formations.

REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION ACTIVITIES AND RESULTS

Remedial Investigation Activities;

The remedial investigation of the Goose Farm site included
the following activities undertaken by the State's consultant
Elson T. Killam and Associates.
        Collection of ten soil samples obtained from soil borings
        drilled in the former disposal area and priority
        pollutant analyses plus 40 tentatively identified
        compounds (TICs) of all samples.
        Drilling of two monitoring wells in the Vincentown
        formation and priority pollutant analyses plus 40 TICs
        of the two samples obtained from these wells.

    -   Collection of one leachate sample and priority pollutant
        analyses plus 40 TICs of this sample.
    -    Collection of one sediment and two surface water
        samples obtained from the adjacent stream and priority
        •pollutant analyses plus 40 TICs of these samples.
    -   Collection of six potable well samples from private
        wells downgradient and in the vicinity of the site
        and priority pollutant analyses plus 40 TICs of all
        samples.
    -   Collection of five samples from existing monitoring
        wells and priority pollutant analyses plus 40 TICs
        of all samples.

These investigative activities were supplemented by work
performed by Wehran Engineers, a consultant for the Morton-
Thiokol Corporation. This work included installation of
additional monitoring wells, collection of groundwater and
subsurface soil samples, and priority pollutant.analyses of
all samples. This work was supervised by the NJDEP staff.

The results of the remedial investigation work conducted on
the Goose Farm site indicated that significant levels of
groundwater contamination and soil contamination remain at
the site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -5-

Soil Contamination

Laboratory analyses of subsurface soils indicated that
significant levels of soil contamination remain in the disposal
pit area. The size of the contaminated area is estimated to
be 15,500 square yards. The depth of the contamination
generally ranges from the surface to twelve feet.
Contaminated soils contain volatile, acid and base/neutral
organic priority pollutants along with non-priority organic
pollutants in all fractions. Volatile contaminants such as
toluene, ethylbenzene, methylene chloride and trichloroethylene
were detected in high concentrations, with toluene measured
up to 640 ppm.

Other non-volatile organic priority pollutants found in the
acid and base/neutral fractions included: Bis (2-chloroethoxy)
methane, bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether and PCB-1254, with
concentrations up to 160 ppm.

Priority pollutant and non-priority pollutant polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were detected in numerous soil
samples. The physical properties of these PAHs include very
low solubility in water and low vapor pressure, both indicating
low mobility and high resistance to biodegradation.

Overall, the highest levels of compounds were found between
zero and 12 feet below the surface in the 15,500 square yard
area considered contaminated. The soil concentrations outside
this area are generally under 0.1 ppm total priority pollutants.
Significant portions of the highly contaminated area contain
concentrations of priority pollutants greater than 100 ppm.
During the initial remedial activities contaminated soil was
excavated from the drum pit area. The highly contaminated
soil was transported off-site for disposal while the less
contaminated soil was redeposited in the pit.
Groundwater and Surface Water Contamination
Analyses of groundwater and surface water at the Goose Farm
site shows that contamination of groundwater up to 570 ppm
total priority pollutants and contamination of the surface
water up to 1100 ppb total volatile organics currently exists.
Groundwater (including leachate) and surface water around the
site contain high levels of volatile organic contamination.
Toluene, acrylonitrile, benzene, methylene chloride, 1,2-
dichloroethene and trichloroethylene were detected at high
levels. Appendix B shows the concentration of each contaminant.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              -6-


Potable water samples collected from wells approximately
2,000 feet downgradient of the site showed low levels of
volatile organic contamination. Methylene chloride was
detected in levels up to 17 ppb, however, this compound was
also detected in trip blank samples. Another volatile,
1,1,2,2-tetracloroethylene was detected at 23 ppb in one
potable well. This chemical was not detected in any other
samples obtained at the site.

Establishing Remedial Objectives

The evaluation of the results of the remedial investigation
provided the basis for establishing remedial action objectives,
The objectives for the Goose Farm site include source control
as well as prevention of contaminant migration.

Remedial action objectives for source control are used to stop
the spread of contamination at the source. The area of
contaminated soil around the former disposal pit area is
considered the source. Once contamination leaving the former
disposal pit area is controlled, more effective remedial
actions for migration control can be implemented.

The remedial action objectives for source control set for
the Goose Farm site are noted below:

   - Remove, treat or contain contaminants

   - Control general migration pathways
   - Control release of volatile compounds in air

   - Control water infiltration
   - Control soil erosion

   - Control direct contact

The principal objective in management of migration is to
mitigate the potential contamination of potable water supplies.
A secondary goal of migration management is to prevent the
movement of contaminants to other areas where exposure to
these compounds through direct contact may occur.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -7-

Screening of Remedial Action Technologies

For the Goose Farm site, the candidate general technologies
developed in response to the established remedial objectives
include:

   - Containment

   - Collection and on-site groundwater treatment
   - In situ treatment

   - On-site disposal
   - Off-site disposal

These general technologies can be further defined as follows.

   - Containment; capping, grading, revegetation, diversion of
     surface run-off, groundwater barriers (both vertical and
     horizontal)
   - Collection and Treatment of Groundwater; wellpoints, deep
     wells,recharge, biological, physical/chemical treatment
   - In-Situ Treatment; hydrolysis, oxidation, reduction, soil
     aeration, solvent flushing, neutralization, polymerization,
     permeable treatment beds, chemical dechlorination.

   - On-Site Disposal; construction of a RCRA landfill, excavation,
     backfilling
   - Excavation and Off-Site Disposal; excavation followed by
     off-site landfilling, incineration

Prior to evaluating complete alternatives, some of the technologies
were screened out on the basis of cost, waste compability,
time required to achieve goals, unproven technology or other
considerations. The technologies that were eliminated and
the reasons for elimination were as follows:

    - Collection and Treatment of Groundwater; deep wells are more
      costly than wellpoints,and the depth of the confining layer
      is such that deep wells are not required.
    - In-Situ Treatment; Neutralization and polymerization are not
      appropriate due to the chemical make-up of the waste.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -8-

Remedial Alternatives

Following the screening of remedial technologies, eight remedial
action alternatives were developed. A description of these
alternatives, their present worth cost and their effectiveness
in meeting the established remedial objectives are discussed
below. Appendix A includes a cost comparison of alternatives
as well as a brief description of the advantages and dis-
advantages of each alternative.

Alternative 1

This alternative involves the off-site disposal of 62,000
cubic yards (CY) of contaminated soil, with regrading and
revegetation. The plume recovery and treatment system would
require 1,200 linear feet of header piping with 120 wellpoints.
The recovered plume water would be treated via clarification
and activated carbon, and its effluent reinjected into the
soil. Treatment of ten pore water volumes was estimated to
be needed to remove the mobile contaminants from the soil and
groundwater. The present worth cost of this alternative is
$45,326,400.

This alternative would be effective in controlling the source
material and preventing the migration of contaminants. It
also attains applicable and relevant Federal public health
and environmental standards.

Alternative 2

This alternative involves limited off-site disposal of 10,000
CY of contaminated soil, with soil flushing and groundwater
recovery and treatment to remove the remaining pollutants in
the remaining 52,000 CY of contaminated soil and in the under-
lying contaminated groundwater. The recovered water will be
treated via clarification and activated carbon and its effluent
reinjected into the soil. It was estimated that extraction
of ten pore volumes of water would be required to remove the
mobile contaminants from the soil and groundwater. The
groundwater recovery system would require 800 linear feet of
header, and 80 wellpoints. The present worth cost of this
alternative is $9,451,600.
This alternative would be effective in controlling the source
material and preventing the migration of contaminants. It
also attains applicable and relevant Federal public health
and environmental standards.

Alternative 3

For this alternative, an on-site landfill would be constructed
for the encapsulation of 62,000 CY of contaminated soil. The
landfill would be constructed in accordance with current RCRA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -9-


requirements. The landfill would have a double lined bottom
with leachate recovery and would be sealed along the top.
The groundwater plume would be recovered via a wellpoint
system, treated via clarification and activated carbon and
discharged. It was estimated that treatment of ten pore
volumes would be required to remove the mobile contaminants
from the aquifer. The total present worth cost of this
alternative is $3,303,600.

The implementation of this alternative would be effective in
controlling the source material and preventing the migration
of contaminants. This alternative attains applicable and
relevant Federal public health and environmental standards.
Alternative 4

This alternative would not require any soil excavation. A
soil flushing and groundwater recovery system consisting of
800 linear feet of header piping, 80 wellpoints, and two
pumps would be constructed and operated for approximately 18
months. This duration represents flushing, recovering and
treating ten pore volumes. The recovered water would be
treated via clarification and activated carbon, and reinjected
into the soil. Following the soil flushing and groundwater
cleanup, an evaluation would be made of the need to cap the
site to minimize the migration of any residual contaminants.
The estimated total present worth cost of this alternative is
$2,814,500.
The implementation of this alternative would be effective in
controlling the source material and preventing the migration
of contaminants. This alternative attains applicable and
relevant Federal public health and environmental standards.
Alternative 5
No excavation would be required for this alternative. A soil
flushing and groundwater recovery system consisting of 800
linear feet of header piping, 80 wellpoints, and two pumps
would be constructed and operated. Nutrients and oxygen
sources would be added to the soil to enhance the cleanup.
Since the nutrients might enhance the treatment system's
efficiency, it is expected that less than 10 pore volumes of
flushing and recovery would be required. The recovered plume
water would be treated via clarification and activated carbon,
and reinjected into the soil. Following the soil flushing
and groundwater cleanup, an evaluation would be made of the
need to cap the site to minimize the migration of any residual
contaminants.  The estimated present worth cost or this
alternative is $2,814,500.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -10-

The implementation of this alternative would be effective in
controlling the source material and preventing the migration
of contaminants. This alternative attains applicable and
relevant Federal public health and environmental standards.
Alternative #6
For this alternative, the contaminated soil would be contained
in-place. Slurry walls would be constructed around the area
of contaminated soil. The bottom of the contaminated area
would be sealed via grouting. To encapsulate the contaminated
soil, a clay cap would be constructed on top. The groundwater
plume would recovered via a wellpoint system, treated via
clarification and activated carbon and discharged. It is
estimated that treatment of ten pore volumes would be required
to remove the contaminants from the aquifer. The present
worth cost of this alternative is $18,534,100.
This alternative would be effective in the short-term for
controlling the source material and preventing the migration
of contaminants. However, since the integrity of the grout
seal is uncertain, this alternative cannot be considered an
effective long-term remedial action. As such, alternative
does not attain applicable and relevant public health and
environmental standards, but would reduce the present threat
posed by the site.
Alternative #7
For this alternative, soil flushing would be performed to
remove the mobile contaminants from the soil. Water would be
injected into the soil to create a flushing action. The
contaminated water would be recovered via a shallow wellpoint
system, treated via clarification and activated carbon and
reinjected. It is estimated that treatment of ten pore
volumes would be required to remove the mobile contaminants
from the soil. The present worth cost of this alternative
is $1,521,800.
This alternative would be effective in controlling the source
material. However, since no remediation is recommended for
the contaminated groundwater, migration of contaminants would
still be possible. Therefore, this alternative does not
attain applicable and relevant Federal public health or
environmental standards.
Alternative #8
This alternative, referred to as "No Action", does not include
any remediation measures for the site. However, it does
include a long-term monitoring program for the groundwater
underlying the site. Approximately 30 groundwater samples

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -11-

per year would need to be obtained and analyzed for priority
pollutants monitor the water quality of the groundwater. The
present worth cost of this alternative is $603,300.
Enforcement

The State of New Jersey and EPA have identified Morton -
Thiokol Inc. as a potentially responsible party. A Cost
Recovery Action has recently been filed by EPA in an attempt
to recover monies spent on the initial cleanup measures and
the remedial investigation and feasibility study. Currently,
the State of New Jersey is negotiating with Morton-Thiokol
for the long term remedial clean-up of the site. These
negotiations are expected to continue until after this Record
of Decision is formally executed.

Evaluation of Alternatives

Alternative 1 includes excavation of soil and off-site disposal
of all contaminated soil as well as groundwater remediation.
This alternative meets the goals of preventing the migration
of contaminants and controlling the source material. However,
this alternative is far more costly than the other effective
alternatives, and provides only a slight, if any, additional
benefit compared to other less expensive alternatives.
Therefore, excavation to background, in this case, is not
cost-effective. In the National Contingency Plan, cost-effective
is described as the lowest cost altternative that is technically
feasible and which effectively mitigates and minimizes damages
and provides protection of the public health, welfare and the
environment. Based on the above, this alternative is not
recommended as the remedial action.

Alternative 2 includes partial soil excavation and off-site
disposal in conjunction with soil flushing, groundwater
remediation and evaluation of the need for site capping.
This alternative would be effective in controlling source
material and preventing the migration of contaminants.
However, the present worth cost of implementing this altern-
ative would be three times more than other effective altern-
atives. Therefore, this alternative was eliminated from
consideration.

Alternative 3 includes construction of an on-site RCRA landfill .
for disposal of contaminated soil and groundwater remediation.
Although this alternative would be effective in the short
term in controlling the source material and preventing
migration of contaminants, its long term reliability would be
doubtful. Many of the characteristics of the site make the
location of a RCRA landfill inappropriate. For example, the
predominant geology is sandy type soil with a rapidly flowing

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -12-


aquifer close to the surface. Due to these factors and the
fact that the cost of this alternative is slightly higher
than others, this alternative was eliminated from consideration.
 Alternative 4 includes soil flushing, groundwater remediation
 and further evaluations for site capping and PCB remediation.
 Alternative 5 is similar; however, its soil flushing would be
 enhanced using in-situ biological methods. Both of these
 alternatives would be effective in controlling the source
 material and preventing further migration of contaminants.
 However, the use of nutrients in Alternative 5 could make
 this alternative more complex from an operational standpoint
.than Alternative 4. Both of these alternatives have a present
 worth cost estimate of $2,814,500. Pilot studies would be
 performed during the design phase to determine the effectiveness
 of each of the two soil flushing options and treatment options.
Alternative 6 includes the construction of an in-place
containment system, to encapsulate the contaminated soil, and
groundwater remediation. This alternative would be somewhat
effective in meeting the remedial objectives. The cost of
this alternative is estimated to be $18,534,000. This cost
is far greater than other alternatives considered to be
more effective in controlling the source and preventing
further migration of contaminants. Therefore, this alternative
is not recommended as the remedial action.
Alternative 7 includes soil flushing to remove the mobile
contaminants. Water would be injected into the soil via
shallow wells, thus creating a flushing action. The water
would be recovered, treated and reinjected into the soil.
Therefore, this alternative would not be effective in controlling
the migration of contaminants.
Alternative 8 is the "No Action" alternative and would include
long-term monitoring of the groundwater. Obviously, this
alternative would not meet the established remedial objectives
of controlling the source material and preventing migration
of contaminants. The implementation of the "No Action"
alternative will not prevent further migration of pollutants
from contaminated soil remaining on-site. Furthermore,
exposure to the public of these contaminants at near surface
locations will not be eliminated. For these reasons, and
since this alternative would not provide adequate protection
of public health, welfare and the environment, it was eliminated
from consideration.

Recommended Alternative
According to 40 CFR Part 300.68 (J), cost-effective is
described as the lowest cost alternative that is technically
feasible and reliable and which effectively mitigates and
minimizes damages and provides protection of public health,
welfare and the environment. A cost comparison of remedial

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -13-


alternatives is presented in Appendix A. Evaluation of
the remedial alternatives leads to the conclusion that
Alternative 4 is the most cost effective alternative that
achieves the established remedial objectives.   Figure 3
shows a layout of the proposed remedial action.

This alternative includes the construction of 800 linear feet
of header piping and 80 wellpoints to be used in a groundwater
recovery and soil flushing system. The recovered water from
the system would be treated via clarification and activated
carbon prior to being reinjected to the soil. Currently, it
is estimated that the soil flushing and groundwater recovery
system would require 18 months of operation. This duration
represents flushing, recovering and treating approximately
ten pore volumes. Continuous sampling will be performed
during soil flushing and groundwater remediation operations.
If a steady state of contamination removal is achieved prior
to the recovery and treatment of ten pore volumes, the Soil
Contamination Evaluation Methodology (SOCEM) model or a similar
model will be used to evaluate whether alternate concentration
limits are appropriate.
The SOCEM model is a simplified procedure used for character-
izing the threat that contaminated soil may pose to groundwater
at hazardous waste sites. Its methodology assists the user
in determining the percent reduction in soil contaminant
concentrations (i.e. source strength) required to achieve
appropriate health based water quality levels at a groundwater
receptor.

During the design phase, pilot studies will be performed to
optimize the operation of the flushing and treatment system.
These tests may include use of nutrients and oxygen sources.
The results of these pilot studies may indicate that the
addition of nutrients and oxygen sources can reduce the
number of pore volume flushes necessary to remove the
contaminants from the the soil and groundwater, as suggested
by Alternative 5. If so, they may be used in the remedial
action, if their use is determined to be cost-effective.

Another component of the remedial action includes testing for
PCB contamination in the former drum pit area. This testing
will be performed prior to, during, and after the soil flushing,
groundwater recovery and treatment operation. The results of
the PCB testing will be used to determine if any additional
remediation is required. If such remediation is deemed
necessary, a supplementary Record of Decision will be prepared
that will clearly delineate selected additional remedial
actions.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 -14-
Th e final component of the cleanup will include an evaluation
of the need to cap the site. This determination will be made
after testing the soil upon completion of the soil flushing
program and evaluating the properties of residual contaminants,
The actual design of the cap, if needed, will be based on the
Hydrologic Evaluation of Landfill Performance (HELP) model or
a similar model.

The HELP model is a two dimensional hydrologic model of water
movement across, into, and through landfills. The model
provides an approximation of leachate which may be generated
at the site under specified conditions. The model accepts
climatologic, soil, and landfill design input data. The
model takes into account such variables as surface storage,
runoff, infiltration, percolation, evaporation, soil moisture
storage and lateral drainage.

Although long-term monitoring will be required, the extent of
such monitoring has not yet been determined. After the final
supplemental remedial action decisions have been made (i.e.
potential capping and PCB remediation) a long-term monitoring
program will be finalized.

             Cost Summary of Recommended Alternative

          Remedial Measure                   Total Cost
          Component                        Present Worth

           1. Soil flushing                  $1,171,000
      N
              and treatment

           2. Groundwater                       994,000
              recovery and
              treatment

           3. Engineering and
              Contingency                       649,000
           4. Additional PCB
              Soil Testing and
              Cap Evaluation                    200,000

              TOTAL                          $3,014,000

Community Relations

A public meeting was held by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection (NJDEP) on February 7, 1984 to
discuss the initiation of a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
Study (RI/FS) for the Goose Farm site. Notification of the
meeting was accomplished through press releases sent to all
newspapers listed in th Goose Farm Community Relations Plan

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -15-


and mailings to all parties listed in the "Contacts" section
of the plan. An information package, including an agenda,
fact sheet, overview of the community relations program at
Superfund hazardous waste sites, and the steps involved in a
major hazardous waste site cleanup, was given to all attendees
at the beginning of meeting. The meeting was attended by
approximately 30 people in addition to the local township
officials and NJDEP representatives. After the initial
presentation by the contractor, E.T. Killam, the meeting was
opened for public discussion. A summary of the questions
and responses is included in the Responsiveness Summary.

A second public meeting was held by NJDEP on August 16, 1984
to discuss the results of the RI/FS at Pijak Farm and Spence
Farm and the status of the RI/FS at Goose Farm. Notification
of the meeting was accomplished through press releases sent
to local newspapers and mailings to local and state officials,
as well as to NJDEP's list of concerned citizens. An information
package including the agenda and fact sheet was handed out to
all attendees as they entered. Approximately 30 people
attended. When the meeting was opened to general discussion,
there were only a few questions asked specifically about
Goose Farm. Several questions that are generic to these
three Plumsted Township Superfund sites were also posed at this
meeting. A discussion of questions and responses are included
in the Responsiveness Summary.

A third public meeting was held by NJDEP on July 25, 1985 to
discuss" the results of the RI/FS at Goose Farm. Notification
of the meeting was accomplished through press releases sent
to local newspapers and mailings to local and state officials,
as well as to NJDEP's list of concerned citizens. The Draft
Feasibility Study was available for public review and comment,
beginning on July 26, 1985, at four repositories: the Ocean
County Library in Toms River, the Plumsted Township Municipal
Building, the New Egypt Library and NJDEP's Hazardous Site
Mitigation Administration in Trenton. There was a 30-day
public comment period. An information package including the
agenda and fact sheet was handed out to all attendees as they
entered. Approximately 40 people attended. The results of
the remedial investigation were presented and the remedial
action alternatives for long-term site remediation.

NJDEP and their consultant, tentatively recommended that
in-situ soil flushing and groundwater remediation be the
selected alternative. The meeting was then opened for discussion
during which time there were several questions posed by local
officials and concerned citizens. These questions and responses
are summarized in the Responsiveness Summary.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -16-


Only one public comment was received from Archer & Greiner,
attorneys for Morton-Thiokol. This letter included a
substantive critique of E.T. Killam's methodologies and
proposal for site remediation. The contents of their letter
and the NJDEP response have been considered in this Record of
Decision. These documents have been included in the Responsive-
ness Summary.
Consistency With Other Environmental Laws
The soil flushing and groundwater recovery and treatment
operation will require obtaining an NJPDES permit from
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (or
technical compliance with permit requirements) for the
discharge of the treated effluent. The proposed treatment
system will be designed to meet the effluent limits established
in the discharge permit. Following the completion of the
soil flushing and groundwater remediation, an evaluation
will be made to determine the need, if any, to remediate PCB
contaminated soil. Should it be determined that PCB excavation
and removal is required, the waste will be manifested for
transport from the site to a secure facility in accordance
with RCRA and TSCA requirements. The final component of the
remedial action may include the construction of a cap over
the site. This cap would be designed using the HELP or a
similar model.
Operable Units

The recommended remedial alternative includes distinct
individual components. Therefore, it is expected that the
remedial action will proceed in a phased manner. The initial
phase will include obtaining soil samples from the disposal
pit area and testing for PCB contamination. Testing will also
be performed during and after the soil flushing and groundwater
recovery and treatment operation. An evaluation of the
results of this testing will determine the extent of further
remediation if any, for PCB hotspots. Any PCB remediation
would follow the groundwater and soil remediation. Finally,
an evaluation will be made to determine the need to cap the
site to minimize the migration of any residual contaminants.
If determined to be necessary, the cap could be designed
using the HELP model or any similar model. Soil samples will
be collected before, during and after the soil flushing and
groundwater treatment phase. The analyses of these samples
will be used to calibrate and run the model.

Operation and Maintenance
Upon completion of the recommended remedial action, monitoring
of the site will be conducted to evaluate the quality of the
local groundwater.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             -17-



Future Actions

Schedule                            Date
- Final Record of Decision          September 1985
- Continue negotiation with
  potential responsible parties     September 1985
- Obligate Design Funds
   (if necessary)                   Pending CERCLA
                                     Reauthorization
- Amend Cooperative Agreement       Pending CERCLA
   (if necessary)                    Reauthorization

- Initiate Remeidal Action Design   Pending CERCLA
                                     Reauthorization

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           A TlT»T?VTT\Tt7'   A
                                           rii r lj IN U J. A. M.

                                        ALTERNATIVE COMPARISON


                                                    TOTAL
                                      COSTS (1,000) PRESENT                ALTERNATIVE        ALTERNATIVE
ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT         CAPITAL ANNUAL O&M    WORTH                  ADVANTAGES         DISADVATAGES
1. Excavation and Disposal   33 ,480                          33,480       Complete Removal   High cost
   (62,000 CY)                                                             Low Technology     Potential spills
   Site Regrade/Revegetate       392                                 392   Restores land      in removal.
   Plume Pump/Treatment          994                                 994   to use.            Potential losses
   Engineering/Contingencies 10 ,460                              10,460                      from landfill.
                                                                                              Use of landfill
    Total Alternative 1       45 ,326                         45,326                          capacity.
2. Excavation and Disposal     5 ,400                             5,400    Lower Cost         Potential spills
   (10,000 CY)                                                                                Potential land-
   Soil Flush and Treat          651                                 651                      fill losses.
   (12 mo)
    Site Regrade/Revegetate       225                                225                      Residuals on site
    Plume Pump/Treatment          994                                994                      Use of landfill
    Engineering/Contingency    2 ,181                              2,181                      capacity.
    Total Alternative 2        9 ,451                              9,451
3. On-Site Landfill -Construe- 1 ,264       39                1,631        No transporta-     Potential loss
   tion With Post Closure Care                                             tion.              from f i l l .
   Plume Pump/Treatment           994                                994   No off-site        Permanent loss
   Engi neering/Contingency       678       -                        678   landfill.          of land use.
   Total Alternative 3         2 ,936                              3,303   Lower Cost.
4. Soil Flush/Treat (18 mos) 1 ,171                                1,171   Low Cost. Less     Permanent loss
   Plume Pump/Treatment         994                                  994   Disposal volume    of some land
   Engineering/Contingency      649                                  649   (carbon sludges)   uses. Residual
                                                                                              PNA's.
   Total Alternative 4         2,814                               2,814

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 APPF.NnTY A

                                         ALTERNATIVE COMPARISON

                                         «•'

                                                     TOTAL
                                       COSTS (1,000) PRESENT         ALTERNATIVE        ALTERNATIVE
ALTERNATIVE COMPONENT          CAPITAL ANNUAL O&M    WORTH           ADVANTAGES         DISADVATAGES
5.   In-Situ Biological Soil    Same Costs As Alt. 4                 Destruction of     Residual PNA's
     Treatment                                                       Biodegradables.    Permanent loss
                                                                     Less Landfill      of some land
                                                                     volume required.   uses.
6. In Place Encapsulation         262                          262   Least loss of     High cost.
   Slurry Wall                                                       Land Use off site Permanent loss
   Capping, Revegetation, etc:. 123            52.1         614                        of land use.
   Base Grouting               12,500                    12,500                        Risk of Landfill
   Plume Pump/Treatment           994                       994                        failure.
   Engineering/Contingencies    4,164                     4,164
     Total Alternative 6        18,043                   18,043

7. Soil Flush and Treat          1,171                    1,171      Lower Cost than    Longer period
   (18 mos)                                                          Alt. 4             until clean
   Engineering/Contingency         351                         351                      surface water.
     Total Alternative 7         1,522                    1,522

8. No Action/Monitoring                         64             603   None               Cannot be
                                                                                        implemented.
     Total Alternative 8                        64             603

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    APPENDIX B


                                      TABLE 1
                         VOLATILE ORGANIC POLLUTANT SUMMARY
                              SURFACE AND GROUNDWATER


                     Shallow                     Upstream     Downstream   Potable
                      Well                       Surface      Surface      Water
Compound           _ Average(*)   Leachate        Water        Water       Values

Methylene
 Chloride           167,675        6,300           10          1,100         17
                                                                             11
                                                                            6.5
Benzene               3,258       12,000           BDL         BDL           BDL
Toluene               3,243        2,200          BDL         BDL            BDL
Trans 1,2
Dichloroethylene         28          440          BDL           19           BDL
                                                         \

Trichloroethylene        63          310          BDL           14           BDL

Acrylonitrile          1053         BDL           BDL          BDL           BDL


* Value of zero used on samples below detection limit for average calculations.
         -\
  BDL = Below Detection Limits
  All concentrations in parts per billion

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      ro*x




OfL

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              FIGURE 2
                     VICINITY MAP             GOOSE FARM '.
                                     PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP. NEW JERSEY
SCALE: 1" - 2,000'
SOURCE: UfS.G.S. TOPO MAPS          EU«K» t KKUm

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

]] AREA OF CONTAMINATED SOIL

~" ESTIMATED PLUME
                                               FIGURE 3
                                         GOOSE FARM
                                PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY
                               RECOMMENDED ALTERNATIVE i*
                               El>on T. Klllam A«»ocl«U«, Inc.
                               Environmental and Hydraulic Engineers
                               It   (»•>•> Sir..I   M«*x». "•-   JWMT   Or041   D!   .(*)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY:

Completion of Feasibility Study

          Goose Farm

       Plumsted Township

         Ocean County

          New Jersey

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              Responsiveness Summary:
                          Completion of Feasibility Study
                                    Goose Farm
                                 Plumsted Township
                                   Ocean County

A public meeting was held by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection (NJDEP) on February 7, 1984 to discuss the initiation of the Remedial
Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the Goose Farm site. Notification of
th«> meeting was accomplished through press releases sent to all newspapers listed
in the Goose Farm Community Relations Plan and mailings to all parties listed in
the: "Contacts" section of the plan. An information package, including an agenda,
fact sheet, overview of the community relations program at Superfund hazardous
waste sites, and the steps involved in a major hazardous waste site cleanup, was
given to all attendees at the beginning of the meeting.     (See attendance sheet,
Attachment A.) The meeting was attended by approximately 30 people in addition
to the local officials and NJDEP representatives. (See Attachment B.) After the
initial presentation by NJDEP's contractor, E.T. Killam, the meeting was opened
for discussion.

There were three questions asked by citizens with regard to sampling activities
and one question about the aquifer underlying the site.    These questions and
responses were as follows:

     Q:   Have polychlorinated biphenols (PCBs) been found on site?

                Yes, PCBs have been found at Goose Farm.
            N
     Q:   Will you test for changes at Goose Farm since the cleanup from two
          years ago?

                NJDEP sampled the site in January 1983; however, results were not
                conclusive.

     Q:   What are you testing for when you sample ground water?

                The full spectrum of contaminants, i.e. 129 known priority
                pollutants plus 40 unknown pollutants.

     Q:   Will you give out maps of the aquifers underlying the site?

                A. Farro stated that these maps would be included in the Draft
                Feasibility Study which would be available upon its completion.
                In addition, G. Singer wrote to one concerned citizen to inform
                him that the shallow aquifer probably flows in a south-southeast-
                erly direction, discharging into a nearby stream and marsh. Data
                indicating the direction of flow for the deeper aquifer would be
                available upon completion of the Feasibility Study.


Additional questions or comments during this first meeting were not of major
significance.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         -2-



A second public meeting was held by NJDEP on August 16, 1984 to discuss the
results of the RI/FS at Pijak Farm and Spence Farm and the status of the RI/FS at
Goose Farm. Notification of the meeting was accomplished through press releases
sent to local newspapers and mailings to local and state officials, as well as to
NJDEP's list of concerned citizens. An information package including the agenda
and fact sheet was handed out to all attendees at the beginning of the meeting.
(See: Attachment C.) Approximately 30 people attended. (See attendance sheet,
Attachment D.) When the meeting was opened for general discussion there were only
a few questions asked specifically about Goose Farm. Several questions that are
generic to these three Plumsted Township Superfund sites were also posed at the
meeting. These questions and responses were as follows:

    Q:   What is the status of the study at Goose Farm?

              The field work has been completed and we expect to have data in
              approximately two weeks.    We should have a public meeting to
              discuss the RI/FS at the end of October, 1984.

    Q:   What direction does the water flow from Goose Farm?

              North.

    Q:   Last time my well was tested, there were traces of mercury detected.

              We see traces of mercury all over the state. When we resample,
              there's usually no evidence of mercury. We sent the second round
              of test samples to a different laboratory and we did not find any
              mercury in the second set of samples.

    Q:   What is the danger of drinking water with trace chemicals?

              It depends on the type of compounds.     The drinking water
              standards for volatiles are 100 ppb.

    Q:   What about responsible party pursuit?

              There is presently an active case being pursued.      It is possible
              that there may still be a private party cleanup.

    Q:   Has anyone done a history of what Thiokol was dumping?

              We have an alleged list.

    Q:   I'm looking at land in this area.     What is the possibility of
         additional contamination?

              It's a difficult question to answer. This is always a
              potentiality but given the amount of testing that has
              been done in this area it's highly unlikely.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          -3-



     Q:   How excessive is excessive and how low is low?

                We use these terms based on guidelines that now exist, however,
                we don't really know.    We don't leave anything I *iind that may
                adversely impact human health.

     Q:   Will there be restrictions on land use of these sites (Spence, Pijak,
          Goose) after cleanup?

                It's possible that these sites could be used again?

     Q:   Will land owners of these sites be paid or will Superfund buy their
          land?

                A claim against the New Jersey Spill Fund is a possibility.

     Q:   Do you recommend a certain well depth that might be pollution free in
          the future? Will there be criteria or guidelines for establishing the
          best well depth?

                NJDEP's Division   of Water Resources is looking into this    issue
                now.

     Q:   What do I ask for if I want to have my water tested?

                This is a critical consumer issue because landowners may have to
                pay for this testing in the future.     If you think you have a
                problem with your water contact the Ocean County Health Depart-
            s   ment.

    Q:    Did you change any limits for construction at approximately 1,000 feet
          from the sites?

                That land use issue has not been addressed by NJDEP. It is a
                local issue.




A third public meeting was held by NJDEP on July 25, 1985 to discuss the results
of the RI/FS at Goose Farm. Notification of the meeting was accomplished through
press releases sent to local newspapers and mailings to local and state
officials, as well as to NJDEP's list of concerned citizens.      An information
package including the agenda and fact sheet was handed out to all attendees at
the begining of the meeting.      (See Attachment E.)   Approximately 40 people
attemded. (See Attendance sheet, Attachment F.) The contractor (J. Shirk of E.T.
Killam) discussed the results of the RI/FS and presented the following remedial
action alternatives for long-term site remediation:

     1.   Off-site disposal (removal of 62,000 cubic yards of soil to a RCRA
          facility), regrading, revegetation and recovery, treatment and recharge
          of contaminated ground water.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        -4-


     2.   Partial off-site disposal (removal of 10,000 cubic yards of soil), soil
          flushing, treatment and recharge for 52,000 cubic yards of soil,
          recovery, treatment and recharge of contaminated ground water.

     3.   On-site construction, monitoring and long-term maintenance of a RCRA
          hazardous waste landfill for 62,000 cubic yards of soil, regrading and
          revegetation of excavated area, recovery, treatment and recharge of
          contaminated ground water.
     4.   In-situ (in-place) soil flushing with treatment and recharge for
          removal of priority pollutants, recovery, treatment and recharge of
          contaminated ground water.
     5.   In-situ soil flushing with treatment and recharge for removal of
          priority pollutants, injection of nutrients for in-situ biological
          oxidation and recovery, treatment and recharge of contaminated ground
          water.
     6.   Containment of wastes with slurry wall and block displacement
          containment, long-term monitoring, recovery, treatment and recharge of
          contaminated ground water.
     7.   In-situ soil flushing with treatment and recharge for removal of
          priority pollutants, no plume treatment.
     8.   No current action except annual monitoring.

The contractor presented Alternative #4 as the recommended alternative.

The meeting was then opened for discussion during which time there were several
questions asked by local officials and concerned citizens. These questions and
responses are summarized below:

    Q:    Will this land be usable in the future?
               The Goose Farm site (approximately two acres) will not be usable
               for agricultural or residential purposes. Surrounding properties
               will not be impacted.

    Q:    How long will it take the chemicals to decompose?

               It depends on the selected alternative.      With Alternative #4,
               there will be passive usage almost immediately.

    Q:    What chemicals were found on site?

               Solvents   in   ground  water, not    many   metals,   polynuclear
               hydrocarbons, PCBs, and non-priority pollutants.

    Q:    What types of solvents were found?

               A   mixture   of   chlorinated   and   non-chlorinated   solvents;
               specifically methylene chloride (at 10-100 ppm in soil).

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  -5-


Q:   What about the well serving the house on Goose Farm?

          There are no problems with that well. Ground water is moving in a
          northwesterly direction.

Q:   Is the deep aquifer contaminated?

          No contaminants were found in the Mt. Laurel which is very deep
          (100-160 feet).

Q:   What is the perimeter of the contamination?

          Contaminants are migrating toward the stream which seems to be a
          cut-off for the upper aquifer (i.e. Kirkwood at 10-20 feet). No
          contaminants are migrating west, south or east.

Q:   Are all monitoring wells at the same depth?

          No, there are deep and shallow test wells.

Q:   Is the stream also contaminated?

          The portion directly adjacent to the site is contaminated;
          however, contaminants have not reached 300 feet downstream.

Q:   What is the time frame for site cleanup?

          We have already discussed this with the Responsible Party and we
       •„ hope the cleanup will be expeditious. After total removal, there
          will be a five-year monitoring period. If nothing shows up after
          five-years, there will not be further action.

Q:   What about fire hazard in the columns, given the high concentrations of
     solvents?
          This is not likely because the carbon filters will be tested on a
          regular basis.

Q:   With Alternative #4, can 100% of the runoff be captured?

          Yes.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

The Draft Feasibility Study was made available for public review and comment,
beginning on July 26, 1985, at four repositories: the Ocean County Library in
Toms River, the Plumsted Township Municipal Building in New Egypt, the New Egypt
Library and NJDEP's Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration in. Trenton. There
was a 30-day public comment period.

Only one public comment was received (on August 26, 1985) from Archer & Greiner,
attorneys for Morton-Thiokol.   This is a substantive critique of E.T. Killam's
methodology and proposals for site remediation, as well as Morton-Thiokol's
recommended approach.    (See Attachment G for these comments.)     Currently, a
response is being developed by the NJDEP technical staff in conjunction with its
legal staff. This response will be forthcoming upon its completion.


HS82:rlk
Enclosures

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment A.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                N.J. Department of Environmental Protection
                        Division of Waste Management
                  Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration

                        Feasibility Studies for the
                   Goose Farm, Pijak Farm and Spence Farm
                           Hazardous Waste Sites
                         Tuesday, February 7, 1984
                                 7:30   p.m.
                    Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                               New Egypt, N.J.

                                   Agenda



1.   Opening Remarks on Community input in Superfund Program     - G. Singer
     and introduction of DEP members


2. Overview of situation' and introduction of contractor,        - A. Farro
     Elson T. Killam Associates, Inc. of Millburn, N.J.


3.   Presentation consultants Elson T. Killam Associates, Inc.



     Questions and Answers

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    §tate of New 3ers*y
                         DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                   DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                                HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
MARWAM M. SADAT. P £                    CN 028. Trenton, N.J. 08625         JORGE H BERKOWITZ. PH 0.
     OIRECTOR                                                                    ADMINISTRATOR




                                         FACT SHEET

              FEASIBILITY STUDIES FOR GOOSE FARM, PIJAK FARM, AND SPENCE FARM

                             (PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, OCEAN COUNTY)

                        TO DETERMINE REMEDIAL ACTION ALTERNATIVES




            These sites are all located in Plumsted Township (Ocean County) within
       a twenty-square mile area, sections of which have been used for disposal
       of drummed and free flowing liquid waste. Investigation, which included
       the installation of monitoring wells, has revealed aquifer, groundwater
       and surface.water organic chemical contamination. Each of these sites has
       been placed on the National Priorities List by the "J.3. Environmental
       Protection Agency (USEPA! and is eligible for Superfund money for remedial
       action.

             An immediate removal operation has already been completed at the Goose
       Farm. site. This consisted of the excavation of all containers and several
       thousand tons of contaminated soil and debris during the period of August.
       19SO to February, 1982. In addition, a water treatment system was installed
       to remove gross contamination from the soil and groundwater. Further investi-
       gation is required to evaluate present hydrogeological conditions and residual
       contamination.

            The present studies are being conducted by Elson T. Killam Associates,
       Inc., environmental and hydraulic engineers of Millburn, New Jersey. Funding
       for these projects in the amount of $608,535 ($451,500 for Pijak Farm and
       Spence Farm, $157,035 for Goose Farm) has been provided by the USEPA as
       part of the Superfund program.




       For 2/7/34 Public Meeting
       at Plumsted Township
       Municipal Building
       New Egypt, N.J.
                                w Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        FACT _SHEET
                    REMEDIAL INVESTIGATIONS AND FEASIBILITY STUDIES
                              PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP, NEW JERSEY


          Remedial Investigations/Feasibility Studies have been started at the
Spence Farm and Pijak Farm Sites east of New Egypt on Route 528.        These studies
are being funded by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(NJDEP) and the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and managed by the
NJDEP Hazardous Site Administration.
          The objectives of the Spence Farm and Pijak Farm investigations and
studies are:
          . To determine the location and amount of hazardous materials on site.
              To determine the rate at which hazardous materials are leaving the
              site in groundwater, surface water and air.
              To develop alternatives for control of these materials.
      \
              To select the best control methods for the site.
              To prepare.conceptual designs of the selected alternative.
          The schedule for these activities is:
              Begin Drilling Monitoring W e l l s - February 1984.
              Begin Sampling - Groundwater, Soil, Wastes, Surface Water,
              Private Wells - March 1984.
              Present Report on Sampling Results - May 1984.
              Present Report on Possible Alternatives - June 1984.
          .   Present Selected Plan for Remedial Action - July 1984.
          The nature and extent of remedial action for the Spence Farm and Pijak
Farm sites w i l l be based on the hazardous materials found in the detailed
sampling program.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                        DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                  HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION



     A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites



     As part of the federal/state program of cleanup of hazardous waste
sites, a Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input
and to advise local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions
at the three major stages of the cleanup: 1) feasibility study 2) engineer-
ing design and 3) removal/treatment/construction.  Local briefings and public
meetings are conducted with elected officials and residents and generally
take place at:

     1)   The commencement of a feasibility study so that local concerns
          can be addressed early in the process.

     2}   The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
          courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
          public presentation of the alternatives.

     3)   the engineering design stage to carry out th'e mandates of the selected
          remedial alternative.

     4) The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction stage to
        advise of the expected physical remedial action.

     5) The completion of the remedial action.

     In addition to the more formal activities outlined above, there is
generally informal communication with local officials and residents.
Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the lead in
remedial action at a site, community Delations activity is conducted by
the relevant state or federal agency.

     In New Jersey at DEP, the Community Relations Program is conducted
by Grace Singer, Community Relations Program Manager (609) 984-3081. At
Region II, EPA, the contact person is Lillian Johnson (212) 264-2515.




HS45:ms
1o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               STEPS INVOLVED IN A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP INVOLVING EPA AND SUPERFUND MONIES



Site Identified                  I n i t i a l Site Investigation         Secure Site             Site Analysis Evaluation

and Referred                                                                                      and Assessment

   (1)                                                                       (3)                             (4)



Prioritization                   Remedial Action Master Plan              Community Relations     Signing of Contract of




                                                                    n
                                                                    y

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment B,




                >

                    .'-"*.- 7^-7. y S




                         )
                    ^. >V

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       NAME            AFFILIATION          ADDRESS




 15.
              F-
 16.

                                     /2p.

18.

                   A
19




21 .

                                            n
22.
                                        /




25.




27.



28.



29.


30.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4,
f

I
i




Mr


I


I
t
$

f



     Attachment C.


*

f




I
I:

1
I

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            §tate of Neiu Jersey
                               DEPAFi..;1ENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                          DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                                      HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
 • MARWAN W,. SADAT. P E                      CN 028. Trenton. N.J. 08625                JORGE H. BERKOWITZ. PH D
 \/,    .DIRECTOR                                                                             ADMINISTRATOR




                                                    Public Meeting

                                                      to discuss

                                                  Feasibility Studies

                                                            at

                                    Goose Farm, Pijak Farm, and Spence Farm
                                            Thursday, August 16, 198A
                                                    7:00 p.m.
                                     Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                                                31 Main Street
                                                New Egypt, N.J.


                                                        AGENDA



             1)     Opening remarks and                          Dr. Jorge Berkowitz, Administrator
I.                  introduction of DEP staff                    Hazardous Site Mitigation

                                                                 Administration, NJDEP


            2)      Overview of current situation                Mr. Dave Henderson, Site Manager

                    and introduction of contractor               Hazardous Site Mitigation

                                                                 Administration, NJDEP


             3)     Presentation:   Feasibility                  Mr. Jim Shirk, E.T. Killam

                    Studies at Goose, Pijak, and                 Associates, Inc.

                    Spence Farms


            4)      Questions and Answers




                                     .V>\i Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    ti
    I
                                           FACT SHEET

                                         Public Meeting
                                               on
                       Results of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                               at
                                           Pijak Farm
                                        Plumsted Township
                                          Ocean County
                                         August 16, 1984


         Site Description:   The Pijak Farm site is located approximately 2 miles
                             northeast of New Egypt, about 1,000 feet south of
    I
                             County Route 528, and 1,300 feet west of Fisher Road.
    I                        The contaminated area, covering roughly one acre, was used
                             for the surface dumping of drums and free-flowing liquid
                             hazardous waste from around 1962 until the early or
                             mid-19701s. The site is situated adjacent to
                             Stony Ford Brook which joins the Crosswicks Creek, a
    I                        tributary of the Delaware River. The underlying ground
                             water aquifers provide a potable water supply for the
                             surrounding area. Both ground water and soil sampling
                             have indicated organic chemical contamination.

         Background:         The site was first identified as a waste disposal site by
                             the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
                             (NJDEP) in February, 1980. In March of that year, NJDEP
I                            recommended the denial of a permit to construct 43
I                            single-family homes on site. Observation wells were
                             installed by NJDEP in June, 1980, Also in June, several
I                            surface water samples were analyzed. In July, 1981 the
                             United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)
                             Environmental Photographic Interpretation Center
                             completed an evaluation of time sequential aerial
I                            photography spanning the years 1940-1979. A Cooperative
                             Agreement between USEPA and NJDEP was signed
                             in September, 1982 to commit $330,000 for a Remedial
                             Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). The contract to
t                            conduct the RI/FS was awarded to E.T. Killam Associates,
                             Inc. of Millburn, N.J. by NJDEP in December, 1983.
I
         Status:             A Draft Feasibility Study was completed in August, 1984
                             and the remedial action alternatives are presently being
                             evaluated by NJDEP and USEPA. There is a 21-day comment
                             period, beginning August 17, 1984, during which the Draft
                             Feasibility Study will be available at the following
f                            repositories: Plumsted Township Municipal Building, Ocean
                             County Library in Toms River, and the NJDEP,
I                            Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration in Trenton.

                                                                     Over...

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      I                        Summary of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
      .|                                  Pijak Farm, Plumsted Township
      I
      |            I.      Remedial Investigation

     |                 A. Scope of Work;    The remedial investigation included the following
     •|                  activities:
      9
    |                       . Construction of 11 monitoring wells;
    I
    g>
    |                       . Excavation of 8 test pits;
    '•»
    <
    3-                    . Sampling and analysis of deep and shallow soil samples;
    I
    I                      . Sampling and analysis of 5 waste samples; and
    I      .
    I                      . Sampling and analysis of 15 ground water, surface water
    J                        and sediment samples.
    i
    I              B.    Results:   The outcome of the remedial investigation indicated that:
    f
    i                      . Wastes were disposed of at the site by surface dumping rather
    ^ .                      than by burial (except for 4,000 cubic yards of buried
    |r                       wastes) ;

 |i                       . Most waste containers were opened intentionally or have
 ,j;                        rusted and the contents dispersed;
 I
 I                 -       . Principal contamination on site is found in waste containers
 I                           and soils, although ground water at Monitoring Well 2-S was
 j                           found to be contaminated;

 |                         . Most organic pollutants found were not priority pollutants
 |                           (only minor concentrations of priority pollutants were found); and
 5;
 |                         . Review of available data on toxicity for these non-priority
 I                          organic pollutants indicated that the greatest potential for
 I             -            adverse health and environmental effects were found in soil
 j                          rather than in water.
 7.
I              II. Feasibility Study

|                       The principal remedial objectives were removal of surface wastes,
|                      .construction of a temporary dam to control sediment loss, and control of
f                      direct access to the site.

5  ... '                  Long Term Recommendations;
f
|
f                         . Removal of wastes and contaminated soils;
'f
|                          . Pumping out contaminated ground water at Monitoring Well 2-S;

JiI                       . Regrading and revegetating the site to eliminate sediment
?                           loss and direct contact with contaminated material; and

|                          . Continue monitoring ground water for volatile priority
I                           pollutants.

I              NJDEP
I              8/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  FACT SHEET

                                Public Meeting
                                      on
              Results of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility   Study
                                      at
                                  Spence Farm
                               Plumsted Township
                                  Ocean County
                                August 16, 1984


Site Description:   Spence Farm is one of seven "Plumated" sites in the
                    vicinity of Ocean and Monmouth Counties. It is located
                    approximately 1.5 miles northeast of New Egypt in
                    Plurasted Township. The site is about 750 feet north of
                    County Route 528 and 7,000 feet east of Moorehouse Road.
                    From the 1950's until the early 1970's, drummed and bulk
                    liquid waste was disposed of in an on-site lagoon, a swamp
                    area, as well as sc. tered locations throughout a 30-acre
                    low lying wooded area adjacent to two adjoining
                    tributaries of Crosswicks Creek. Sampling and analysis of
                    ground water, surface water, and the underlying aquifer
                    has revealed organic chemical contamination.

Background:         Monitoring wells were installed by the New Jersey
                    Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) in June,
                    1980.   In July 1981, the United States Environmental
                    Protection Agency (USEPA) Environmental Photographic
                    Interpretation Center completed an evaluation of time
                    sequential aerial photography which covered the time
                    period of 1940-1979. A Field Investigation Team completed
                    a site evaluation in October, 1981. In March 1981, the
                    USEPA released a Remedial Action Master Plan for Spence
                    Farm. On September 30, 1982 the NJDEP entered into a
                    Cooperative Agreement with the USEPA to commit $320,000
                    for a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). In
                    November 1983, NJDEP awarded the contract for the RI/FS
                    to E. T. Killam Associates, Inc., of Millburn, N.J..
                    Field work commenced in December, 1983.

Status:             A Draft Feasibility Study was completed in August, 1984
                    and the remedial action alternatives are presently being .
                    evaluated by NJDEP and USEPA. There is a 21-day comment
                    period, beginning August 17,1984, during which the Draft
                    Feasibility Study will be available at the following
                    repositories: Plumsted Township Municipal Building,
                    Ocean County Library in Toms River, and the NJDEP,
                    Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration in Trenton.




                                                                 Over...

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                 Summary of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                           Spence Farm, Plumsted Township

I.   Remedial Investigation

     A.   Scope of Work: The remedial investigation included the following
          activities:
              Construction of 15 monitoring wells;

           .   Excavation of 15 test pits;

               Sampling and analysis of 14 deep and shallow soil samples;

               Sampling and analysis of 6 waste samples;

               Sampling and analysis of 19 ground water, surface water
               and sediment samples; and

               Sampling and analysis of 6 potable water supply wells.

     B.   Results:   The outcome of the remedial investigation indicated that:

               Wastes were disposed of at the site by surface dumping rather
               than by burial;

               Most waste containers were opened intentionally or have rusted
               and the contents dispersed;

               Principal contamination is found in waste containers and soils,
               with limited contamination of ground water and surface water;

               Most organic pollutants found were not priority pollutants,
               (only minor concentrations of priority pollutants were found) ; and

               Review of available data on toxicity for these non-priority
               organic pollutants indicates that the compounds with the greatest
               potential for adverse health and environmental effects were found
               in soil rather than in water.

II. Feasibility Study

     The principal remedial objectives were removal of surface wastes, con-
     struction of a temporary dam to control the loss of sediment, and control
     ,of direct access to the site.

     A.   Immediate Recommendation:

               Removal of surface wastes including drums, laboratory packs, and
               contaminated soil.

     B.   Long term Recommendations:

               Regrading the site to eliminate erosion of less contaminated soils
               in order to prevent direct contact with more contaminated
               materials; and

               Continue monitoring ground water for volatile priority    pollutants.

NJDEP
8/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   FACT SHEET

                                Public Meeting
                                      on
              Status of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                      at
                                  Goose Farm
                               Plumsted Township
                                 Ocean County
                                August 16,1984



Site Description:   Goose Farm is one of seven "Plumsted" sites in the area of
                    Ocean and Monmouth Counties. The site is located off Route
                    539, approximately one mile north of the intersection of
                    Routes 539 and 528. It is immediately adjacent to a
                    stream which is a tributary of the Crosswicks Creek. Goose
                    Farm is in a rural, agricultural area at the edge of a
                    pine/oak forest. During the late 1960's and early 1970's
                    an excavated portion of the site was used for the disposal
                    of bulk liquid and drummed wastes. Contamination of soil,
                    ground water, and surface water at the site has been
                    documented. The contamination poses a potential threat to
                    the two shallowest aquifers which underlie the area: the
                    Kirkwood and the Vincentown formations.

Background:         Initial remedial action transpired from August, 1980 until
                    February, 1982 and entailed the excavation of all
                    containers, as well as several thousand tons of
                    contaminated soil and debris. A water treatment system was
                    installed to remove gross contamination from the soil and
                    ground water. The New Jersey Department of Environmental
                    Protection (NJDEP) entered into a Cooperative Agreement
                    with the United States Environmental Protection Agency
                    (USEPA) on September 23, 1982 to commit $210,000 for the
                    performance of a Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                    (RI/FS). A contract for the RI/FS was awarded by NJDEP to
                    E.T. Killam Associates, Inc. of Millburn, N..r. in
                    December, 1983. Site access was secured via a Court Order
                    and field work was initiated in February, 1984.

Status:             The feasibility study is presently underway. The field .
                    work has been completed and included the following
                    activities: 22 soil borings; construction of 2 monitoring
                    wells; and sampling of 4 monitoring wells, 6 potable water
                    wells, surface water, sediment and leachate. The study
                    is expected to be completed by December, 1984.




NJDEP
8/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                            DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                      HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION


      A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites


     As part, of the federal/state program of cleanup at hazardous waste
sites, a Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input and
to advise local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions at
the three major stages of the cleanup: 1) remedial investigation/feasibility
study 2) engineering design and 3) removal/treatment/construction.      Local
briefings and public 'meetings are conducted with elected officials and
residents and generally take place at:

     1)       The commencement of a remedial investigation/feasibility study so
              that local concerns can be addressed early in the process.

     2)       The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
          f
              courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
              public presentation of the alternatives during which the feasibility
              study is available in local repositories.

     3)       The engineering design stage to carry out the mandates of the
              selected remedial alternative.

     4)       The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction stage to
              advise of the expected physical remedial action.

     5)       The completion of the remedial action.


     In addition to the more formal activities outlined above, there is
generally informal communication with local officials and residents.
Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
(DEP) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the lead
in remedial action at a site, community relations activity is conducted by
the relevant State or Federal agency.

     In New Jersey, the DEP Community Relations Program is conducted by Grace
Singer, Community Relations Program Manager (609) 984-3141/4892. At Region
II, EPA, the contact person is Lillian Johnson, Community Relations
Coordinator (212) 264-2515.




HS45:ms
5/84

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            STEPS INVOLVED F.N A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP




     (1)                            (2)                          (3)

Site Identified           Initial Site Investigation        Secure Site         Site Analysis Evaluation

 and Referred                                                                         and Assessment



     (5)                            (6)                          (7)                       (8)

Prioritization            Determination of Lead          Community Relations    Signing of Contract or

                                                           Plan Activated        Cooperative Agreement



     (9)                            (10)                         (11)                      (12)

Hiring of Contractor           Preparation of           Selection of Remedial    Hiring of Contractor

for Remedial Investi-          Feasibility                Action Alternative    for Engineering Design

 gation/Feasibility              Study

    Study


     (13)                           (14)                         (15)

Hiring of Construction/      Cleanup Evaluation          Contractor Audit and

 Removal Cleanup                                               Close out

   Contractor




New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment D.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          N.J. Department of Environment.'! Protection
                                  Division of Waste Management
                           Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
                         Public Meeting to Discuss Feasibility Studies
                          for Goose Farm, Pijak Farm and Spence Farm
                                Hazardous Waste Superfund Sites
                          Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey
                                   Thursday, August 16, 1984
                                           7:00 p.m.
                             Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                                        31 Main Street
                                     New Egypt, New Jersey




     NAME                     AFFILIATION                       ADDRESS

                                                                          lcX&#t^^<&jUS~


                                                        RD«I
3|




                              ^ ^ ^ .- o




                               ?l-^f <
      >*<?/ ( /~                C £ /M


                   •-f.V^.



                                    tJ


I uJi

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       ADDRESS




!»-
ii

130.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   N.J. Department of Environmental Protection
                                           Division of Waste Management
                                    Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
                                  Public Meeting to Discuss Feasibility Studies
                                   for Goose Farm, Pijak Farm and Spence Farm
                                         Hazardous Waste Superfund Sites
                                   Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey
                                            Thursday, August 16, 1984
                                                    7:00 p.m.
                                      Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                                                 31 Main Street
                                              New Egypt, New Jersey




    NAME                               AFFILIATION                       ADDRESS




                                                                ! tti km    II I 'A            (A. i


               / ,'l^L 'l^el r^           •(. f .- v

               yioC-r-t-cLX.,



i
i




           Z


                      /"                                                                /.
                                                                                      ''^L;.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

             N.J. Department of. Environmental Protection
                     Division of Waste Management
              Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
            Public Meeting to Discuss Feasibility Studies
             for Goose Farm, Pijak Farm and Spence Farm
                   Hazardous Waste Superfund Sites
             Plumsted Township, Ocean County, New Jersey
                      V'ursday, August 16, 1984
fr                            7:00 p.m.
                Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                           31 Main Street
                        New Egypt, New Jersey




     NAME        AFFILIATION                       ADDRESS

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Attachment E,

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                of Neui Jersey
                           DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                       DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                                  HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
.MARWAN M. SADAT. P.E.                    CN 028. Trenton, N.J. 08625            JORGE H. BERKOWITZ. PH.D.
S      DIRECTOR
                                                                                      ADMINISTRATOR




                                            Public Meeting
                                              to discuss
                                       Feasibility Study Results

                                                    for

                                             Goose Farm
                                       Thursday, July 25, 1985
                                              7:00 p.m.
                                Plumsted Township Municipal Building
                                             31 Main Street
                                              New Egypt, NJ




                                                 AGENDA


        1.     Opening remarks and                   Dr. Jorge Berkowitz, Administrator
               introduction of DEP staff             Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
                                                     NJDEP

        2.     Overview of current status            Mr. David Henderson, Site Manager
               and introduction of contractor        Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration
                                                     NJDEP

        3.     Presentation: Remedial Action         Mr. James Shirk
               Alternatives for Goose Farm           E. T. Killam Associates, Inc.

        A.     Questions and Answers




                               New Jersey Is An Equal Opportunity Employer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    FACT SHEET

                                  Public Meeting
                                        on
                Results of Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                        at
                                    Goose Farm
                                 Plumsted Township
                                   Ocean County
                                   July 25, 1985



Sit:e Description:   Goose Farm is one of seven "Plumsted" sites in the area of
                     Ocean and Monmouth Counties. The site is located off Route
                     539, approximately one mile north of the intersection of
                     Routes 539 and 528.   It is immediately adjacent to a stream
                     which is a tributary of the Crosswicks Creek. Goose Farm is
                     in a rural, agricultural area at the edge of a pine/oak
                     forest. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, an excavated
                     portion of the site was used for the disposal of bulk liquid
                     and drummed wastes. Contamination of soil, ground water, and,
                     surface water at the site has been documented.

Background:          Initial remedial action transpired from August, 1980 until
                     February, 1982 and entailed the excavation of all containers,
                     as well as several thousand tons of contaminated soil and
                     debris.   A water treatment system was installed to remove
                     gross contamination from the soil and ground water. The New
                     Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) entered
                     into a Cooperative      Agreement with the United      States
                     Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) on September 23, 1982
                     to commit $210,000 for the performance of a Remedial
                     Investigation/Feasibility Study (RI/FS). A contract for the
                     RI/FS was awarded by NJDEP to E.T. Killam Associates, Inc. of
                     Millburn, NJ in December, 1983. Site access was secured via
                     a Court Order and field work was initiated in February, 1984.

Status:              A Draft Feasibility Study was completed in July, 1985 and
                     the   remedial  action   alternatives are presently   being
                     evaluated by NJDEP and USEPA.      There is a 30-day public
                     comment period, beginning July 26, 1985 during which the
                     Draft Feasibility Study will be available at the following
                     repositories:    Plumsted Township Municipal Building, New
                     Egypt Library, Ocean County Library in Toms Rivers, and the
                     NJDEP, Hazardous Site Mitigation Administration in Trenton.




                                                                      Over...

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       -2-



                                   Goose Farm
                      Summary of Feasibility Study Results



Following is a brief description     of   the   remedial   action   alternatives   for
long-term site remediation.

Alternative 1: Off-site disposal (removal of 62,000 cubic yards of soil to a
               RCRA facility), regrading, revegetation and recovery, treatment
               and recharge of contaminated ground water.

Alternative 2: Partial off-site disposal (removal of 10,000 cubic yards of soil),
               soil flushing, treatment and recharge for 52,000 cubic yards of
               soil, recovery, treatment and recharge of contaminated ground
               water.

Alternative 3: On-site construction, monitoring and long-term maintenance of a
               RCRA hazardous waste landfill for 62,000 cubic yards of soil,
               regrading and revegetation of excavated area, recovery, treatment
               and recharge of contaminated ground water.

Alternative 4: In-situ (in-place) soil flushing with treatment and recharge for'
               removal of priority pollutants, recovery, treatment and recharge
               of contaminated ground water.

Alternative 5: In-situ soil flushing with treatment and recharge for removal of
               priority pollutants, injection of nutrients for in-situ biological
               oxidation and recovery, treatment and recharge of contaminated
               ground water.

Alternative 6: Containment of wastes with slurry wall and block displacement
               containment,   long-term  monitoring,  recovery, treatment and
               recharge of contaminated ground water.

Alternative 7: In-sicu soil flushing with treatment and recharge for removal of
               priority pollutants, no plume treatment.

Alternative 8: No current action except annual monitoring.




7/85
NJDEP

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION

                              DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT

                        HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION


            A Community Relations Program at Superfund Hazardous Waste Sites


           As part of the federal/state program of cleanup at hazardous waste
      sites, a Community Relations Program is conducted to receive local input and
      to advise local residents and officials about the planned remedial actions at
      the three major stages of the cleanup: 1) remedial investigation/feasibility
      study 2) engineering design and 3) removal/treatment/construction.      Local
      briefings and meetings are conducted with elected officials and residents and
      generally take place at:

           1)   The commencement of a remedial investigation/feasibility study so
                that local concerns can be addressed early in the process.

           2)   The completion of a feasibility study to discuss the alternative
                courses of remedial action. There is a 30-day comment period after
                public presentation of the alternatives during which the feasibility
                study is available in local repositories.

           3)   The engineering design stage to carry out the mandates         of the
                selected remedial alternative.

           4)   The commencement of the removal/treatment/construction     stage to
                advise of the expected physical, remedial action.

           5)   The completion of the remedial action.


           In addition to the activities outlined above, there is generally
      ongoing communication with local officials and residents as required.
      Depending upon whether the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
      (DEP) or the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has the lead
      in remedial action at a site, community relations' activities are conducted by
      the relevant State or Federal agency.

           In New Jersey, the DEP Community Relations Program is directed by Grace
      Singer, Chief, Office of Community Relations (609) 984-3081. At Region II,
      EPA, the contact person is Lillian Johnson, Community Relations Coordinator
      (212) 264-2515.




      HS45:js
      4/85


•I1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             STEPS INVOLVED IN A MAJOR HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE CLEANUP



     (1)                             (2)                          (3)                      (A)
                                 *

Site Identified           Initial Site Investigation         Secure Site         Site Analysis Evaluation

 and Referred                                                                         and Assessment


     (5)                             (6)                          (7)                      (8)

Prioritiz tion            Determination of Lead           Community Relations    Signing of Contract or

                                                            Plan Activated        Cooperative Agreement


     (9)                             (10)                         (11)                     (12)

Hiring of Contractor           Preparation of            Selection of Remedial    Hiring of Contractor

for Remedial Investi-          Feasibility                 Action Alternative    for Engineering Design

 gation/Feasibility              Study

    S.tudy


     (13)                            (14)                         (15)

Hiring of Construction/      Cleanup Evaluation           Contractor Audit and

 Removal Cleanup                                                Close out

   Contractor




New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

.*

     Attachment F.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                              DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                        HAZARDOUS SITE MITIGATION ADMINISTRATION
                        Public Meeting to Discuss Results of
                        Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
                                                at
                                            GOOSE FARM
                                        PLUMSTED TOWNSHIP
                                           OCEAN COUNTY
                                          JULY 25,  1985
                                             7:00    P.M.




     NAME               AFFILIATION                                   ADDRESS




                                                             '            y
                                                                                          r r   / ' f

ai
                            (/I.,   0

                                                            22

                                                                  ,-/ ^




                                                                                 0.



                              '

                                                                  7


     t      ! ,•'
1U.-/6 ?r//                                                                /.; .,/?.</£


                                                                 L/c/

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           NAME                                 AFFILIATION              ADDRESS




  0                                                                                                   JN b
15.




19.

           /)
20..
                                    0
                          l/r^A   /(M; </.(>-         )\)     M A-   2      £
21.



22.



23.



24.

                                                Mr-
25.




                                                                     '-,-.. ;.^ ,./.   v.   .f^.^i1   4. •„, . , £2

21 s^
  t    i   I   f/
               ' /
                      '
                     //




28.



29.

30.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          NAME                                       _            AFFILIATION               ADDRESS

  31.


I 32. .
                                                                         v
                                \^           I                   /*~

                                                                       iCo
  33.

        irT . 14 tUrflr i CJCSfl
        I - r-" - -   --    "\ti\{ '
                           r w i-fcr i — <       —       --,..   ^Vr^Rj L_a <?t s
 •34.

        ^ddL^jg^ ?Je^AJh^cJbLe^ -                                            /y£k£^ /^z^n
I 35.



  36.



  37.



 38.




I 40.




142.




 44.



 45.




 47

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1




    Attachment G,




i




^
j

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  ARCHER & GREINER
                                                        A PROFESSIONAL   CORPORATION

                                                          COUNSELLORS A T L A W

                    HANl.vOOlO   XD-^N                 ONE CENTENNIAL SQUARE
                                                            P.O. BOX 3OOO
                                                    HADDONFIELD. N. J. O8C. '-0968
               IVMfRLlNC         OEOBGt
                                                             609 • 795 21 21
 2i
'ffi?   9O8(Bt S njGiE*                                    OEX 6O9       795-0574
jjv     *aiMufi [ a sot'N




                                                                                                    ATLANTIC CITY OFFICE
                                                                                                             SUITE 2O7
                                                                                                       I 125 ATLANTIC AVENUE
                                                        August 2 6 , 1985                           ATLANTIC C I T Y . N.J. O84OI
                                                                                                           6O9-347-664O




        Dr. Jorge Berkowitz
        New Jersey Department of                                                                       £,; ^
            Environmental Protection
        Division of Waste Management                                          ..
        32 E. Hanover Street                                                   ''"'_'•     ' "~" '-"-»-• £               y-V.- S<


        Trenton, New Jersey 08628                                           '"    •      .'... " - .j_-<ii_.u
                                   Re:    Morton Thiokol, Inc. - Goose Farm                        ,      . -K -^
        Dear Dr. Berkowitz:
                  Enclosed are Morton Thiokol's (MTI) comments on the Goose
        Farm RI/FS as prepared by AWARE Incorporated. As you know, these com-
        ments have been prepared and produced within thirty days, and therefore,
        may need further amplification and discussion. Nonetheless, in that
        short period of time, AWARE Incorporated has identified many glaring
        deficiencies in the State contractors' (TRIA) reports. Among these are:
                            1.     Failure to establish guideline performance standards for
                                   the remedial actions. With no target, it is impossible
                                   to understand what TRIA was attempting to achieve.
                            2.     The chosen alternative has no technical basis in fact for
                                   the duration of time the alternative is to be operated.
                                   As a result, the cost is unquestionably wrong and other
                                   alternatives 'are the lower cost solution.
                            3.     Other unconsidered alternatives, such as on-site contain-
                                   ment by slurry walls and minimum groundwater pumping,
                                   appear to be better ultimate solutions.
                  These and other technical issues are discussed in the attach-
        ment. We note that the State's draft report also found fault with our
        previously provided Goose Farm study as performed by Wehran Engineering.



                                                                                                                           r* >.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Dr. Jorge Berkowitz
Page Two
August 26, 1985


Each of the problems noted are explicitly covered in the Wehran report
and we are left to wonder if the State's contractorsever saw the
finished report. In addition, a telephone call would have resolved
many of the concerns raised.
          MTI has evaluated other remedial paths without any guidance or
agreement from NJDEP as to acceptable residual levels or which chemicals
found are of greatest significance. We desire to discuss with your
office this issue as well as the advantages of the alternatives we have
independently evaluated. Perhaps after understanding our respective
positions, MTI will be in a position to consider undertaking the ulti-
mate remedy at this site.
           As you know, MTI has in good faith proceeded with these
extensive activities even though MTI is a defendant in litigation filed
by the State involving this very site. We hope that a similar good
faith review of our client's submission will result in substantial re-
consideration by the State of its own contractors' reports. We stand
rea.dy to meet with appropriate state representatives in order to address
any of these issues, and because of our ongoing litigation, we submit
these comments and the attached report without prejudice to any of
MTI's existing rights.
                                    Very truly yours,

                                     •   <. ,'t <- <:''
                                    EDWARD C. LAIRD

ECL:jas
End. .

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         I
         SF




         ,1
         .a
         I



                                      consultants in environmental manaQement

              August 21, 1985



    1         Edward C. Laird, Esq.
    |           Archer & Greiner
    |           One Centennial Square
    |         . Haddonfield, New Jersey 08033

    |j        RE: Initial comments on Goose Farm RI/FS

    I          Dear Ed:
    iI        The attached    report contai.ns our initial     comments on   the Remedial
    js        Investigation/Feasibility Study completed for the Goose Farm site by NJDEP's
    i         consultant, TRIA.
    tr

|             The most striking feature of the RI/FS is its failure to diligently search out
I             a trulv cost-effective remedial option for the Goose Farm site. Furthermore,
I             it is a markedly unquantitative RI/FS which has resulted in selection of a
jjj           remedial alternative which can not stand up to detailed technical scrutiny.

|              The attached report also contains our initial thoughts concerning more
I             appropriate remedial options for the Goose Farm site. Development of these
* '           alternative remedial options is only preliminary at this juncture, yet even at
i             this     'level   of     evaluation,       it      is   clear      that      these     containment-based
|              alternatives are worthy of further consideration.

|              If you have        any questions on the attached report, please do not hesitate to
\             contact us.
\i            Very truly yours,
I
              AWARE Incorporated



              Robert D. Mutch, Jr., P.HG., P.E.
              Vice President
I             /cs
              Encl.
              cc: A.      Slesinger


                                80 Airport Road e West Milford. New Jersey 07480 e Phone (201) 728-1940

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                  Page
       Letter of Transmittal
•I
I       1.0 INTRODUCTION                                                            1
-1-
*       2.0   GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE RI/FS                                            2

       3.0    SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE RI                                           4

       4.0    SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE FS                                           7

              4.1   Absence of Quantitative Remedial Objectives                     7

              4.2   Evaluation of Recommended Remedial Alternative #4               8

                    4.2.1   Technical Evaluation                                    8
                    4.2.2   Cost Evaluation                                        15

              4.3   Evaluation of Remaining TRIA Remedial Alternatives             16

                    4.3.1   Technical Evaluation                                   16
                    4.3.2   Cost Evaluation                                        18

       5.0    Preliminary assessment of Other Remedial Options                     21

              5.1   Description   of Additional Alternatives                       23

              5.2   In-Situ Biological Treatment Applications                      26

       6.0    Conclusions                                                          27

                                            LIST OF TABLES
                                                                              Following
                                                                                 Page

       Table 1 - Estimated Retardation Factors (R) for Principal Goose Farm
                 Contaminants                                                     12

       Table 2 - Estimated Construction Cost of Alternative No.     4             15

       Table 3 - Cost Estimate, RCRA On-Site Landfill                             19

      • Table 4 - Alternative No. 9, Construction Costs                           24

       Table 5 - Alternative No. 10, Construction Costs                           25

       Table 6 - Comparative Analysis of Selected Goose Farm Remedial Options     27

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    1.0 INTRODUCTION

    A remedial investigation/feasibility study (RI/FS) has been completed for the
    Goose Farmr.site in Plumsted Township, New Jersey. The RI/FS was undertaken by
    a consortium of three consultants under contract Co the New Jersey Department
    of Environmental Protection, Division of Waste Management, Hazardous Site
    Mitigation Administration. The consortium performing the work is termed TRIA
    and consists of Elson T.        Killam and Associates, Inc.     (ETK), Geomet
    Technology, Inc. (GTI), and Leggette, Brashears and Graham, Inc.        (LEG).
    Elson T. Killam acts as prime contractor for the project. The work of TRIA is
    embodied in three documents:

    1.    Draft II, Task 2-Remedial Investigation, Volume      1 - Main Report, July 12,
I         1985

    2.    Draft II, Task 2-Remedial Investigation, Volume 2 - Appendix A, June 1985

    3.     Draft II, Feasibility Study, July 12, 1985

    AWARE Incorporated has been retained by Morton-Thiokol to review the Goose
    Farm RI/FS and to comment on its adequacy, its thoroughness, and the.
    reasonableness of its conclusions and cost estimates.   In performing  this
    evaluation, a number of other documents have also been consulted.     These
    include the following:

    1.    Wehran Engineering, Supplemental Investigation of the Goose Farm Site, May
          1985

    2.    Wehran  Engineering, Analytical    Results, Groundwater      Monitoring    Wells,
          Goose Farm Site, March 1985.

    3.    Wehran Engineering,   Analytical Results,   Soil Samples     - Volume     1, Goose
          Farm Site, March 1985

    4.    Wehran Engineering, Analytical Results,       Soil Samples   - Volume     2, Goose
          Farm Site, March 1985

    5.    Wehran Engineering, Analytical Results,       Soil Samples   - Volume     3, Goose
          Farm Site, March 1985

    6.    Wehran Engineering, Analytical Results,       Soil Samples   - Volume     4, Goose
          Farm Site, March 1985.

    7.      FMC Aquifer Remediation Systems, Site Assessment Report        for the     Goose
         "• Farms Hazardous Waste Site, June 27, 1985

    In addition to the above-referenced reports, AWARE has also reviewed much of
    the earlier information developed as part of the past remedial efforts, has
    visited the    site on numerous     occasions, and has participated      as a
    subcontractor to Wehran Engineering in the preparation of the above-referenced
    Wehran Engineering documents.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      2.0 GENERAL COMMENTS ON THE Rl/rS

      Without question, the most striking feature of the feasibility study is its
      failure to mount a diligent search for a truly cost-effective remedy for the
      Goose Farm site.   It is this lack of diligence which will run like a thread
      through most of the comments       contained herein regarding the remedial
      investigation/feasibility study of the Goose Farm site. The feasibility study
      looks at only eight remedial alternatives for the Goose Farm site, only two
      more than the minimum six alternatives mandated by the National Contingency
      Plan. Further, the alternative remedial programs are given only a cursory
      evaluation and are developed in a purely conceptual manner.

      Remedial objectives or performance goals are stated in only the most
      conceptual terms. No effort has been made to quantitatively set performance
      standards and objectives for the remedial programs.   Remedial objectives are
      the starting point for a feasibility study. Once set, the feasibility study
      becomes an engineering evaluation and search for the most cost-effective way
      of attaining those goals. Without quantitative standards, a feasibility study
      flounders for lack of direction. The Goose Farm RI/FS suffers from its
      failure to set performance objectives

      The remedial investigation is similarly unquantitative. The RI fails to
       generate enough new data or to use older data to generate isoconcentration
      .contour maps depicting contaminant levels on the site. No estimates are made
      of the amount of contaminated groundwater in the plume of contamination. No
      estimates are made of the amount of groundwater flow within the plume. The
.j|    stratigraphy of the site has been largely ignored in terms of its impact on
      groundwater flow.     Illustrative of this rather casual regard for site
       stratigraphy is the indiscriminate grouping of permeability tests regardless
      of formation. The consultants failed to differentiate between true soil
      contamination and groundwater-borne contamination.    No estimates were made of
       the degree of retardation of the various contaminants      in the groundwater
      system. This latter deficiency of the RI/FS is especially critical since the
       recommended remedial plan involves soil contamination flushing and plume
       recovery and treatment.   The retardation factor (R) will dictate the rate of
       flushing of contamination from the plume.

      It is also perplexing that in a site where soil flushing and groundwater
      recovery are recommended why a computer model is not utilized in the
      development of feasible remedial alternatives.      Even a relatively simple
      two-dimensional hydrologic model would be immensely helpful in conceptualizing
      and testing various remedial strategies. The place for computer modeling of
      groundwater-related remedial options is in the feasibility study, not the
      subsequent engineering design.   The computer model can not only test out and
      evaluate the effectiveness of various groundwater recovery and recharge
      options, but can often lead one through trial and error to unusually
      cost-effective remedial options. It is believed that the absence of computer
      modeling in the Goose Farm feasibility study has been a serious omission.

      Failure to develop a quantitative understanding and depiction of hydrogeologic
      and contamination conditions at the Goose Farm site has led to the selection

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    I
    f>
                                                3
    I;         -




 •S «'



 •'I      of a remedial alternative which seems ii.Capable of me "ing any reasonable set
  I       of performance objectives and certainly not in the time frame projected in the
 ,1'      RI/FS. The remedial plan optimistically envisions an 18-month period of soil
 ;
   !      flushing and plume recovery and treatment, after which presumably the aquifer
 ||       and site    would be sufficiently     renovated.    As will    be demonstrated
          subsequently, it is our belief that this plan is seriously flawed for all but
          the most relaxed of performance standards. The flaw lies in the fact that the
          consultants have assumed that the soil and groundwater contaminants will
          either be flushed relatively rapidly from the system, within the 18-month
          period, or will be permanently bound up in the soils. This is an unrealistic
          and, in fact, a dangerous assumption.     In reality, the Goose Farm soils and
          groundwater contain a complex suite of organic and inorganic contaminants
          whose retardation factors and, consequently, times of flushing span the
          mobility spectrum. By underestimating the complexity of the source, TRIA has
          recommended a remedial plan the success of which hinges on relatively rapid
          soil flushing and aquifer renovation. As the subsequent calculations will
          show, flushing of this aquifer system will not be rapid.         In fact, the
          calculations indicate that flushing will take not months but many years, even
         ,decades.

-.|      TRIA also assumes that treatment can be effected by means of a granulated
  :      activated carbon system.   It also appears that this assumption is optimistic
         given the character of the soil and groundwater contamination. The probable
!
         inadequacies of a simple GAG plant will be addressed in later sections of this
.,&      document.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 II»




       3..0 SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE RI

       The following specific comments are made regarding the remedial investigation
       portion of the Goose Farm RI/FS.     Most of the comments relate one way or
       another to the unquantitative nature of the remedial investigation.

       1.   The RI fails to present an isoconcentration contour map of the plume of
            groundwater contamination. An isoconcentration contour map of this type
            depicts the distribution of contaminant levels within the plume. The RI
            does not even delineate the full spatial extent of the plume.        TRIA
            states "The areal limits of contaminated groundwater cannot be accurately
            defined because of the limited number of samples." (Appendix A, page 41).
            It is difficult to fathom why in a remedial investigation of a National
            Contingency List site sufficient samples cannot be taken to define at
            least the spatial boundaries of the plume, if not the distribution of
            contaminants within the     plume.   It's not a     matter of budgetary
            limitations since cost-effective analytical plans can be developed
            employing a combination of indicator analyses to define the boundaries of
            the plume and more specific analyses to define the severity of the plume
            (Clarke, 1984).

       2.   Nowhere in the RI is the total volume of groundwater within the plume
,«          estimated. An indirect reference to plume volume is made on page 1-11 of
            the feasibility study although it appears to be in error. TRIA states on
            page 1-11 that "Total pollutants may range from 10,000 to 30,000 Ibs. in
            groundvater (an average of 20 to 60 ppm total priority pollutants)." This
            calculation is based on a total volume of groundwater of 60 million
            gallons. -Our estimate of the total volume of groundwater in the plume is
            approximately 14 million gallons. It seems likely that TRIA neglected to
            multiply the volume of the plume by the specific yield in order to obtain
            the actual volume of groundwater since the two numbers differ by a factor
            of approximately 0.25.

       3.   No effort was made to estimate the volume of groundwater flow within the
            plume. Utilizing TRIA's figures for average permeability and hydraulic
            gradient, it appears that the flow in the plume is approximately 8,000
            gallons per day.

       4.   The stratigraphy of the site has been largely ignored in regard to its
            impact upon hydrogeologic conditions. An example of this is the way TRIA
            indiscriminately groups field permeability tests together, irrespective
            of the formation tested. The upper and lower Kirkwood, Manasquan, and
            Vincentown.formations have different hydrogeologic properties which have
            not been taken into account in the RI. Many of the wells employed in the
            field permeability tests are screened across more than one geologic
            formation, thereby prohibiting differentiation of individual formation
            permeabilities.

       5.   TRIA failed to differentiate    between true soil contamination and
            groundwater contamination. In a plume of groundwater contamination, a

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     certain amount of contaminant partitioning between gi.undwater an.'' the
     aquifer skeleton    invariably takes place.     However,   the resultant
     contamination of the aquifer skeleton cannot be compared to areas of true
     soil contamination where wastes have directly contacted soils, often
     coating them with pellicular film of non-aqueous phase liquid (NAPL).

6.   The remedial investigation did not consider the mobility of the Goose
     Farm contaminants in the groundwater system. Retardation factors for the
     Goose Farm contaminants were not estimated.      In the case of organic
     compounds, retardation factors can be estimated on the basis of organic
     content of the aquifer. Determination of aquifer organic content is a
     relatively.simple and inexpensive analysis which in our judgment should
     have been included in the RI.      Understanding the retardation of the
     principal Goose Farm contaminants would have enabled the remedial
     measures to be evaluated with a better conceptual understanding of
     contaminant mobility—a critical criteria when aquifer remediation and
     soil flushing is being considered.

/.   TRIA fails to utilize the Wehran Engineering-generated geologic and
     hydrogeologic data for reasons which are difficult to comprehend. TRIA
     states, "First, the geologic information provided for the soil borings,
     was insufficient to allow correlation of         particular samples and
     analytical results to specific geologic formations.      It is not known
     whether soil or water samples are from the Kirkwood, Manasquan, or
     V'incentown formations." The basis for this statement is difficult to
     understand since the W'ehran Engineering boring logs clearly define the
     geologic formation and provide not only a detailed Burmister description
     of the lithology but also, where appropriate, geologic information such
     as the presence and type of shell fragments encountered.

     TRIA also states that "Second, information was not provided about the
     geology, drilling, and construction of the monitor wells." As stated
     above, information was contained in the Wehran Engineering boring logs
     regarding the geology encountered at each boring location. Moreover, the
     boring logs clearly show and describe the drilling technique and the
     specific nature of the well construction.

     TRIA further states that "The formation(s) in which the wells are
     screened are unknown." Clearly as indicated above, this is not the case.

     TRIA also states that "Third, groundwater samples were analyzed only for
     indicator parameters and are, therefore, not able to be directly
     correlated with specific contaminants identified by TRIA." It should be
     noted that the objective of the Wehran wells was to define the western
     boundary of. the plume. Therefore, an analytical protocol consisting of
     indicator parameters was judged by NJDEP and Wehran to be appropriate.
     The fact that the analytical results cannot be "directly correlated with
     specific contaminants identified by TRIA" is a moot point.      Had TRIA
     employed a rational program of indicator analyses in their analytical
     program, perhaps the spatial extent of the Goose Farm plume would be
     better defined within the TRIA RI.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

TRIA also states that "Lastly, there was no description of sampling
procedure utilized by Wehran in the collection of samples." Again, this
is not the case for on page 2-4 of the Supplemental Investigation Report
issued by Wehran Engineering, Wehran states that samples were collected
in accordance with established NJDEP approved procedures.

On page 36 of Appendix A of the TRIA RI they state "The background soil
sample collected by Wehran was found to contain a significant level of
contamination. However, no location for the sample was provided which
eliminates the formulation of any useful conclusions." Once again, this
statement is inaccurate since the location of the background soil sample
is shown on Figure 1 of Wehran Engineering's "Supplemental Investigation
of the Goose Farm Site" report dated May 1985.

The State has analyzed for many compounds ("+40") which are not priority
pollutants.   As in previous efforts undertaken by DEP, many of the
nonpriority pollutants detected may not be anthropogenic in origin.
These analyses only further complicate the selection of appropriate
performance standards. We believe the priority pollutant list is an
adequate analytical base for this site.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       4.0 SPECIFIC COMMENTS ON THE FS
'If    The following more   specific comments are offered in connection   with the TRIA
Si
•ii    Feasibility Study.


      4.1 Absence of Quantitative Remedial Objectives

      The RI/FS fails to set forth quantitative remedial objectives.         In the
      feasibility study, remedial action objectives for source control are stated as
      follows:


           "1.   Remove, treat, or contain contaminants.

            2.   Control general migration pathways.

            3.   Control release of volatile compounds in air.

           .4.   Control water infiltration.

            5.   Control soil erosion.

           6.    Control direct contact."

       Insofar as management of migration is concerned, the RI/FS states that "the
       principal objective in management of migration is to mitigate contamination of
       potable water supplies.   Secondary goals of migration management are to stop
       the general movement of contaminants to other areas which may cause a danger
       to public health, welfare or the environment through direct or indirect
      .contact."

      These remedial action objectives do not speak to che degree of control
      required at the Goose Farm site.    In fact these remedial objectives are not
      specific to the Goose Farm site at all, but could apply to any waste disposal
      site.    Remedial objective #2 calls for control over "general migration
      pathways". Nowhere in the RI/FS are the migration      pathways quantitatively
      evaluated as to their current risk to public health and the environment or, as
      important, as to what would be an acceptable level of risk for each pathway.
      Table 1-2 of the TRIA RI presents exposure limits for typical Goose Farm
      contaminants.   It presents the 10   cancer risk and EPA SNARLS for water and
      permissable exposure levels for air. The information in this table does not
      represent remedial goals.    A remedial objective must address not only the
      permissable    concentration, but   where in    the system    the permissable
      concentration must not be exceeded. For example, one remedial objective might
      be to maintain water quality in the unnamed stream below some prescribed level
      of contamination   such as the EPA SNARLS or the 10~ cancer risk. Another
      remedial objective might be to maintain groundwater quality at certain points
      in the aquifer system below these same levels. Remedial objectives of this
      type provide a target for the feasibility study to home in on. Given a
      quantifiable target, remedial engineers can then evaluate the myriad of

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

remedial technologies capable of attaining those remedial objectives. In the
absence of such quantifiable remedial objectives, the feasibility study
flounders for lack of direction. This has clearly been the case in the Goose
Farm RI/FS. Remedial alternatives have been developed along with associated
cost estimates without any definition of the degree to which they are expected
to remediate site conditions. How can an 18-month aquifer renovation period
be estimated without some concept of the acceptable degree of aquifer
remediation which will be required? In short, it can't.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4.2 Evaluation of Recommended Remedial Alternative £4

The following comments are offered regarding the technical        merits   and
projected costs of TRIA's recommended remedial program.


4.2.1 Technical Evaluation

As stated earlier, the technical merits of TRIA's Alternative #4 seem
questionable.   Its success hinges on what can best be considered the
optimistic belief that the Goose Farm contaminants will fall into one of two
categories: those which will be rapidly flushed from the soils, and those
which will remain permanently bound to the soil matrix. The plan envisions an
18-month period of soil flushing and plume treatment, after which presumably
the highly mobile contaminants will have been flushed from the soil and the
aquifer and the remaining contaminants will remain bound to the aquifer
skeleton.

Although the effectiveness of this option hinges on the rates of contaminant
flushing and aquifer remediation, the RI/FS does not contain even preliminary
estimates of these mechanisms. The sole reference to flushing times mentions
achieving a ten-pore volume exchange of groundwater. The RI made no effort to
measure the aquifer's natural organic content from which estimates of organic
contaminant mobility can be drawn. TRlA has apparently simply guessed at the
amount of flushing required to remove contaminants.        As the succeeding
evaluation will indicate, it appears that their unsupported estimate of
flushing times is seriously in error.    As a result, the aquifer remediation
and soil flushing project would not be completed in the 18 months contended by
TRIA.   Rather, in all likelihood, it would be forced to ''perate for many
years, even decades, before adequately remediating the aquifer and the soil
contamination.

Naturally, the performance standards established for the aquifer remediation
project "will to a large degree dictate how long the system must run. It is
evident that in the absence of concrete performance standards and a reasonable
estimate of contaminant mobility in the Goose Farm soil system, the duration
of the soil flushing and remedial project are indeterminate. Similarly, the
costs of this remedial alternative could correspondingly escalate to the point
of placing it in an unfavorable position with respect to other remedial
alternatives as illustrated in Section 6.0 of this report.

In the following section of this report, a preliminary assessment of       the
likely flushing times for various contaminants is undertaken.

Estimates of Flushing Time

Numerous field and laboratory studies have demonstrated the importance of
adsorption in the transport of      organic contaminants through soil and
groundwater systems. Adsorption of a contaminant to soil can occur through a
variety of processes including physical adsorption, chemisorption (formation
of chemical bonds between the material and the soil), hydrogen bonding, and

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           10




    ion >. change.  The degree to which a particular contaminant is adsorped in
    soil or Ln an aquifer depends on the nature of the contaminant itself and the
    properties of the formation. The degree to which contaminants are retarded in
    their migration in groundwater systems is a critical factor in the evaluation
    and design of aquifer remediation efforts. Some compounds will be very
    tenaciously held by the soil matrix, becoming essentially immobile. Others
    will be strongly retarded in their passage through the aquifer, moving at only
    a small fraction of the rate of groundwater flow.    Still other contaminants,
    particularly the lower molecular weight, volatile organic contaminants move
    relatively rapidly through the groundwater system—often nearly as fast as the
    groundwater, itself. However, even the volatile organics themselves exhibit a
    substantial degree of variation in their mobility in aquifer systems.

    The degree to which a chemical or solute is retarded with respect to the flow
    of groundwater in an aquifer system is defined as its Retardation Factor, R,
    where:

              groundwater velocity
        R =
              solute velocity

    The retardation factor can be used to estimate flushing times of contaminants
    from aquifers, It can be considered as being roughly equivalent to the number
    of pore volume exchanges necessary to extract a particular contaminant from
    the groundwater system. It should be noted that the Retardation Factor (R)
f   refers to .the retardation of solutes in a plume of dissolved groundwater
    contamination. In areas of severe soil contamination other factors also come
    into play which will be subsequently discussed.

    It can be shown that:

               R = 1 +(p/n)Kd                                               (1)

       Where: p = bulk solids density
1              n = porosity
*
              K, = soil/water distribution coefficient
               d
    The ratio of the bulk solids density to the porosity (p/n) typically falls in
    the range from U to 10, and for the purposes of this evaluation can be
    considered as roughly 5. K, is a distribution coefficient which provides a
    m'easure of the extent to which a material partitions between a soil matrix and
    the groundwater.

    Karickhoff, et al (1979) have shown that the adsorption of organic compounds
    in soil systems is very strongly controlled by the fractional organic content
    of the soil (f ) to the extent that other soil properties play minor roles.
    The term K    represents the adsorption coefficient referenced to the soil's
    organic content, rather than its total mass.     Karickhoff and his coworkers
    have developed the following relationship:

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            11



                                                  K
                                   K            = -__                  (2)
                                       oc        f
                                                      oc
The face that the retardation coefficient for organic compounds can be
correlated to a soil's organic content is particularly useful since numerous
authors have been able to demonstrate correlations     between K   and several
commonly known properties of chemicals.    In particular, water solubility (S)
and octanol/water   partition coefficient (K ) have been shown to correlate
well with K .     (Kenaga and Goring, 1978; Karickhoff et al.f 1979; Chiou, et
al., 1979).

In consideration of the preliminary nature of this assessment the following
empirical relationship developed by Karickhoff will be utilized throughout the
analysis :

                                       K         = 0.63 K            (3)
                                           oc            ow
Utilizing equations 1, 2, and 3, it is possible to estimate the retardation
factors for the organic compounds found at the Goose Farm site. The method is
illustrated in the following sample calculations for methylene chloride.

Sample Calculation

     Chemical contaminant:                      Methylene Chloride

     Octanol/water partition
                   Y         coefficient (K ) = 18
                                           ow
     Using equation (3)

          K        = 0.63 K
              OC              OW

          KQC      = 0.63(18) = 11

     From equation (2)

          K , = f    K
           d      oc oc
     Where: f   = 0.5% or 0.005                        (estimated)
             oc
          K. = 0.005 (11) = 0.055
           d
     and from equation (1)

          R =' 1 + p/n K

    Where:         p/n = 5

          R = 1 + 5 (0.055)

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        12




            R = 1.28


  Retardation Factor (R) of Methylene Chloride is 1.28.

  Table 1 presents the estimated retardation factors (R) for the principal
  organic priority pollutants found at the Goose Farm site. In the calculation,
  it has been estimated that the average organic content of the formations
  through which the plume is migrating is 0.5 percent.

  The above analysis reflects the mobility of individual compounds in the
   groundwater system. In evaluating these situations one must also consider the
   synergistic effects of multiple chemicals migrating in the same groundwater
* system, such as is the case at Goose Farm. It has been well documented, for
   instance, that the solubility and hence the mobility of many relatively
   insoluble compounds can be greatly enhanced by the presence of dissolved
   concentrations of organic solvents in groundwater. The high concentrations of
  .organic solvents in the Goose Farm soils and groundwater are likely enhancing
   the mobility of many of the otherwise relatively immobile base neutral
   extractables, and acid extractables. It is difficult to quantify the impact
   of this mechanism of contaminant migration, yet it may be a significant factor-
   in the observed presence of base neutral extractables, and acid extractables,
   well beyond the confines of the disposal pit.

 It must also be emphasized that the preceeding analysis of retardation factors
 applies .only to     activity occurring within the       plume of     dissolved
 contamination. In the zones of severe soil contamination such as the disposal
 pit   the above-described mechanisms are       inadequate to     fully predict
 retardation. In those areas, the soils have been overwhelmed by the organic
 compounds and are often coated with a pellicular film of the materials. Where
 this is the case, as it appears to be in the disposal p i t , it can require 30,
 40, or more pore volume exchanges of groundwater to leach even the relatively
 mobile compounds from the soil.

 The importance of this analysis of retardation .factors lies in the fact that
 retardation factors can be roughly correlated with the number of pore volume
 exchanges necessary to flush an aquifer free of contaminants.     In this case,
 one por'e volume equals the approximate volume of groundwater within the plume.
 It is estimated that the Goose Farm plume contains approximately 14 million
 gallons of groundwater.    This estimate is based upon the areal dimensions of
 the plume which are roughly 500 feet by 500 feet, an average depth of
 approximately 30 feet, and an average porosity of 0.25.     It can therefore be
 roughly estimated that an organic contaminant such as 1,2-Dichloropropane with
 a retardation value of 4 would require removal of approximately 4 pore volumes
 or 56,000,000 gallons of groundwater. Similarly, Ethylbenzene would require
 withdrawal of     325,000,000 gallons    of groundwater.    The   diversity of
 retardation factors exhibited by the Goose Farm contaminants will manifest
 itself in the progressive release of contaminants having successively higher
 retardation factors during the course of the groundwater recovery program.
 Since many of the retardation factors are high, yet not so high as to render
 the contaminants totally immobile, a tremendous amount of groundwater will

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               TABLE 1

                                Estimated Retardation Factors (R)
                              for Principal Goose Farm Contaminants

                                                             Calculated Using Karickhoff, et al
                                                                   Empirical Correlations

     Chemicals                                 K
                                                   ow             K
                                                                  oc            K
                                                                                    d       R

     Volatile Priority Pollutants
     Acrylonitrile                            0.7244                  0.46    0.0023        1.01
     Acrolein                                            1            0.63    0.0032        1.02
     Methylene Chloride                                 18              11     0.055        1.28
     1 , 2-Trans-Dichloroethylene                       30              19     0.095        1.47
     1 , 2-Dichloroethane                               30              19     0.095       1.475
     1 , 1-Dichloroethane                               62              39      0.20            2.0
     Benzene                                  89-135                    71*     0.36*           2.8*
     1 , 1 , 1 ,-Trichloroethane                    150                 95      0.48            3.4
     1 , 2-Dichloropropane                          190                120       0.6            4.0
     Trichloroethylene                              195                123      0.61            4.1
     Toluene                                        490                309      1.54            8.7
     Ethy Ibenzene                             1,410                   888      4.44        23.2

     Base (Neutral Extra.ctables
     Bis(2-Chloroethoxy ) Methane                  18             11.34        0.057            1.3
     Bis(2-Chloroethyl) Ether                      38             23.95         0.12            1.6
     Bis(2-Chloroisopropyl ) Ether               380              239.5          1.2            7.0
     Naphthalene                               2,340              1,474         7.37         37.9
     Fluorene                                 15,100              9,513         47.6            239
     Acenaphthene                            21,380              13,469         67.4            338
     Phenanthrene                            28,000              17,640         88.2            442
     Anthracene                              28,200              17,766        88.83            445
     Chrysene                               407,000              25,641             128         642
     Di-N-Butyl Phthalate                   158,489              99,848             499     2,497
     Py rene                                209,000             131,670        658.4       3,293
     Fluoranthene                           214,000             134,820             674    3,372
     Butyl Benzyl Phthalate       63, 100-631,000               218,641*        1,093*     5,467*
     Benzo (A) Anthracene                   408,000             257,040         1,285       6,426
     Benzo (A) Pyrene                    1,100,000              693,000         3,465      17,326
i:   Benzo (B) Fluoroanthene             3,715,352            2,340,672        11,703      58,518
     Benzo (K) Fluoroanthene             6,918,310            4,358,535        21,793     108,964
     Benzo (GHI) Perylene              1 7 , 000 , 000       10,710,000        53,550     267,751
     Indeno (l,l,2-c,d) Pyrene         45,700,000            28,791,000       143,955     719,776
     Bis(2-Ethylhexyl) Phthalate

     Acid Extractables
     Phenol                                             29            18.3      0.09        1.457

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                i/
IJChemicals                            K            K           I\
                                                                     d          R

I

i|Pesticides
fPCB-1242                            380,000      239,400      1,197        5,986
fpCB-1254                         1,070,000       674,100      3,370       16,851
[PCB-1248                         1 , 300 , 000   819,000      4,095       20,476

Note:    KQW = Octanol/Water Partition Coefficient
         K   = Soil/Water Partition Coefficient Referenced to Organic Content
         K, = Soil/Water Partition Coefficient
         R   = Retardation Factor
         *   = Mean Value

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   I
      I                                            13



  :|       have to be pumped to purge the contaminants from the *_ .uifer. In the absence
   ,j      of quantitative performance standards (and naturally a more detailed analysis
   C       of contaminant flushing) it is impossible to predict with any degree of
  I        accuracy the time period over which a groundwater recovery and treatment
. |        system would operate at the Goose Farm site. However, at a pumping rate of
  |         100,000 gallons per day, one pore volume exchange could be realized every 140
  i        days provided induced stream water infiltration is negligible. Comparing this
  I'       figure with the retardation factors provided in Table 1 indicates that a
  I        groundwater recovery and treatment facility on this site could run for many
  |         decades, possibly even 100 years, depending upon the performance standards
           established.
(•|
           As noted earlier, two other factors must be kept in mind. First, the mobility
           of otherwise relatively immobile compounds will be enhanced by the presence of
  I        organic solvents. This will cause these relatively immobile compounds to be
 |          flushed more rapidly from the soil system. Second, the rates of flushing in
 I         the 'areas of severe soil contamination cannot be predicted by retardation
 |          factors alone. The shear mass of contaminants in this area plays a more
 |          important role in dictating flushing times.    The combined effect of these two
 I         phenomena is to increase the number and amount of contaminants flushed from
 |          the aquifer at intermediate times—some of the highly mobile contaminants.
 |          appearing later than predicted and some of the relatively immobile compounds
 •|        being leached more rapidly.

 I         The TRIA groundwater recovery system is proposed to consist of a vacuum
 I         wellpoint system as indicated in Figure V-l. The vacuum wellpoints are to be
 j,        aligned along the eastern and northern boundaries of the plume adjacent to the
 I         creeks into which the plume discharges. Because of the proximity to the
 I         craeks, induced Infiltration of stream water into the groundwater recovery
 1         system will make up a significant portion of that system's flow. This induced
 j         surface water infiltration couild potentially account for between 30 and 70
 |          percent of the total flow of the wellpoint system. It will depend upon the
|           system's geometry and flow rates, aquifer    properties, and stream bed and flow
 |            characteristics.    Obviously, inducing      this   significant   in-flow of
  *         uncontaminated water into the system has several negative side effects.
 I           First, it would necessitate increasing the hydraulic capacity of both the well
I •         point system and the groundwater treatment plant. More important, however, it
•*        , will serve to throw the        remedial project out of hydrologic balance.
•I"         Alternative #4 is intended to operate as an essentially "closed-loop" system.
 5-         Recovered contaminated groundwater is intended to be treated and returned to
|j          the,aquifer near the northern end of the disposal pit (see Figure V-l of the
|            Feasibility Study).    The aquifer within the plume has a finite capacity to
I           'store and conduct groundwater. The continuous addition of surface water into
I            the system will eventually overwhelm the aquifer, potentially causing one or
I .         more of several problems. First, the groundwater could rise to excessive
I-          levels in the recharge area, possibly reaching the ground surface, causing
I           obvious problems.    Second, the potentiometric highs caused by the recharge
|            system could serve to expand        the plume laterally beyond its present
            boundaries.

           The   concept 'of recharging at   the rear   of the   plume to   accelerate aquifer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      i     renovation is quite good. However, where surface water is bei..g induced to
     ;|     flow into the groundwater collection system, it is usually necessary to
     i      discharge    a comparable   amount   of water    beyond    the "closed   loop"
     (       recharge/discharge system in order to maintain a hydrologic balance. Once
    't      again, it is evident that a computer model could have been extremely useful in
    is      conceptualizing the groundwater recovery remedial options.

   I        The TRIA-recommended remedial option envisions accelerated soil flushing as a
  t         means to enhance the migration of leachable constituents to the groundwater
   I        recovery system.    However, the means proposed to achieve this soil flushing
  |          will be at best partially effective. It is proposed that a wellpoint system
 |           consisting of 80 wellpoints be utilized to inject water back into the
 |           contaminated soil zone in the vicinity of the disposal pits. A sketch of the
 j.         proposed system is presented in Figure V-l of the feasibility study.         A
I           wellpoint system of this type will effectively flush only those soils in its
 ij         immediate vicinity. Such a recharging wellpoint system will create a
j           potentiometric ridge along its alignment and accelerate flushing only within
£           the confines of the potentiometric ridge and the underlying saturated zone.
!'          Contaminants in the unsaturated zone more than a few tens of feet from the
I -         recharge system will likely be completely unaffected. Even contaminants in
|            the unsaturated zone in the immediate vicinity of the wellpoint recharge
|. -         system may be unaffected depending upon the resultant height of the
I           potentiometric ridge. The TRIA RI/FS provides no quantification of the impact
r           of the proposed soil flushing system upon the groundwater table or with regard
            to its effectiveness. Clearly this is another example of where a computer
;"          model could have been a great asset to the feasibility study process. With
i           the computer model, the effectiveness of various soil flushing systems could
!           be quantitatively evaluated.

!         . A more effective approach to soil flushing would be some form of surface
            application system such as a recharge basin or spray irrigation. In this way,
            contact between the recharging water and the soil contaminants can be
            maximized through the region of soil contamination.

            Groundwater Treatment Considerations

            In Alternative #4, it is proposed that groundwater be treated with gravity
            clarification and granular activated carbon adsorption. TRIA assumes that ten
            pore volumes of the contaminated plume will need to be treated during an
            18-month period. A total of 140 million gallons (approximately 260,000 gpd)
            of groundwater will need to be treated. Aside from the previusly described
            problems of contaminant flushing, several concerns arise with respect to the
            treatment method as well.

            1.   Gravity Clarification

                 Gravity clarification with a hydraulic detention of approximately 2 to 3
                 hr is effective in removing suspended solids. However, most groundwaters
                 have very low suspended solids.    Hence, from this standpoint, gravity
                 clarification is     not needed.   Furthermore, most of     the chemical
                 constituents (e.g. heavy metals, hardness, etc.) contained in groundwater

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            15




       |                    are in soluble forms which are not susceptible to grav ;::y settling [n
      4                    this respect, therefore, gravity clarification is not effective. If there
      |                     is a need to remove heavy        metals using some type       of chemical
      «                    precipitation, then gravity clarification is required to remove the
     •j     .              precipitated metals. But, heavy metal concentrations in State Wells #095
      $..       '          and #107 are either lower than primary drinking water standards (e.g.
     I                     mercury)   or not    regulated   (e.g.    zinc).   Consequently,   gravity
     I              .      clarification is not needed under Alternative #4.
     I
     ;,
      >             ,2.    Granular Activated Carbon (GAC) Adsorption
      \
      -j    .             • Although most of the organics in the plume water are highly adsorbable,
     |                       GAC alone is not cost-effective in removing 400-500 mg/1 BOD (FMC, 1985),
     I                      which is characteristic of the core of the plume. Moreover, considering
     |                       the high concentration of many organics (e.g., 560,000 ppb methylene
     ?                      chloride, 9500 ppb benzene, etc.), GAC treatment would be very expensive
     \.                     if stringent effluent limitations of less than 50 ppb each VOC and total
                            VOC <_ 100 ppb are to be met. (Once again, the feasibility study is
                            haunted by lack of performance standards.)

                    3.     Air Stripping

                           Air Stripping is not proposed in Alternative #4.   Because most of the
                           organics found in the plume water are highlv volatile (e.g. methylene
                           chloride, dichloroethylene, trichloroethylene, acrylonitrile, benzene,
                           etc.), air stripping prior to to carbon adsorption would significantly
                           reduce the VOC loading to the carbon treatment, and therefore would
                           considerably lower treatment cost.

  {                 Based upon the above critique, a treatment train of air stripping followed by
  .|                PACT (powdered activated carbon in activated sludge) should be considered.
  *                 However, the feasibility of air stripping vis-a-vis local air quality control
 I                  standards would have to be confirmed.
  4
  £                 The achievable effluent concentrations and sizing of the treatment system were
  *                 not addressed in the Killam report.   These would have to be confirmed through
 $                  a series of treatability studies on the actual plume water.
 Y.
 |                      4.2.2 Cost Evaluation
 I
 ij                 The estimated construction costs of TRlA's Alternative #4 modified to reflect
Je                  the suggested alternative treatment scheme is presented in Table 2.       The
\                   construction costs apparently do not differ appreciably from those estimated
t;                  by TRIA.    However, in the TRIA cost estimates no differentiation was made
I                   between construction costs and operational and maintenance costs.

J                   It is estimated that the annual operation and maintenance costs for the
I                   groundwater treatment plant will amount to approximately $394,000.      This
I                   includes $200,000 a year general 0 & M for the treatment plant, $139,000 per
|                    year for sludge disposal, and $55,000 for groundwater monitoring.
«i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE 2
                         Estimated Cost of A l t e r n a t i v e No. 4


Item                          Units     Quantity      Unit Price         Estimated Cost


Groundwater Recovery &
Recharge System                LS                     S     349,000       $ 349,000

Soil Flushing & Recovery
System                         LS                          383,000           383,000

Groundwater Treatment
Plant (AS, PACT)               LS           1             1,350,000        1,350,000


SUBTOTAL                                                                  $2,022,000

Engineering, Permitting, & Contingencies @ 30%                               607,000


TOTAL                                                                     $2,629,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            L6




6.3 Evaluation of Remaining TRIA Alternatives

The following      brief comments are    offered regarding the remaining   seven TRIA
alternatives.

4 .3.1 Technical Evaluation

Alternative #1

The National Contingency Plan mandates that the feasibility study consider a
total removal option.   In the case of Alternative #1, complete removal would
encompass  not only the contaminated soils in- the waste disposal pit, but
apparently much of the contaminated aquifer as well. In essence, this
alternative would involve removal and reconstruction of the aquifer with clean
fill—a rather extreme method of aquifer remediation. This alternative has
several negative aspects which remove it from serious consideration. These
are:

1.   The extreme cost.

2.   The nationwide shortage of landfill capacity for the 62,000 cubic yards of
     waste resulting from this alternative.

3.   The current regulatory reluctance to send wastes off-site         to sites which
     may potentially become future Super fund sites.

Alternative #2

Alternative #2 shares the same          disadvantageous aspects   as Alternative   #1,
although to a lesser degree.

Alternative   #3

This alternative calls for the on-site disposal of the 62,000 cubic yards of
contaminated soil in a RCRA hazardous waste landfill.    Although technically
feasible,  this alternative is considerably more costly than some of the
in-situ management alternatives presented in Section 5.0 of this report. In
addition, there would remain a risk of failure which could prompt still
another remedial investigation/feasibility study    the future.   The risk of
failure, that is leakage from the facility, wo.     always remain since RCRA
guidelines and site considerat: s would mandate construction of the landfill
above the groundwater table. Consequently, there would always be an outward
hydraulic gradient across the liners. The difficulty in obtaining the
necessary permits to construct such a facility in the coastal plain of New
Jersey should also not be overlooked.

Alternative ?5

Alternative #5 involving in situ biological treatment     is a variation of
Alternative #4, discussed previously. The success of the in situ biological
treatment depends upon the ability of the stimulated bacteria to degrade the

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      17



contaminants in situ without need for their extraction and above-ground
treatment.   The technology of in situ biological treatment appears very
promising. Whether it is applicable to the specific conditions of the Goose
Farm site would have to await a more detailed treatability study.

In situ biological treatment could be performed in conjunction with a soil
flushing and groundwater recovery system such as that proposed in Alternative
#'i by TRIA or in conjunction with the containment options described within
Section 5 of this document.

Alternative #6

Alternative #6 is the only containment-based alternative evaluated by TRIA.
It involves a rather unusual approach to in situ management, specifically the
application of "base grouting". Base grouting is a procedure to develop a
horizontal low-permeability horizon beneath a waste disposal site. Subsurface
cutoff walls are then keyed into this low-permeability horizon to form a
containment "vessel".    Base grouting, however, is a highly      questionable
procedure insofar as the integrity of the final product is concerned. No
specification is given within the RI/FS as to the specific nature of the base
grouting technology considered.

\pparently no consideration was given to utilization of the Hornerstown Sand
^quitard as a strata into which subsurface cutoi'f walls could be keyed.
Wehran Engineering conducted a rather extensive analysis of the Hornerstown
Sand aquitard beneath the Goose Farm site. The results of that analysis are
published within their May 1985 report. Wehran Engineering estimates that the
"upper shell layer (of?the Hornerstown Sand formation) has a permeability on
the order of 1.0 x 10    cm/sec." It is therefore clear   that the Hornerstown
Sand aquitard is capable of being advantageously exploited as a relatively
low-permeability aquitard into which subsurface cutoff walls could be founded.
Yet, the TRIA FI/FS gives no consideration to this advantageous feature of the
site. In fact, TRIA seems to ignore the presence of the Hornerstown Aquitard
altogether. On page III-2 of the feasibility study they state in connection
with Alternative #6 that "the bottom grouting is required, however, by the
permeability of the lower Kirkwocd, Manasquan, and Vincentown formations at
the site." It is difficult to understand the reasoning for this oversight
since not only is the Hornerstown Sand aquitard a well-recognized aquitard in
the New Jersey coastal plain, but at this site it is well within the reach of
conventional slurry trench construction methods.

Alternatives #7 and S8

Alternatives #7 and #8 are not truly in contention as potential       remedial
measures  for the Goose Farm site. Alternative #7 fails to address the
contaminants within the plume and Alternative #8 is the no-action alternative.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       18




4.3.2 Cost Evaluation

The following    general comments    are offered regarding      certain   common
characteristics of the TRIA remedial alternatives.


1. As has been previously described, it is our belief that the difficulty and
   time required to flush the soils and remediate the aquifer at the Goose
   Farm site have been seriously underestimated. Employing the principles
   previously described, it is our contention that soil flushing times and
   aquifer remediation times are likely to take anywhere from a decade to
   more than a hundred years, depending upon the performance standards
 , established for the project.

2.   Aside from being unrealistically low, the projected cost of plume pumping
     and treatment is the same in Alternatives 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6, in spite of
     substantial differences in the amount of aquifer requiring remediation in
     each alternative.   How could the aquifer remediation costs be the same
     when in Alternatives L and 3, 62,000 cubic yards of the most highly
     contaminated material will be removed       from the aquifer, while in
     Alternative   4, the     recommended  solution, no    source control    is.
     contemplated. Similarly, in Alternative 2, 10,000 cubic yards of highly
     contaminated soils, representing the disposal pit, are to be removed for
     off-site disposal. Yet, the cost for plume management in this alternative
     is again the same as Alternative 4, which involves no source control. In
     Alternative 6, a slurry trench cutoff wall and bottom grouting is proposed
     to contain presumably the most highly contaminated soils. Yet, no impact
     on plume cleanup costs is projected. Surely some benefit is to be accrued
     from these highly capitally-intensive   source control efforts insofar as
     the duration and costs of the aquifer remediation program is concerned?

3.   The cost o£ contaminated soil excavation and disposal is estimated at $540
     per cu-bic yard. The derivation of this figure is not provided in the
     RI/FS. This figure seems rather high in light of similar waste excavation
     and disposal efforts in New Jersey and elsewhere.

4.   The RI/FS report provides very little technical information concerning the
     eight evaluated remedial programs.    The estimated pumping rates of the
     soil flushing or groundwater recovery systems are not provided. The cost
     of the groundwater treatment plant is not broken out and separated from
     the cost of the groundwater recovery system or the operational costs
     associated  with the system.' The depths and proposed alignment of the
     slurry trench cutoff wall in Alternative 6 is not provided. Nor is there
     any explanation of the base grouting technique. In reading the report one
     does not know whether "base grouting" refers to the "block fracturing
     technique" or some other form of pressure grouting. The derivation of the
     immense $12,500,000 cost of base grouting is also not provided within the
     RI/FS.

Specific Comments

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      19




Alterative #1

Although the unit cost of excavation and disposal ($540 per cubic yard) seems
high, it is not clear whether TRIA has included in their estimate provisions
for management of groundwater during the excavation operation. Groundwater
management during excavation could be a significant factor in the cost
estimates and may account for the rather high unit price for excavation and
disposal.

Alternative #2

The general comments and specific comments   made in regard to   Alternative #1
also apply with respect to Alternative #2.

Alternative #3

It appears that TRIA's estimates of the cost to construct an on-site landfill
may be low. Table 3 contains an approximate cost estimate for a 67,000 cubic
yard hazardous waste secure      landfill conforming with EPA's guidelines
published following the 1984 reauthorization of the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act.    In accordance with those guidelines, the landfill design
includes a primary and secondary liner, a primary leachate collection system
above the primary liner, and a leachate collection/ detection system between
the two liners.  In further compliance with the referenced EPA guidelines, the
base liner has been assumed to be constructed of 3 feet of compacted clay with
a maximum permeability of 1X10-7 centimeters per second. The primary liner
has been assumed to be a composite liner consisting    of 80 mil high density
polyethylene (HOPE) atop a two-foot    1X10    liner of compacted clay.    The
landfill's final cover would consist of a composite cap of 20 mil PVC atop one
foot of 1X10-7 centimeters per second compacted clay overlain by a one-foot
sand drainage layer and one and one-half feet of top soil. TRIA's estimates
of annual operating costs, presumably consisting of leachate treatment, final
cover maintenance, and environmental monitoring, appear reasonable.

Alternative #4

Since Alternative #4 is the recommended remedial option, the costs of this
option have been evaluated in greater detail in Section 4.2.2 of this report.


Alternative #5

Insufficient information existed at the time of this report to estimate the
costs associated with in situ biological treatment. Additional studies by FMC
are under consideration by Morton-Thiokol.

Alternative #6

Alternative #6 is the only TRIA alternative which gives consideration    to
containment  of contaminated source areas.   Unfortunately, Alternative #6
contemplates base grouting of 5 acres. Base grouting is not only enormously

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                             TABLE 3
                           COST ESTIMATE
                       ON-SITE RCRA LANDFILL



                                                 UNIT       ESTIMATED
           ITEM      UNITS      QUANTITY        PRICE         COST

1 . SITE PREPARATION L.S.              1      $50,000.00      $50,000
2. BERMS              C.Y.        26,200          $12.65     $331,430
3. SECONDARY LINER    C.Y.        40,400          $12.65     $51 1,060
4. LEAK DET. SYSTEM
     -SAND            C.Y.         7,000           $7.00       $49,000
     -COLLECT. PIPES L.F.          4, 150          $0.75        $3, 113
     -GEOTEXTILE      S.F.       172,000           $0. 15      $25,800
     -COLLECTION SUMP L.S.              1     $20,000.00       $20,000
5. PRIMARY LINER
     -CLAY            C.Y.        17,500          $12.65     $221,375
     -80 HOPE         S.F.       187,500           $1 .00    $187,500
6. LEACHATE C.S.
     -SAND            C.Y.         7,400           $7.00       $51,800
     -COLL. PIPES     L.F.         4,270           $0.75        $3,203
     -GEOTEXTILE      S.F.       186,000           $0. 15      $27,900
     -COLL/STORAGE    L.S.              1     $75,000.00       $75,000
7. MONITORING WELLS UNIT               4       $2,500.00       $10,000
8. FINAL CAP
     -CLAY            C.Y.        10,200          $ 12.65     $129,030
     -20 MIL PVC      S.F.       210,000            $0.27      $56,700
     -SAND            C.Y.         8,300            $7.00      $58, 100
     -DRAIN. PIPE     L.F.         4,500            $0.75       $3,375
     -TOPSOIL         C.Y.        14,700            $9.00     $132,300
     -HYDROSEED       S.F.       222,000            $0.08      $17,760

SUBTOTAL                                                    $1 ,964,445

ENG IMEERING,PERMITTI NG, AND CONTINGENCIES        30.00%     $589,334


TOTAL                                                       $2,553,779

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     20




expensive, i- remains an inherently difficult undertaking. Because of the
unseen subterranean nature of the work, the integrity of a base-grouted zone
i:s always in question. Apparently no consideration was given to utilizing the
Hornerstown Sand aquitard as a confining layer into which to key subsurface
cutoff walls. Exploitation of the Hornerstown Sand aquitard as part of an in
situ management approach for the Goose Farm site is discussed in some detail
in Section 5 of this report.    The inclusion of the rather questionable base
grouting technique in Alternative #6 increases the cost of this alternative by
$16,250,000.    As a    result, it drives the apparent      cost of in-place
encapsulation beyond the range of reason.      Yet, as will be described in
Section , there are numerous other in situ management alternatives for the
Goose Farm site which are in fact more cost effective than the alternatives
presented within the TRIA RI/FS and, moreover, possess a higher degree of
reliability.


Alternatives #7 and #8

Neither Alternative #7 or #8 are in serious consideration because in the case
of Alternative #7 the plume is left unmanaged and in the case of Alternative
#8 no remedial efforts are involved.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      21




5.0 PRELIMINARY ASSESSKENT OF OTHEK REMEDIAL OPTIONS

The fact that the soil flushing and aquifer remediation remedial alternatives
proposed by TRIA will be a more time consuming and therefore more costly
undertaking than estimated, demands that containment options be given a closer
examination. A closer look at containment options ia also indicated by the
observed properties of the Hornerstown Sand aquitard beneath the Goose Farm
site. The TRIA RI/FS makes little effort to consider the many containment
options available. The single containment option TRIA considered (Alternative
#6) involved the highly questionable and costly practice of base grouting. No
consideration was given in the TRIA RI/FS to utilization of the Hornerstown
Sand aquitard as part of an in-situ management approach.      In so doing, it
appears they have overlooked some very attractive and cost-effective remedial
alternatives.

Subsurface cutoff walls can play a variety of roles in the remediation of
hazardous waste sites (Mutch, 1984).    In the case of waste disposal sites,
cutoff waHs can be used to hydraulically isolate the waste disposal site. In
the same manner cutoff walls have been used to isolate subterranean zones of
soil contamination.   In groundwater recovery and treatment programs, cutoff
walls have also been used to minimize or prevent induced infiltration from,
adjacent surface water bodies. Cutoff walls have also been used to partially
or completely enclose a plume of groundwater contamination, thus halting its
spread and allowing groundwater recovery and treatment efforts to proceed at a
more relaxed pace.

Each of the above-described common usages of subsurface cutoff walls has
potential application at the Goose Farm site. A subsurface cutoff wall could
be employed to encircle the former disposal pit and the . highly contaminated
soils in its immediate vicinity. Alternatively, a subsurface cutoff wall
could be utilized to completely enclose both the waste disposal pit and the
plume of groundwater contamination.      Finally a subsurface cutoff wall,
 jssibly even a relatively shallow cutoff wall penetrating to the Manasquan
Formation rather than the Hornerstown Sand aquitard, could be utilized to
minimize induced infiltration from the adjacent stream.

It must be emphasized at this point that cutoff walls do not form completely
impermeable barriers to groundwater flow. Rather, in the proper hydrogeologic
setting and under the proper design and construction conditions, they can very
effectively minimize groundwater flow. This is not to suggest, however, that
leakage from a waste disposal site encircled by subsurface cutoff walls need
be inevitable.    Many waste disposal     sites have been remediated by a
combination of circumferential subsurface cutoff walls and internal leachate
collection systems to reverse hydraulic gradients across the cutoff wall. In
other words, by lowering the potentiometric surface within the waste disposal
site to elevations less than the potentiometric levels in the surrounding and
underlying aquifers, seepage will be induced to flow into the waste disposal
site rather than vice versa. This remedial concept has been employed in the
remediation of numerous waste disposal sites including several sites on the
National Priority List. Several of the National Priority List sites employing
this technique include the Monroe Township Landfill in Middlesex County, NJ

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     22




(Mutch 1983); the South Brunswick Landfill 'n Middlesex County, NJ;   and the
Hooker "S" Area Landfill in Niagara Falls, NY (Amos, 1985).

In the containment options for the Goose Farm Site discussed subsequently, it
is this concept which is employed. This concept results in essentially 100
percent abatement of contaminant release from the site. A properly undertaken
risk assessment may demonstrate that such a high level of abatement is not
required. In which case, it may be possible to omit the hydraulic gradient
reversal and allow some nominal amount of leakage to ultimately leave the
site's confining envelope. However, at this juncture, we have assumed the
more conservative remedial approach.

Since in every application of subsurface cutoff walls there will be some
groundwater flow through the cutoff wall itself and beneath the cutoff wall,
prediction of the amount of flow occurring by each of these mechanisms is
critical to evaluation and design of a subsurface cutoff wall. In each of the
subsequently discussed additional remedial options, the estimated amount of
groundwater inflow has been estimated.

The   following   additional remedial   options   seem   worthy of    further
consideration. In order to avoid confusion and to be consistent with the TRIA
feasibility study, the numbering of these additional remedial options begins
with Alternative #9..

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           23




5.1 Description of Additional Remedial Alternatives

Alternative 19

Alternative #9 would include the following elements:

1.   A circumferential cutoff wall around the waste disposal pit and plume of
     groundwater contamination. The approximately 2,000 ft. long slurry trench
     cutoff wall would lie along the creeks on the eastern and northern sides
     of the plume, along the western edge of the plume, and just south of the
     southern edge of the waste disposal pit. The slurry trench cutoff wall
     would key into     the Hornerstown  aquitard at an     average depth of
     approximately 65 feet.

2.   An interior leachate/groundwater collection system would be constructed to
     lower the potentiometric surface within the cutoff wall enclosure      to a
     level below the potentiometric levels in the adjacent Kirkwood/Vincentown
     and the underlying Mt, Laurel Aquifer.

3.   Collected  leachate would be managed either by trucking to an off-site
     wastewater treatment plant such as DuPont's Deepwater, New Jersey facility,
     or by an on-site treatment plant. This decision would have to await the
     findings of a treatability study and economic analysis.

It is crucial in any containment-based    remedial action  that the amount of
leakage be estimated. In a conventional containment approach where leakage
would be outward, it is necessary to know the amount of leakage in order to
estimate the degree of effectiveness of the remedial option and to undertake a
risk assessment.     In an    "intragradient" containment option,     such as
Alternative #9, the estimation of inward leakage allows for proper planning of
leachate management alternatives. In the case of Alternative #9, Leakage into
the cutoff wall enclosure can be expected from three mechanisms:

        (a)   Infiltration of precipitation
        (b)   Inflow of groundwater through the cutoff wall, itself
        (c) Upward leakage through the Hornerstown Sand aquitard.

Infiltration of Precipitation

It has been estimated that ..roundwater recharge on the Goose Farm Site, given
the nature of the surficial soils and absence of vegetation, is probably on
the order of 15 inches per year. Over the 6.1 acre area of the cutoff wall
enclosure this would amount to a total of 2,482,000 gallons of groundwater
recharge per^year or approximately 6,800 gallons per day on an average basis.
It should be noted however that groundwater recharge will vary significantly
seasonally and the design must be able to accommodate          these seasonal
fluctuations.

Leakage Through the Cutoff Walls

Under    natural conditions,    it has   been   assumed that   there is   a five   foot

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       24




differential in the potentiometric levels of the combined Kirkw "d/Vincentown
aquifer in the deeper Mt. Laurel/Wenonah Aquifer. Therefore, in order to
lower the potentiometric surface within the cutoff wall enclosure to a level
at least two foot below the potentiometric level in the Mt. Laurel/Wenonah
Aquifer, it will be necessary to lower the interior potentiometric surface
approximately seven feet. This will create a seven foot head differential
across the subsurface cutoff walls. The hydraulic gradient would therefore be
7/3, or 2.33, assuming a three-foot thick slurry trench cutoff wall. Seepage
through the 130,000 square foot cutoff wall having a permeability of 1 x 10~
cm/sec would therefore be approximately 645 gallons per day.

Leakage Upward Through Hornerstown Sand Aquitard

The upper shell layer of the Hornerstown Sand aquifer is approximately eight
feet in    thickness.   Wehran Engineering estimates      its permeability at
approximately 1 x 10     cm/sec.   Conservatively assuming that the two-foot
gradient is. entirely dissipated across the upper shell layer, the hydraulic
gradient would be 0.25. Upward leakage through the Hornerstown Sand aquitard
would therefore be approximately 140 gallons per day.

The total leakage into the cutoff wall enclosure will be the sum of the above
three mechanisms or approximately 7,600 gallons per day.

The estimated costs of Alternative #9 are presented in Table 4.     The total
construction costs of Alternative #9, including engineering, permitting, and
contingencies, is 52,242,500. Annual operating costs would consist primarily
of leachate treatment costs. Annual costs for leachate management amount to
approximately' 540,000 per year. Adding in costs for routine monitoring, one
can assume that the annual operating costs would be approximately $95,000 per
year.


Alternative #10

Alternative #10 would include the following elements:


1.   A circumferential cutoff wall around the waste disposal pit and plume of
     groundwater contamination.  The approximately 2,000 ft. long slurry trench
     cutoff wall would lie along the creeks on the eastern and northern sides
     of the plume, along the western edge of the plume, and just south of the
     southern edge of the waste disposal pit. The slurry trench cutoff wall,
     would key into      the Hornerstown aquitard at an      average depth .of
     approximately 65 feet.

2.   A cap would be constructed over the cutoff wall enclosure area to minimize
     infiltration of precipitation. The cap would consist of 12 inches of
     compacted clay with a maximum permeability of 1 x 10     cm/sec, covered by
     a 20 mil PVC liner. Above the liner a drainage layer would be constructed
     using 4-inch perforated pipe placed in 12 inches of coarse sand. The
     drainage layer would be covered with 18 inches of topsoil and hydroseeded

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE 4

                                   Alternative No. 9
                                   Construction Cost


Item                       Units       Quantity            Unit Cost      Est. Cost


Slurry Cutoff Wall          SF         130,000             $        9     $1,170,000

Leachate CS

        well points         EA             120                     25          3,000

  -     Piping              LF           1 , 300                     5         6,500

        pumps              LS                3                  4 , 000       12,000

        installation       LF            1,300                     45         58 , 500

        storage facility    LS                1                150,000       150,000

Groundwater Treatment
Plant                      LS                 1             325,000          325,000


SUBTOTAL                                                                  $1,725,000

Engineering, Permitting, and Contingencies         30.0%                     517.500


TOTAL                                                                     $2,242,500

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        25




      to minimize erosion.

3.-   An interior leachate/groundwater collection system would be constructed to
      lower the potentiometric surface within the cutoff wall enclosure to a
      1-evel below the potentiometric levels in the adjacent Kirkwood/Vincentown
      and the underlying Mt. Laurel Aquifer.

4.    Collected leachate would be managed either by trucking to an off-site
      wastewater treatment plant such as DuPont's Deepwater, New Jersey facility
      or by an on-site treatment plant. This decision would have to await the
      findings of a treatability study.

Leakage Estimate

Leakage into the cutoff wall enclosure under Alternative #10 would be the same
as that occurring in Alternative # 9 with the exception of infiltration of
precipitation.    The composite    clay/geomembrane cap    should essentially
eliminate infiltration of precipitation into the cutoff wall enclosure.
Recognizing the limitations of any containment options, we have conservatively
assumed a leakage rate of 100 gallons per day.       Total leakage under this
option would therefore be approximately 885 gallons per day.

The costs'"of Alternative #10 are presented in Table 5. The annual operating
costs for Alternative #10 are lower, since infiltration of precipitation is
essentially eliminated.    Annual costs    for leachate treatment would be
approximately 525,000 per year. Adding in costs for site monitoring and
routine maintenance, the total annual operating costs are probably on the
order of $80,000.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      26




j. 2 In-Situ Biol^ical Treatment Applications

Possible variations of Alternatives #9 and #10 would involve the application
of in-situ biological treatment processes to treat the contaminants within the
cutoff wall enclosure.   The cutoff walls offer the advantage of allowing the
in-situ biological treatment to proceed at a more relaxed pace since plume
migration would be controlled.      The closed loop in-situ biodegradation
processes could operate without concern of induced surface water infiltration
or loss of partially treated effluent from the treatment zone.          It is
difficult to say at this juncture how effective in-situ biological treatment
would be given the complex suite of organic and inorganic compounds found at
the Goose Farm site. However, results in other areas of the-country have been
very promising. In-situ biological treatment is a particularly attractive
treatment method for contaminants which tend to remain in the soil or are only
slowly flushed from the groundwater system since treatment occurs in the
subsurface without the need of bringing the contaminants to the surface for
conventional treatment.

The advantage    of incorporating in-situ biological      treatment with the
containment options is that eventually collection and treatment of groundwater
from within the cutoff wall should no longer be necessary.      A treatability.
study in conjunction with the establishment of quantitative performance
standards would permit a determination of the time required to reach this
point.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      27




6.0 CONCLUSIONS

It is our contention that the most serious deficiency of the TRIA RI/FS is its
failure to mount a truly diligent search for a cost effective remedial option
for the Goose Farm site. The remedial options which are looked at are few in
number and poorly developed. Both the RI and FS portions of the document are
strikingly unquantitative. Remedial objectives are not set forth other than
in     the    most    conceptual    terms.    The   plume    of    groundwater
contamination—essentially the entire focus of the RI/FS— is not even mapped,
either in terms of its spatial extent or the distribution of contaminants
within the plume. No estimate is provided of the quantity of contaminated
groundwater within the plume. No effort was made to estimate the retardation
of the principal contaminants in the groundwater system. The influence of
site stratigraphy on the hydrogeologic conditions of the site was largely
overlooked.   No effort was made to differentiate and define the hydrogeologic
properties of the different geologic formations found beneath the site. The
Hornerstown Sand aquitard—a well known low permeability       aquitard in the
coastal    plain   of New    Jersey—was    entirely  ignored  in    considering
containment-based options.

It is our suggestion that in light of the apparent unlikelihood of flushing
the contaminants from the aquifer in the time period projected by TRIA, other
remedial options, specifically containment options, be further evaluated.

Table 6 contains a comparative analysis of selected Goose Farm remedial
options. Specifically the table provides a comparison of Alternatives 4, 9,
and 10. Alternative 3k has been evaluated for several different durations of
the groundwater recovery and treatment system and soil flushing       systems.
Durations of 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 20, and 30 years have been utilized in the
assessment;. Table 6 contains an estimate of the initial construction costs,
the annual 0 & M costs, and the present worth value of the total annual 0 & M
costs over the appropriate duration of operation. The last column of Table 6
gives the true total cost of the remedial option representing the sum of.the
initial construction costs and the present worth value of the annual 0 & M
costs.

Since Alternative #4 has a relatively high annual operation and maintenance
cost, the "total cost" of this alternative is very sensitive to the duration
of the groundwater recovery and soil flushing program. The present worth
 value of the annual 0 & M costs varies from a low of $702,000 in the event the
recovery program only operated for two years to $4,433,000 for a 30 year
•operational period.   Alternative #4 is only competitive with Alternatives 9
and 10 in the event the groundwater recovery and treatment and soil flushing
sys'tem operates no longer than two years. The total cost of Alternative #4
escalates rapidly as the duration of the groundwater recovery and soil
flushing system increases. Should that system have to operate for five years,
the total cost of Alternative #4 exceeds $4 million.     Operated for 10'years,
the costs exceed $5 million. The preceding analysis of contaminant mobility
and flushing times indicates that for all but the most relaxed of performance
standards it'could take many years, probably decades, to adequately renovate

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         TABLE 6
              Comparative Analysis of Selecteu ^oose Farm Remedial Options



                                              Annual      Duration     Present Worth
                              Construction    0 & M     0 & M Costs   of Total Annual
Alternative                       Cost        Costs        (yrs.)       0 & M Costs     Total Cost


Alternative No. 9             $2,242 ,500    $95 ,000       30        $1,068 ,750       $3 ,311,250

Alternative No. 10             2,412 ,085     80.000        30            900,000        3,312,085



Alternative No. 4              2,629 ,000    394 ,000        2            702 ,000       3 ,331,000

Alternative No. 4              2,629 ,000    394 ,000        3         1,017 ,000        3 ,646,000

Alternative No. 4              2,629 ,000    394 ,000        4          1,304 ,000       3 ,933,000

Alternative No. 4              2,629 ,000    394 ,000         5         1,572 ,000       4,201,000

Al ternat ive No. 4            2,629 ,000    394 ,000        10        2,644 ,000        5 ,273,000

Alternative No. 4              2,629 ,000    394 ,000       20         3,869 ,000        6,498,000

A l t e r n a t i v e No. 4    2,629 ,000    394 ,000       30         4,433 ,000        7 ,062,000

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        28




the aquifer.' .Consequently, the true   cost of Alternative #4 is probably in
excess of $5 million, thus putting      it in very unfavorable position with
respect to Alternatives 9 and 10.

The complex suite of inorganic and organic compounds within the Goose Farm
hydrogeologic system demand that in-situ containment options be given a closer
evaluation. In-situ management alternatives such as Alternatives 9 and 10,
may offer a more effective and more reliable means of remedying the
groundwater contamination problems at the Goose Farm site.     Moreover, these
alternatives could be used in conjunction with in-situ biological treatment
methods to eventually degrade the majority of the contaminants and obviate the
need for ^ong-term maintenance and monitoring of the remedial plan.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY


Chiou, C.T., L.J. Peters, and V.H. Freed, "A Physical Concept of Soil-Water
Equilibria For Nonionic Organic Compounds", Science 206, 1979.

Kenaga, E.    E., and C.A.I.  Goring, "Relationship Between Water Solubility,
Soil-Sorption, Octanol-Water Partitioning, and Bioconcentration of Chemicals
in Biota", ASTM Third Aquatic Toxicology Symposium New Orleans, LA, 1978.

Karickhoff, W., D. S. Brown, and T. A.      Scott.        Water Res., _13_, 241, 1979.

Lyman, W. J., W. F. Reehl, and D. H. Rosenblatt.         Handbook of                 Chemical
Property Estimation Methods, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1982.

Mutch,Jr., R. D. , "Subsurface Cutoff Walls: Design Considerations in the
Application of Ground-Water Recovery Programs", Proceedings of International
Water Conference oj_ ESWP, 44th Annual Meeting,        October 24-26, 1983,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Mutch, Jr., R. D., G. DLPippo and J. Hearty, "Environmental Cleanup of the
Monroe Township Landfill", Proceedings of the ASCE National Conference on
Environmental Engineering, Atlanta, Georgia, July 1.'-.'31.

Water   Related   Environmental Fate        of      129      Pr i o r i t y   Pollutants,USEPA
440/4-79-029a, b., December 1979.

FMC Aquifer Remediation Systems, Site       Assessment Report for the              Goose Farms
Hazardous Waste Site, June 27, 1985.

Wehran Engineering, Supplemental Investigation of the Goose Farm Site, May
1985

Wehran Engineering, Analytical Results,          Groundwater Monitoring          Wells, Goose
Farm Site,, March 1985

Wehran Engineering -Analytical Results.      Soil     Samples - Volume 1,           Goose Farm
Site, March 1985                                                                          . .

Wehran Engineering    Analytical Results,    Soil Samples -            Volume 2,    Goose Farm
Site, March 1985

Wehran Engineering    Analytical Results,    Soil Samples -            Volume 3,    Goose Farm
Site, March 1985

 Wehran Engineering   Analytical Results,    Soil Samples -            Volume 4,    Goose Farm
-Site, March 1985.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               §tate of Hctu Hersey
                      DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                  DIVISION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT
                            32 E. Hanover St., CN 028,Trenton, N.J. 08625
DR. MARWAN M. SADAT, P.E.                                                           LINO F. PEREIRA, P.E.
        DIRECTOR                                                                      DEPUTY DIRECTOR



 Edward C. Laird, Esq.
 Archer & Greiner
 One Centennial Square
 P.O.. Box 3000
 Haddonfield, NJ 08033-0968

                                           RE:    Morton Thiokol, Inc.
                                                  Goose Farm RI/FS

 Dear Mr. Laird:

 This will acknowledge receipt of your letter of August 26, 1985 to Dr. Berkowitz
 and the comments prepared by Aware, Inc. relating to the Goose Farm RI/FS.   The
 Department, along with USEPA Region II has developed a Draft Record of Decision
 (ROD) which outlines the actions to be taken at Goose Farm.        The comments
 submitted by Morton Thiokol and the public were taken into consideration in the
 formulation of the ROD.

 Please be. advised that Morton Thiokol's comments were considered despite the fact
 that they were dated and submitted to the Department after the expiration of the
 30 day public comment period.

 To start, I would like to point out that Morton Thiokol appears to have, at least
 in part, misunderstood the purpose of the State's RI/FS. The RI/FS was intended
 to generally determine the condition of the Goose Farm Site and suggest
 alternatives for remedial action.   Following the selection of an alternative, a
 detailed design will be developed in order to define the specifics of the chosen
 alternative. Additional data will be gathered during the design phase as needed.
 Your comments raise some issues that are to be addressed during the design phase.

 Response to Specific Comments on the RI:

  1.    While the full spatial extent of the plume has not been determined, it is
        wholly unnecessary to make such a determination in order to find that plume
        management is required. Additional data concerning the spatial extent of
        the plume, will be developed as needed during the design phase.      In any
        event, such 'additional data would not alter our selection of the chosen
        remedial action alternative.

 2.     Although the total volume of ground water within the plume has not been
        determined, such a determination is not required at this juncture and would
        not affect the Department's selection of a remedial action alternative.   We
        intend to gather a]1 additional necessary data to make such estimates during
        the design phase.



                              A'cu- ./<'/-.vcr Is .-In Equal Opportunity Employer

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Edward C. Laird                         -2-



3.    We "disagree that no effort was made to establish the volume of groundwater
      flow within the plume. In fact, all data required for such a determination
      was included within the RI/FS and was considered.

4.     Subsequent to the issuance of the Draft RI/FS, a Supplement to Volume II,
       Appendix A was provided to the Department by its consultant.            This
       supplemental information provided an additional analysis of the stratigraphy
       of the site and its impact upon hydrogeologic conditions.    I have enclosed
       this new information with this letter. This information in no way affected
     - our choice of the remedial action alternative.

5.    While it is true that contaminant partitioning between ground water and the
      aquifer skeleton can occur, more than sufficient data exists to establish
      beyond question that true soil contamination and ground water contamination
      exist.

6.    While it is true that retardation factors were not estimated in the RI/FS,
      we do not believe that such estimates are necessary and would certainly not
      alter the Department's selection of a remedial action alternative.       We
      intend to determine actual retardation factors by treatability studies
      during the design phase.

7.    Subsequent to the issuance of the Draft RI/FS, a Supplement to Volume II -
      Appendix A was provided to the State by its consultant.     This supplement
      provided additional analysis based in part upon work done by Wehran
      Engineering, including the Wehran geologic and hydrogeologic data from soil
      borings (see attached Supplement).

8.    We disagree that the priority pollutant list is an adequate analytical base
      for the site. Due to the nature, of Thiokol's operation, priority pollutants
      were not expected to be the only types of contaminants found at the Goose
      Farm site, and indeed, numerous non-priority pollutant organics not
      associated with the natural environment were found.
             6 'l


9.    We disagree with your assertion that a computer model is in any way
      necessary in the selection of a remedial action alternative.  We believe
      that more than enough data exists to properly support our choice of the
      selected alternative.

Specific Comments on the FS:

We disagree that it is necessary to quantitatively define remedial objectives at
this time. Ground water quality will be continuously monitored and compared to
then existing ground water standards.     In the absence of such standards the
Department will employ Ames testing and other bioassay techniques to assess risk
and determine whether adequate remediation has been accomplished.   We agree that
in light of the absence of concrete quantitative objectives, our estimate of an
18 month aquifer remediation process could vary. However, we must point out that
there are numerous factors which will influence the amount of time required to
achieve the desired remediation.    Many of these factors cannot be adequately
defined prior to additional treatability testing, pump tests and other studies to
be performed during the design phase.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Edward C. Laird                       -3-



In conclusion, we appreciate Morton Thiokol's comments, and encourage your
continued participation in striving to achieve a solution to the problems at
Goose Farm. Although many of the issues raised are more appropriately addressed
during the design phase, we expect to continue our dialogue with you at that
time.   Morton Thiokol's proposed alternatives are not wholly inconsistent with
the chosen alternative and we may further consider your proposals upon the
completion of additional studies at the site.

We invite you to contact us regarding the possibility      of your performing   the
remedial work as finally designed.

                                       Very truly yours,



                                    s Dr/ Marwan M.
                                   / Director     / J/
                                      t
RMT:kep
