LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Report: Declaration Statement, Record of Decision, Ellis Property, Evesham and Medford Townships, Burlington County, New Jersey, prepared by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 2, September 30, 1992.
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/99984
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: e231d144c8b603edc47250444ff3ff4079b9b8aa3c738610626b64d006f54238
Source PDF pages: 97
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    *99984*
                      DECLARATION STATEMENT               99984

                         RECORD OF DECISION
                          ELLIS PROPERTY

SITE NAME AND LOCATION

Ellis Property
Evesham and Medford Townships, Burlington County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Ellis Property Site (the Site), which was chosen in
accordance with the requirements of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980,
as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of
1986, and to the extent practicable, the National Oil and
Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan. This decision
document explains the factual and legal basis for selecting the
remedy for the Site.
The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
concurs with the selected remedy. The information supporting
this remedial action decision is contained in the administrative
record for the Site.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Site, if not addressed by implementing the response action
selected in this Record of Decision, may present an imminent and
substantial threat to public health/-welfare, or the environment.

DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY

This is the first and only planned operable unit for the Ellis
Property site. The selected remedy addresses the remediation of
contaminated soil on the Site and ground water in the underlying
aquifer.
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
         Excavation of contaminated soil and treatment/disposal
         at an approved off-site facility;
         Extraction of contaminated ground water from the
         shallow aquifer underlying the Site;




                                                            R2-0003212

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                -2-

         Treatment of contaminated ground water in a facility to
         be constructed on the Site;
         Disposal of the treated ground water by reinjection;
         and
     •   Implementation of an environmental monitoring program
         to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, complies with Federal and State requirements that
are legally applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remedial action, and is cost-effective. The selected remedy
utilizes permanent solutions and alternative treatment (or
resource recovery) technologies to the maximum extent
practicable, and it satisfies the statutory preference for
remedies that employ treatment that reduce toxicity, mobility or
volume as their principal element.
Because the selected remedy will not result in hazardous
substances remaining on the Site above health-based levels, a
five-year review pursuant to Section 121(c) of the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, as
amended, is not required. However, pursuant to Office of Solid
'Waste and Emergency Response Directive 9355.7-02, a review will
be conducted at least every five years after initiation of the
selected remedial action because cleanup levels will require five
or more years to attain. The purpose of the reviews is to ensure
that the remedy continues to provide adequate protection of human
health and the environment.




            Sidamon-Eristoft/               Dat
Regional Administrator XL/

                      ^—




                                                          R2-0003213

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      DECISION SUMMARY
                     RECORD OF DECISION




                       Ellis Property
Evesham and Medford Townships, Burlington County, New Jersey




       United States Environmental Protection Agency
                         Region II
                     New York, New York




                                                       R2-0003214

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE OF CONTENTS




SITE NAME, LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION                              1
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES                          1
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                                5
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                                  6

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                               •            8
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES                            14
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES .               19

SELECTED REMEDY . . .                                           26

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                                        27
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES                            31



APPENDICES
APPENDIX I.    FIGURES
APPENDIX II.   TABLES




                                                         R2-0003215

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME. LOCATION AND DESCRIPTION

 The Ellis Property Site (the Site) is located in Burlington
 County, east of Sharp Road and about 2,000 feet north of
 Evesboro-Medford Road in Evesham Township, New Jersey (Figure 1).
'The site is surrounded by farmland and wooded lots, and is less
 than one mile from the nearest residential area. The property
 was once used as a dairy farm and is designated as Block 14, Lot
 4 on the Evesham Township tax map. It comprises approximately 36
 acres of land; 24 acres are located in Evesham Township and the
 remainder in Medford Township. Currently, there are no buildings
 on site. At the present time, the Site is overgrown with grasses
 and weeds.
Land in the area immediately surrounding the Site is primarily
agricultural. Cultivated fields bound the Site to the north and
south. Another field is found to the west, across Sharp Road.
Approximately 60 residences were identified within one mile of
the Site. This may be a low estimate because there are new
housing developments in the area, especially near Coxs Corner.
To the east of the Site lies a wetland area, classified by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) as a palustrine ecological
system with scrub/shrub and emergent plant classes. Although the
wetlands receive surface water runoff from the Site, inundation
and saturation of the wetland area is probably caused by
discharge from the shallow ground-water table. Consequently,
periodic drying of the wetlands occurs when the elevation of the
ground-water table is reduced. The nearest free-flowing surface
water is Sharps Run, approximately one-quarter mile north of the
Site. Drainage from the wetlands eventually leads to Sharps Run.
Sharps Run flows east through Medford Township to the south-
western branch of Rancocas Creek, approximately six miles east of
the Site. The northeastern corner of the Site, which includes
part of the wetlands, lies in the 100-year floodplain.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES

In 1968, Irving and Reba Ellis purchased the property and used
part of it as a drum storage and reconditioning (drum cleaning)
operation. Approximately four acres of the 36-acre tract were
involved with this operation. The reconditioning operation
ceased in 1978, after a fire damaged some of the buildings.
However, storage of drums at the Site continued into the 1980s.

Initial Activities
In September 1980, the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) investigated the Site following an
anonymous complaint. The Site was reported to have been used as




                                                          R2-0003216

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

a drum recycling operation, where used drums and containers were
brought, rinsed or cleaned, and then resold. The Site consisted
of a two-story building, housing several washing tanks with
troughs, three sheds, a storage area, and a boiler (Figure 2).
The building contained 50 to 75 drums, many of which Were full of
unknown liquids. The three sheds also contained various-sized
drums and chemical containers, many of which contained unknown
substances. The area near the sheds was devoid of plant growth.
About one hundred 55-gallon plastic drums were located adjacent
to the sheds. One of these drums contained a dark green liquid
with a pH of 1. The ground surrounding these drums was stained
red and green. A soil sample taken from a depth of two feet had
a pH of 2 and a bright green color. A natural swale and several
man-made ditches led into a wetland, located approximately 700
feet east of Sharp Road. The troughs inside the larger building
drained into one of these ditches. Sediments and surface water
runoff entered the wetlands from the drainage ways (Figure 3).
Hundreds of drums and containers were spread haphazardly around
the Site. Some of these drums were later found to contain oils,
grease, acids, and various organic compounds. There was evidence
of spills from past operations at the Site. Several drums were
corroded, with the contents leaking onto the ground. A soil
sample taken near a leaking drum was found to contain oil and
grease. Subsequent inspections by the NJDEPE indicated that
chemical spills onto the ground had occurred in several areas.
Soil sampling and analysis by the NJDEPE revealed the presence of
hydrochloric acid, heavy metals, and grease. Polychlorinated
foiphenyls (PCBs) were detected in concentrations up to 23.1 parts
per million (ppm).
In April 1981, NJDEPE issued a Directive Letter to Mr. Ellis,
instructing him to remove and dispose of the drums and
contaminated soil from the Site. NJDEPE made numerous attempts
to persuade Mr. Ellis to accept responsibility for the
contamination on his property. In September 1982, the Evesham
Municipal Utilities Authority filed a civil action in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Burlington County
(Docket No. L 24308-82) against Irving and Reba Ellis for the
illegal storage of drums containing hazardous substances. In
December 1982, NJDEPE filed a Civil Action Complaint in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division, Burlington
County (Docket No. C 1679-82) due to Mr. Ellis's failure to
comply with the Directive Letter and the continued use of the
Site for the storage of drums. In January 1983, the Burlington
County Health Department and the NJDEPE conducted a survey of
potable wells within an approximate 1-mile radius of the site to
determine if they were impacted by site contamination. The
survey found that ten potable wells were completed in the
Wenonah-Mount Laurel Aquifer, and that the Site had not impacted
potable water supplies in the area. On August 30, 1983, an order
was entered transferring the matter of NJDEPE v. Irving Ellis to




                                                          R2-0003217

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the Law Division and consolidating it with the matter of Evesham
Municipal Utilities Authority v. Irving Ellis and Reba P. Ellis.
On February 10, 1983, an Order for Partial Summary Judgment was
entered in the Superior Court against Irving-Ellis in the
consolidated cases in the amount of $49,084.98. The court also
ordered Mr. Ellis'to pay $53,000 in penalties. On June 6, 1984,
in a Judgment Consent, the court ordered Mr. Ellis to pay the
Evesham Municipal Authority $4,000 and forbade him to store,
discharge, or spill hazardous substances at the Site.
The Site was included on the National Priorities List on
September 1, 1983. On October 19, 1984, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) issued a General Notice Letter to
Mr. Irving Ellis, informing him of his potential liability under
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA), as amended by the Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), with respect
to the contamination at the Site. In May 1989, EPA initiated a
search for other potentially responsible parties.

Removal Actions
In March 1983, utilizing the New Jersey Spill Compensation Fund,
NJDEPE removed approximately one hundred drums containing acids
and disposed of them at an approved off-site facility.
Containerized solids and flammable liquids were also removed and
disposed of, along with contaminated soil and sludge. In the
acid spill area, the highly acidic surface soils were removed,
and lime was tilled into the soil to neutralize the acid. Soils
in the vicinity of the PCB disposal area were removed to a depth
of approximately two feet and disposed at an approved off-site
facility. The large building and sheds were demolished at that
time because they were structurally unsafe. Private wells were
also sampled and showed no contamination.
On February 22, 1989, NJDEPE requested that EPA conduct a drum
removal action at the Site. On February 28, 1989, EPA conducted
a preliminary assessment of the Site. An Emergency Response
Cleanup Services (ERCS) contractor began site preparation, waste
sampling, and stabilization on May 15, 1989. On October 23,
1989, the ERCS contractor was re-mobilized to segregate, stage,
mark, and label a total of 218 drums containing hazardous waste
material for off-site disposal. In addition, approximately 400
empty drums were crushed for off-site disposal. Removal of the
drums was completed on April 17, 1990.




                                                         R2-0003218

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study
In a letter, dated October 19, 1984, EPA offered Mr. Irving Ellis
the opportunity to undertake, or finance, a Remedial Investiga-
tion and Feasibility Study (RI/FS) at the Site. Mr. Ellis
declined the offer. Consequently, the RI/FS was initiated by the
NJDEPE through a Cooperative Agreement with EPA. In November
1985, Roy F. Weston, Inc. (WESTON*) was selected to perform a
remedial investigation to characterize the geology and hydrology
at the Site, and to identify the contaminants in the ground
water, surface water, soils, and sediments.
Eighteen monitoring wells were installed at the Site. Eight
wells were located in the shallow aquifer, three in the
intermediate aquifer, and seven in the deep aquifer. Soil
samples were taken at depths from 0 to 72 inches below ground
surface. Surface water and sediments were collected from the
drainage ways and the wetlands.
The RI identified contaminants in the ground water, surface
water, soils, and sediments. The results of the RI are discussed
later, under "Nature and Extent of Contamination." After
characterizing the contamination at the Site, WESTON performed a
feasibility study to identify and screen remedial technologies to
address the potential risks to the public and the environment
posed by the Site. The FS was based on information obtained
during the RI and was completed in April 1992.
The National Historic Preservation Act requires federal agencies
to examine the potential impacts of their actions to these
places. As part of the RI/FS activities, WESTON conducted a
Stage IA Cultural Resources Survey to identify whether any
cultural resources on, or eligible for inclusion on, the National
Register of Historic Places are located on, or near, the Site.
The survey concluded that relatively undisturbed areas within 300
feet of the wetlands have a high potential for the presence of
prehistoric archaeologic resources; areas between 300 and 1,000
feet from the wetlands have a moderate potential for prehistoric
archaeologic resources.
A field investigation was conducted on March 28, 1992 to
delineate jurisdictional wetlands on site. This investigation
was documented in the Wetland Delineation Report; Ellis Property
Superfund Site, prepared by the NJDEPE. The field investigation
defined the boundary of the wetlands adjacent to or on the Site
itself.
A search of the National Heritage database was conducted by
WESTON to identify endangered/threatened species or critical
habitat that may be impacted. The search revealed that
observations of eight rare vertebrate species within an
approximate 3-mile radius of the Site were recorded. Of the




                                                         R2-0003219

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

eight species observed, three have been classified as endangered
by the State of New Jersey; five are classified as threatened by
the State of New Jersey. These species are listed in Table 1A.
Table IB lists other endangered/threatened species occurring in
Burlington County. Although no sightings of these species have
been recorded in the Immediate vicinity of the Site, they may
potentially use the Site as habitat.
The USFWS was contacted by EPA regarding the potential existence
of federally-listed and proposed endangered and threatened
species in the vicinity of the Site. The USFWS indicated that
occurrence of the threatened Helonius bullata (swamp pink) is
documented for the Rancocas Creek and several of its tributaries.
However, the presence of the swamp pink has not been recorded for
Sharps Run or the wetland.

HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
The RI report, FS report, and the Proposed Plan for the Site were
released to the public for comment on May 1, 1992. These
documents were made available to the public in the administrative
record file at the Evesham Township Municipal Building and the
information repositories at the NJDEPE and EPA Docket Room in
Region II, New York. The notice of availability for the above-
referenced documents was published in the Burlington County Times
on May 1, 1992. The public comment period on these documents was
scheduled from May 1, 1992 to May 30, 1992, and subsequently
extended to June 15, 1992 upon request from the public.
On May 13, 1992, NJDEPE conducted a public meeting at the Evesham
Township Municipal Building to inform local officials and
interested citizens about the Superfund process, to discuss
proposed remedial activities at the Site, and to respond to
questions from area residents and other interested parties.
Responses to the comments received at the public meeting, as well
as written comments received during the public comment period,
are included in the Responsiveness Summary.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION
This response action addresses remediation of the contaminated
media at the Ellis Property Site. It includes remedial
alternatives to address contaminated soil and ground water, and
focuses on the protection of human health and the environment.
No other operable units are planned for the future.




                                                         R2-0003220

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS

Site Geology and Hydrology
The Ellis Property is situated in the central portion of the
Atlantic Coastal Plain, which extends from the fall line located
west of the Delaware River to the Atlantic Ocean. The Coastal
Plain regionally slopes gently to the southeast. The topography
is generally flat in the area. The Site consists of silty sand
with clay lenses, and is underlain by the Hornerstown Sand
(shallow aquifer), which is comprised of silty sand and clay
lenses. Underlying the shallow aquifer is the Navesink Sand,
which is interbedded with glauconitic clay and sand. These two
formations, which function as a confining layer, are just above
the Wenonah-Mount Laurel Sand, a major source of potable water
for domestic wells in the vicinity of the Ellis Property Site.
The Magothy-Raritan aquifers, which underlie the Wenonah-Mount
Laurel Sand, are confined by clay formations which separate them
from less productive aquifers. The Magothy-Raritan aquifers are
a significant source of municipal water supply in the vicinity of
•the Site.
Based on available information, the water quality in the deeper
aquifers do not appear to be impacted at present by the
contaminants in the shallow aquifer. A Burlington County Health
iDepartment survey found no private wells near the Site located in
the shallow aquifer, although there are no restrictions on well
locations to prevent its use as a domestic water supply. The
shallow aquifer is not currently used as a source of public water
supply because of its low productivity; however, it is a
potential source of recharge for the underlying aquifers at the
Site. Ground water beneath the Site is located in the New Jersey
Coastal Plain Sole Source Aquifer, and is therefore, classified
•AS "Class II potable water" (i.e., drinking water).
.Shallow ground-water flow at the Site is to the east or east-
northeast. Hydraulic conductivity values calculated for the
{shallow aquifer ranged from 0.41 to 1.63 feet per day.
Sharps Run is a tributary of the south branch of the Rancbcas
Creek. The NJDEPE has classified the south branch of the
Rancocas Creek, from Vincentown to the Delaware River, and its
tributaries as FW2-NT, non-trout producing general surface
waters.

Nature and Extent of contamination
The scope of the RI at the Ellis Property Site included
investigations in all media that may be contaminated. The
predominant contaminants in the soil, ground water, surface
water, and sediments, and their respective range of




                                                          R2-0003221

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

concentrations are summarized in Table 2. Surface water,
sediments, and air quality were investigated and determined not
to be contaminant pathways of concern. Contaminated soil and
ground water represent the primary contaminant exposure pathways
at this Site.
The predominant soil contaminants and the respective range of
concentrations, in parts per million (ppm), detected at the Site
include: arsenic.(1.4-31.8 ppm), lead (2.2-3,790 ppm), PCBs
(0.31-23.1), and bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, a base
neutral/acid extractable (BNA) compound,    (0.045-2.3 ppm).
Approximately3 690 cubic yards (yd3)3 of soil are contaminated with
metals, 60 yd with PCBs, and 10 yd with BNA compounds. The
contamination appears to be the result of chemical spillage or
leakage onto the ground. Migration of soil contaminants is
likely due to surface s'oil erosion and surface water runoff,
predominantly towards the east.
Ground-water contamination appears to be limited to the shallow
aquifer. The predominant contaminants and the respective range
of concentrations, in parts per billion (ppb), detected at the
Site are: antimony (19-2,123 ppb), arsenic (15.8-91 ppb),
beryllium (1.55-10.2 ppb), 1,2-dichloroethene (1,2-DCE) (5-520
ppb), methylene chloride (6-52 ppb), nickel (10.9-147 ppb),
tetrachloroethene (PCE) (760-33,000 ppb), trichloroethene (TCE)
(11-24,000 ppb), 1,1,2-trichloroethane (3-14 ppb), total chromium
(12-404 ppb), and lead (4.3-71 ppb).
The concentrations of antimony, arsenic, beryllium, chromium,
1,2-DCE, methylene chloride, nickel, 1,1,2-trichloroethane, TCE,
and PCE exceed the drinking water Maximum Contaminant Levels
(MCLs). Lead exceeds the National Primary Drinking Water action
level. A comparison of the range of concentrations detected and
MCLs is shown in Table 3. Ground-water contamination also
appears to be the result of chemical spillage or discharge from
drum washing operations or leakage from stored drums. There were
no underground storage tanks at the Site.
TCE and PCE are nonpolar, halogenated compounds with low
solubilities in water. These compounds are more dense than
water. When introduced as a free product, they tend to sink and
form dense nonaqueous phase liquids (DNAPLs), with an
indeterminate portion going into solution. As shown in
Table 3-25 of the RI report, the highest concentration of TCE
(i.e., 24,000 ppb) was found in monitoring well MW-2. This
concentration is above the New Jersey drinking water MCL of
1 ppb. Lower TCE concentrations were observed in wells MW-5,
MW-6, and MW-7, located east and southeast of MW-2. All of these
wells were installed in the shallow aquifer. The clay/silt
layer, approximately 17 to 25 feet below ground surface, is
believed to act as a barrier to vertical TCE migration, since no
contamination has been found in the intermediate and deep




                                                           R2-0003222

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               8

monitoring wells. Boring logs indicate that this clay/silt layer
appears to slope in a southeasterly direction across the Site.
Therefore, TCE would be expected to migrate from well MW-2 toward
wells MW-6 and MW-7, if the clay layer is continuous. The
evidence seems to suggest the existence of a TCE source in the
vicinity of the lime-tilled area. The presence of PCE at 15,000
ppb and 33,000 ppb at MW-7 and its absence at other monitoring
wells indicates the potential existence of another suspected
source of DNAPLs. However, soil and ground-water sampling during
the RI did not reveal the existence of DNAPL sources. Additional
studies would be performed, and monitoring wells would be
installed, during the design phase, so that the contamination
plume and the possible existence of a DNAPL source can be
examined more fully.

SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS

WESTON conducted a baseline risk assessment to evaluate the
potential risks to human health and the environment associated
with the Site. The Baseline Risk Assessment focused on
contaminants in the ground water, surface water, soil, and
sediments that are likely to pose significant risks to human
health and the environment. The Baseline Risk Assessment report
consists of a Human Risk Assessment and an Ecological Risk
Assessment.

Hunan Risk Assessment
The Human Risk Assessment portion of the Baseline Risk Assessment
report identified several exposure pathways by which the public
may be exposed to contaminant releases at the Site under current
and future land-use conditions. Surface water, soil, and
sediment exposures were assessed under a potential present land-
use scenario. Ground-water exposure was not evaluated because
there are no residents on site, and based on available
information, the shallow ground water is not used as a source of
drinking water by residents within a 1-mile radius. Ground
water, surface water, soil, and sediment exposures were assessed
under a future land-use scenario. Reasonable maximum exposure
scenarios were used in assessing both the present and potential
future risks.
Currently, the Site is not securely fenced and is accessible by
foot. Under current land-use conditions, trespassers represent
the probable population exposed to site contamination. The most
likely trespasser is an adult hunter/recreational user.
Therefore, an adult trespasser was evaluated under the current
scenario. The trespasser was assumed to live off site and, on
the average, trespass on the Site one day/week, 52 weeks/year.
This was an estimate, considering hunting season durations, as




                                                         R2-0003223

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

well as other potential recreational activities at the Site by a
trespasser, which may be higher during warmer months and lower
during the colder months. The adult trespasser was considered to
be on site for three hours per exposure event and exposed to on-
site surface soils, surface water, and sediments. The exposure
duration was considered to be 30 years.
Unrestricted future land-use of the Site was assumed. Therefore,
a future residential land-use scenario was evaluated. Two age
groups were evaluated for the future resident—a child aged 1-6
years and an adult. The future resident was assumed to be on
site on a daily basis, year-round. Exposure to surface soils was
assumed to occur during outdoor activities such as gardening,
yard work, and recreational activities, and indirectly through
ingestion of home-grown vegetables. A year-round exposure to
soils of 350 days/year was assumed. In addition, contact with
surface water arid sediments in the wetlands was assumed to occur
during recreational activities, such as wading. Due to the
shallow depth of these surface waters, recreational activities
were assumed to be limited.
The exposure pathways of concern -for current land-use include:.
(1) incidental ingestion of, and dermal contact with, chemicals
in the soil and sediments, (2) inhalation of wind-blown dust, and
(3) dermal contact with surface water. The potential exposure
pathways of concern for future land-use include those for current
land-use as well as the following: (1) ingestion of chemicals in
ground water, (2) dermal contact with chemicals in ground water,
(3) inhalation of volatile organic chemicals in ground water
during showering or bathing, and (4) consumption of home-grown
fruits and vegetables. For both the current and future land-use
scenarios, a reasonable maximum exposure was evaluated.
Under current EPA guidelines, the likelihood of carcinogenic
(cancer-causing) and noncarcinogenic effects due to exposure to
site chemicals are considered separately. It was assumed that
the toxic effects of the site-related chemicals would be
additive. Thus, carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic risks
associated with exposures to individual compounds of concern were
summed to indicate the potential risks associated with mixtures
of potential carcinogens and noncarcinogens, respectively.
Noncarcinogenic risks were assessed using a hazard index (HI),
based on a comparison of expected contaminant intakes and safe
levels of intake (Reference Doses). Reference doses (RfDs) have
been developed by EPA for indicating the potential for adverse
health effects. RfDs, which are expressed in units of milligrams
per kilogram per day (mg/kg-day), are estimates of daily exposure
levels for humans which are thought to be safe over a lifetime
(including sensitive individuals). Estimated intakes of
chemicals from environmental media (e.g., the amount of a
chemical ingested from contaminated drinking water) are compared




                                                         R2-0003224

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               10
to the RfD to derive the hazard quotient for the contaminant in
the particular medium. The HI is obtained by adding the hazard
quotients for all compounds across all media that impact a
particular receptor population.
An HI greater than 1.0 indicates that the potential exists for
noncarcinogenic adverse health effects to occur as a result of
site-related exposures. The HI provides a useful reference point
for gauging the potential significance of multiple contaminant
exposures within a single medium or across media.
Potential carcinogenic risks were evaluated using the cancer
slope factors developed by EPA for the contaminants of concern.
Cancer slope factors (SFs) have been developed by EPA's
Carcinogenic Risk Assessment Verification Endeavor for estimating
excess lifetime cancer risks associated with exposure to
potentially carcinogenic chemicals. SFs, which are expressed in
units of (mg/kg-day)'1, are multiplied by the estimated intake of
a potential carcinogen, in mg/kg-day, to generate an upper-bound
estimate of the excess lifetime cancer risk associated with
exposure to the compound at that intake level. The term "upper
.bound" reflects the conservative estimate of the risks calculated
from the SF. Use of this approach makes the underestimation of
the risk highly unlikely.
For known or suspected carcinogens, risk is represented in terms
of an individual's likelihood of developing cancer as a result of
exposure to a carcinogenic chemical present in the exposure
media. For example, a cancer risk level of 1 x 10"3 indicates
that an individual has a one in a thousand chance of developing
cancer during their lifetime. Or, such a risk may be interpreted
as representing one additional case of cancer in an exposed
population of one thousand people. EPA considers excess upper-
bound individual lifetime cancer risks of 1 x 10"* to 1 x 10* to
be acceptable. This level represents that an individual has not
greater than a one in ten thousand to a one in a million
increased chance of developing cancer as a result of a site-
related exposure to a carcinogen over a 70-year lifetime under
specific exposure conditions at the Site. Generally, if the
lifetime excess cancer risk exceeds 1 x 10"*, the contamination is
of sufficient concern to consider a remedial action. 6 If the
excess cancer risk falls between 1 x 10~* and 1 x 10* , the need
for a remedial action is evaluated on a site-specific basis.
Finally, where the calculated lifetime excess cancer risk is
below 1 x 10*, no remedial action is generally required.
The results of the Baseline Risk Assessment indicate that under
the current land-use scenario, noncarcinogenic health effects to
an adult trespasser are not likely, based on the potential
exposure pathways and routes evaluated. The HI for this scenario
was less than 1.0. Similarly, the estimated carcinogenic risk
was found be within EPA's acceptable cancer risk range.




                                                          R2-0003225

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                11
Therefore, carcinogenic and noncarcinogenic health effects from
exposure to soils, surface water, and sediments at the Site are
not likely, under current land-use conditions.
Under the future residential land-use scenario, carcinogenic and
noncarcinogenic health effects are likely, based on the potential
exposure pathways and routes evaluated for a future resident.
The carcinogenic risk was calculated to be 1.26 x 10'2 (1.26 in a
hundred), and was attributable to arsenic, a known human
carcinogen, and PCE and TCE, which are probable human
carcinogens. The exposure pathways with the greatest
carcinogenic potential risk for the future resident are ingestion
of home-grown produce, ingestion of chemicals in the ground
water, and non-ingestion uses of ground water (i.e., bathing).
The His for the future child and adult resident were calculated
to be 362 and 127, respectively. The exposure pathways with the
greatest potential noncarcinogenic risk for the future child
resident (the most sensitive receptor) are ingestion of home-
grown produce, incidental ingestion of soil, dermal contact with
ssoil, inhalation of windblown dust, ingestion of chemicals in the
ground \<fcter, and non-ingestion uses of ground water- (i.e.,
bathing)1. Risk was attributable to several compounds, including
PCBs, chromium, and bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.
There are no restrictions which prohibit the use of the shallow
aquifer as a source of potable water supply. Consequently, in
the worst case scenario, the risk assessment assumed that future
residents might use the shallow aquifer as an untreated source of
potable water.
Health risks associated with exposure to surface water and
sediments at the Site were evaluated for both the current and
future land-use scenarios. The pathways analyzed include
incidental ingestion of sediment in the wetlands and drainage
ways, and dermal contact with sediments and surface water in the
wetlands and drainage ways. In both the current and future land-
use scenarios, the carcinogenic health risk  associated with these
pathways was found to range from 1 x 10'7 to 1 x4 10'10, which does
not exceed the acceptable risk range of 1 x 10" to 1 x 10*.
Similarly, noncarcinogenic His for both scenarios were found to
be substantially less than 1.0. Therefore, these pathways do not
pose significant health concerns.

Ecological Risk Assessment
The Ecological Risk Assessment (ERA) evaluated potential impacts
to the environment associated with the contaminants at the Site.
The assessment focused on the potential impacts of contaminants
of concern found in the soil, surface water, and sediments, to
terrestrial and aquatic flora and fauna that inhabit, or are
potential inhabitants, of the Site. The contaminants of concern




                                                           R2-0003226

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               12

included pesticides, PCBs, lead, cadmium, chromium, and organic
compounds. The ecological receptors that were considered are:
white-tailed deer, woodcock, red-tailed hawk, aquatic organisms,
and terrestrial plants.
The ERA indicated that contaminated soil posed a risk to white-
tailed deer and woodcock. The greatest risk to the white-tailed
deer was attributed to browse ingestion. The ingestion of soil
and earthworms posed the greatest risk to the woodcock.
The ERA indicated that the contaminated surface water and
sediments in the drainage ways do not pose an unacceptable risk
to aquatic life. The contaminated surface water and sediments in
the wetlands posed a marginal, but not unacceptable, risk to
aquatic life. The ERA showed that the contaminants at the Site
posed no unacceptable risks to the red-tailed hawk and
terrestrial plants.
Sediment contamination in the wetlands appears to be the result
of surface soil erosion from the Site. The remediation of soil
contamination at the Site would reduce further migration of soil
contaminants into the wetlands by eliminating the soil erosion
pathway. Remediating the soil contaminants would also reduce the
potential for soil contaminants to infiltrate the ground water
and discharge into the wetlands, through the high water table.

Uncertainties In Risk Assessment
The risk assessment process involves numerous conservative
assumptions, all of which contributed to uncertainty in the risk
evaluation. In general, sources of uncertainties associated with
the risk assessment include: environmental sampling and analysis,
exposure assessment, and toxicity assessment.
Uncertainties in environmental sampling arise in part from the^
potentially uneven distribution of chemicals in the media
sampled.
Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates
of how often an individual would actually come in contact with
the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which such
exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the
concentrations of the chemicals of concern at the point of
exposure.
Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both
from animals to humans and from high to low doses of exposure, as
well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. These uncertainties are addressed by
making conservative assumptions concerning risk and exposure
parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the risk




                                                         R2-0003227

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               13
assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to
populations near the Site, and is highly unlikely to under-
estimate actual risks related to the Site.

Conclusion
Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and
EPA determined that the contaminated soil and ground water at the
Site pose an unacceptable risk to human health. In addition,
contaminated soil poses an unacceptable risk to the environment.
The contaminants in the surface water and sediments in the
drainage ways do not pose an unacceptable risk to human health or
the environment. The ERA indicated that the surface water and
sediments in the wetlands pose a marginal, but not unacceptable,
risk to aquatic life. NJDEPE and EPA determined that the
contaminants in the surface water and sediments in the wetlands
do not pose an unacceptable risk to the environment for the
following reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure to
contaminants in the surface water and sediments is low,
considering that there is seldom any standing surface water in
the wetlands. The surface water samples that were collected are
not believed to be representative of actual surface water. There
was little or no surface water in the wetlands during the RI
sampling events. Surface water was created by depressing a
beaker, or digging a hole, into the surface of the wetlands and
allowing water to fill the depression or hole. Samples were
taken with a bailer, which stirred up the sediments. Because
lead adheres to sediment particles, the presence of sediments in
the water samples resulted in artificially high concentrations of
lead. The calculated risks associated with the contaminated
sediments in the wetlands are not believed to be representative
of actual risks.- The risks associated with the sediments were
formulated using overly conservative assumptions based on
toxicity values that are more applicable to saltwater systems.
However, these toxicity values are routinely used as a screening
mechanism and are not used to establish cleanup levels.
Exceedance of these toxicity values does not necessarily indicate
that an ecological risk exists at the Site.
A remedial action to address the wetlands is not necessary since
NJDEPE and EPA that the contaminants in the surface water and
sediments of the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to
human health or the environment.
Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
Site, if not addressed by the selected alternative or one of the
other remedial measures considered, may present an imminent and
substantial endangerment to the public health, welfare, and the
environment through the continued migration of contaminants from
the Site.




                                                         R2-0003228

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 14


Remedial Action Objectives
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment. These objectives are based on
available information and standards, such as applicable or
relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) and risk-based
levels established in the Baseline Risk Assessment.
Because the Baseline Risk Assessment established that the soil
and ground water at the Site poses an unacceptable, risk to human
health and the environment; the following remedial action
objectives were established:

Soil
o      Prevent contact with contaminated soil, which represents an
       unacceptable risk, or reduce contaminant concentrations in
       the soil below risk-based levels.
o      Prevent further migration of soil contaminants into the
       ground water.
o      Prevent migration of contaminated soils off site.

Ground Water
o      Prevent the migration of contaminated ground water off site.
o      Prevent the migration of contaminated ground water into the
       underlying aquifers.
o      Return the aquifer to its designated use as a source of
       drinking water by reducing contaminant concentrations in the
       shallow ground water to drinking water quality.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES
CERCLA requires that each selected site remedy be protective of
human health and the environment, comply with other statutory
laws, be cost-effective, and utilize permanent solutions,
alternative treatment technologies and resource recovery
alternatives to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, the
statute includes a preference for the use of treatment as a
principal element for the reduction of toxicity, mobility, or
volume of the hazardous substances.
This Record of Decision evaluates remedial alternatives for
addressing soil and ground-water contamination at the Ellis




                                                           R2-0003229

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                15

Property Site. Since NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface
water and sediment contamination in the wetlands and drainage
ways do not pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the
environment, remedial alternatives for the surface water and
sediments are not warranted.
The estimated capital cost, operation and maintenance (O&M)
costs, and net present worth costs of each alternative discussed
below are provided for comparison. The estimated implementation
time reflects only the time required to construct or implement
the remedy, and does not include the time required to design the
remedy, negotiate with the responsible parties, or procure
contracts for design and construction.

Soil Alternatives
The FS considered the following general response actions for the
contaminated soil at the Ellis Property Site: no action,
ins:        ..-.1 controls, excavation with treatment and disposal,
ana i--~^.. „, Those alternatives which passed the screening
process .are summarized below.
Alternative SS-3, which consists of excavation of surface soils,
on-site treatment, and on-site disposal, was analyzed in the FS.
It did not pass the screening process because the relatively
small volume of contaminated soil did not justify the
construction of an on-site treatment system; therefore, this
alternative is not included below.

Alternative SS-lt   NO ACTION
Estimated Capital Cost: 0          _
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $42,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $117,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame: None
CERCLA requires that a "No Action" alternative be evaluated at
every site to establish a baseline for comparison to the other
alternatives. Under this alternative, EPA and NJDEPE would take
no further action at the Site. Current site contaminants would
be left in place, and no changes in levels of these contaminants
would be expected except for those resulting from natural
attenuation, biodegradation, or weathering. Access to the Site
would be unrestricted, allowing trespassers and wildlife to be
exposed to the contaminants.
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least every
five years. If justified by the review, remedial actions would




                                                            R2-0003230

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                16
be evaluated at that time to address the contamination. The cost
estimates above include the cost to perform this review.
Alternative SS-2;   INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS
Estimated Capital Cost: $40,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $25,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $110,000
Estimated Implementation Time: 6 months
Under this alternative, measures would be taken to reduce the
potential risks to public health and the environment. This would
include the construction of a fence around the perimeter of the
Site and placement of warning signs to restrict access. Deeds
would be modified to restrict site development. These measures
are aimed at reducing potential contact with the contaminated
jsoil. Current levels of contaminants would remain at the Site.
As in the No Action alternative above, the Site would be reviewed
at least every five years. The cost estimates above include the
cost to perform this review.

Alternative SS-4:   EXCAVATION AND OFF-SITE TREATMENT/DISPOSAL

Estimated Capital Cost: $560,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $188,200 (1 year only)
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $739,000
Estimated Implementation Time: 1 year
Alternative SS-4 would include excavation of contaminated soil,
and treatment/disposal at an approved off-site facility, i.e,
landfill and/or hazardous waste incinerator. It is anticipated
that soil contaminated with PCBs and/or organic compounds would
be treated at an incinerator, while soil contaminated with heavy
metals would be disposed at a landfill. An incinerator would not
be effective in destroying heavy metals. The concentrations of
PCBs and BNA compounds currently present in the soil would permit
disposal in a landfill. However some stabilization for the
metal-contaminated soils may be required on site or off site,
prior to disposal. The need for stabilization would be
determined during the design phase. The excavated area would be
back-filled with clean fill. Under this alternative, soil
contaminants would be remediated to EPA's risk-based levels. The
soil is primarily contaminated With heavy metals (approximately
690 yd3) . The amount of soil contaminated  with PCBs and BNA
compounds was estimated to be 60 yd3 and 10 yd3, respectively.
The O&M and net present worth costs include the cost of treatment
or stabilization of the soils prior to disposal.




                                                          R2-0003231

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                17


Alternative SS-5;   CAPPING OF SURFACE SOILS
Estimated Capital Cost: $630,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $100,800
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $2,180,000
Estimated Implementation Time: 2 years
Under Alternative SS-5, contaminated surface soils above risk-
based cleanup levels would be covered with an impermeable multi-
layer cap. This would prevent exposure to the contaminants, and
prevent migration of contaminants off site and into the ground
water through infiltration. The cap would be designed to meet
Federal and State of New Jersey requirements for hazardous waste
disposal facilities. The design of a multi-layered cap, to
satisfy these requirements, would consist of an upper vegetative
layer underlain by a drainage layer over a low permeability
layer. The low permeability layer would be designed to minimize
infiltration of water into the contaminated soil below. The
drainage layer would consist of sand, which would decrease the
amount and residence time of water contacting the low
permeability layer, thereby minimizing water infiltration. The
drainage layer would be sloped to an exit toe drain, which would
allow the water to be expelled. The upper vegetative cover would
consist of about two feet of topsoil. The topsoil would be
capable of providing long-term vegetative support and would be
graded to a uniform slope between 3 and 5 percent. The
vegetation would be chosen to minimize erosion and promote
drainage off the cap.
As in the No Action alternative above, the Site would be reviewed
at least every five years because contaminants would remain on
site. The cost estimates above include the cost to perform this
review.

Ground-Water Alternatives
The following general response actions were considered in the FS
for contaminated ground water: no action, institutional controls,
and extraction and treatment. Below are summaries of the ground-
water alternatives.

Alternative GW-1; NO ACTION
Estimated Capital Cost: $30,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $61,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $200,000
Estimated Implementation Time: None




                                                         R2-0003232

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 18
CERCLA requires that a "No Action" alternative be evaluated at
every site to establish a baseline for comparison to the other
alternatives. Under this alternative, EPA and NJDEPE would take
no further action at the Site. Current ground-water contaminants
would remain, and no changes in levels of these contaminants
would be expected except those resulting from natural
attenuation, migration, or biodegradation. Access to the shallow
ground water at the Site would be unrestricted, allowing
potential exposure to the contaminants. This alternative would
not prevent the potential migration of contaminants off site or
into the deeper aquifers..
Because this alternative would result in contaminants remaining
on site, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least every
five years. If justified by the review, remedial actions would
be evaluated at that time to address the contamination. The
above cost estimates include the cost to perform this review.

Alternative GW-2;   INSTITUTIONAL' CONTROLS
Estimated Capital Cost: $74,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $180,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $575,000
Estimated Implementation Time: 6 months
Alternative GW-2 would include the implementation of deed and
well restrictions to reduce the potential for exposure to ground-
water contaminants. These restrictions may completely ban the
installation of wells in a particular area, or they may establish
well siting or construction specifications and the minimum depth
to which wells must be installed. Current site contaminants
would remain, and no changes in levels of these contaminants
would be expected except those resulting from natural
attenuation, migration, or biodegradation.
As in the No Action alternative above, the Site would be reviewed
every five years. The cost estimates above include the cost to
perform this review.

Alternative GW-3i   EXTRACTION AND TREATMENT OF CONTAMINATED
GROUND WATER
Estimated Capital Cost: $1,340,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost: $365,000 years 1-3; $283,000 years 4-30
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost: $5,914,000
Estimated Implementation Time: 30 years
Under this alternative, an interceptor trench and/or extraction
wells would be installed to collect shallow ground water. The
exact number and precise location of the extraction wells and the




                                                          R2-0003233

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               19
optimum pumping rate would be determined during design. The
design of the treatment system would be based upon additional
tests and investigations to be conducted during the remedial
design phase. The contaminated ground water would be pumped to
an on-site treatment system that would remove metals by
precipitation and ultrafiltration, and remove, volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) by air stripping. The ground water would be
treated to meet Federal and New Jersey Safe Drinking Water
Standards. The treated ground water would be reinjected.
Ground-water monitoring would be performed during and following
active remediation. Further treatment of the air stream may be
required to comply with New Jersey's Air Pollution Control
Regulations for VOC and toxic emissions.
The installation of an interceptor trench and extraction wells
may affect the natural flow of ground water and surface water to
the wetlands. The ground-water extraction system may affect the
hydrology of the wetlands. To the maximum extent practicable,
the interceptor trench and extraction wells would be placed in
locations that avoid or minimize any impacts. If it is
determined during design that hydrological impacts to the
vetlands are significant, ground water from the clean aquifer
below the shallow aquifer would be pumped and discharged into a
nearby swale that drains into the wetlands to minimize any
hydrological impacts.
It is anticipated that half as many monitoring well samples would
be required in years 4 through 30 than in the first 3 years
because the contaminant concentrations would be expected to
decline through the extraction and treatment of the ground water.
This is reflected in the annual O&M costs for this alternative.

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES
In accordance with the National Oil and Hazardous Substances
Pollution Contingency Plan, a detailed analysis of each remedial
alternative was performed with respect to each of the nine
criteria. This section discusses and compares the performance of
the remedial alternatives under consideration against these
criteria. These criteria were developed to address the
requirements of Section 121 of CERCLA to ensure all important
considerations are factored into remedy selection decisions.
All selected remedies must at least satisfy the Threshold
Criteria. The selected remedy should provide the best trade-offs
among the Primary Balancing Criteria. The Modifying Criteria are
evaluated following the public comment period.

Threshold Criteria




                                                         R2-0003234

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                20
1.    Overall protection of human health and the environment
      addresses whether or not a remedy provides adequate
      protection and describes how risks posed through each
      exposure pathway (based on a reasonable maximum exposure
      scenario) are eliminated, reduced, or controlled through
      treatment, engineering controls, or institutional controls.
2.    Compliance with ARARs addresses whether or not a remedy
      would meet all of the applicable or relevant and appropriate
      requirements of Federal and State environmental statutes and
      requirements and/or provide grounds for invoking a waiver.

Primary Balancing Criteria
:?.   Long-term effectiveness and permanence refers to the
      magnitude of residual risk and the ability of a remedy to
      maintain reliable protection of human health and the
      environment over time, once remedial objectives have been
      met.
4.    Reduction of toxicitv. mobility or volume through treatment
      addresses the statutory preference for selecting remedial
      actions that employ treatment technologies that permanently
      and significantly reduce toxicity, mobility or volume of the
      hazardous substances as a principal element.
5.    Short-term effectiveness addresses the period of time needed
      to achieve protection and any adverse impacts on human
      health and the environment that may be posed during the
      construction and implementation period, until the remedial
      objectives are achieved.
6.    Implementability is the technical and administrative
      feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of
      materials and services needed to implement a particular
      alternative.
7.    Cost includes estimated capital.and operation and
      maintenance costs, and the present-worth costs.

Modifying Criteria
                  • ••                                   S
8.    State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review of
      the RI/FS and the Proposed Plan, the State supports,
      opposes, and/or has identified any reservations regarding
      the preferred alternative.
9.    Community acceptance refers to the community's comments on
      the alternatives described in the Proposed Plan, and the RI




                                                           R2-0003235

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               21
     and FS reports. Responses to public comments are addressed
     in the Responsiveness Summary of this ROD.
A comparative analysis of the remedial alternatives based upon
the aforementioned evaluation criteria follows.

Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment
Risks to human health and the environment would not be eliminated
through Alternative GW-1, No Action, because it would not address
contaminants in the ground water, which pose an unacceptable
risk. In addition, ground-water degradation would continue
because migration of contaminants would not be controlled.
Alternative GW-2, Institutional Controls, would reduce the
potential for on-site contact through the placement of deed
restrictions. However, it would not prevent the migration of
contaminants off site or into the deeper aquifers, allowing
ground-water degradation to continue. Therefore, Alternative
GW-2 would not be protective of human health and the environment.
Since Alternatives GW-1 and GW-2 would not be protective of human
health and the environment, they will not be discussed further.
Alternative GW-3, Extraction and Treatment of Ground Water,' would
protect human health by reducing contaminant concentrations in
the ground water to acceptable levels, and by preventing further
migration. If it is determined during design that the extraction
of contaminated ground water will adversely .affect the hydrology
of the wetlands, engineering controls would be designed to
mitigate the hydrological impacts to the wetlands. Therefore,
Alternative GW-3 would be protective of human health and the
environment.
Risks to human health and the environment would not be eliminated
through Alternative SS-1, No Action, because it would not address
the contaminants in the soil, which pose an unacceptable risk.
In addition, ground-water degradation due to the uncontrolled
infiltration of soil contaminants would continue.
Alternative SS-2, Institutional Controls, would reduce the
potential for on-site contact through deed restrictions and the
installation of a fence around the Site. However, it would not
provide protection of human health and the environment because it
would not control off-site migration or infiltration of
contaminants. Since Alternatives SS-1 and SS-2 would not be
protective of human health and the environment, they will not be
discussed further.
Alternative SS-4, Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal,
would remove contaminants from the soil and prevent further




                                                          R2-0003236

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               22
migration of contaminants into the ground water, thereby
protecting human health and the environment.

Alternative SS-5, Capping, would reduce the potential for contact
with the contaminated soil, thereby reducing the risk posed by
the direct contact exposure pathway. In addition, deed
restrictions would need to be placed on the property to restrict
future land-use, and thereby reduce potential contact with the
contaminated soils.

Compliance with ARARs
There are several categories of ARARs: action-specific, chemical-
specific, and location-specific. Action-specific ARARs are
technology or activity-specific requirements or limitations
related to various activities of the project. Chemical-specific
.ARARs are usually numerical values which establish the amount or
concentration of a chemical that may be found in, or discharged
to, the ambient environment. Location-specific ARARs are
restrictions placed on the concentrations of hazardous substances
or the conduct of activities solely because they occur in a
special location.

Action-Specific ARARs
Action-specific ARARs affecting Alternative SS-4 include Land
Disposal Restrictions (LDR), Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act (RCRA), and Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) requirements
for treatment and disposal of hazardous substances.
Under Alternative SS-4, stabilization of the excavated soils
would comply with LDR, which requires contaminated materials to
be treated to meet standards before placement in a landfill.
RCRA mandates that owners and/or operators of incinerators
receiving hazardous wastes must have operating permits and meet
specified treatment standards. Alternative SS-4 would comply
with this ARAR by sending excavated soils for treatment at an
approved facility that meets these requirements. PCB-
contaminated soils would be treated at an approved facility that
meets TSCA standards for incinerators.
Under Alternative SS-5, the multi-layer cap would be designed,
constructed, and installed to meet RCRA and New Jersey
requirements for performance and operating standards.

Chemical-Specific ARARs




                                                           R2-0003237

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                23

Because ground water at the Site is classified as Class II (i.e.,
drinking water), the following are considered relevant and
appropriate requirements: National Primary Drinking Water
Standards and New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act Maximum
Contaminant Levels for Hazardous Contaminants, and/or New Jersey
Ground Water Quality Standards.
Alternative GW-3 would comply with ARARs. Ground water would be
treated to meet ARARs prior to reinjection. VOC emissions from
the air stripper would comply with New Jersey's "Control and
Prohibition of Air Pollution by Volatile Organic Substances" and
"Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution by Toxic Substances."
Since there are no ARARs for soil cleanup, contaminated soils
would be remediated to site-specific risk-based levels.
Alternative SS-5 does not include any treatment or disposal, and
would not attain risk-based soil cleanup levels because
contaminant concentrations would not be reduced. Alternative
SS-4, Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal, would remove
soil contaminants that are above EPA's risk-based levels and
eliminate the risks associated with exposure.

Location-Specific ARARs
Location-specific ARARs affecting the remedial action include the
Safe Drinking Water Act, National Historic Preservation Act,
Endangered Species Act, and the Wetlands Act of 1970.

•Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
Alternative GW-3, Extraction and Treatment of Ground Water, would
'.be effective in treating the contamination in the shallow ground
vater. However, Alternative GW-3, in and of itself, would not
attain the .drinking water MCLs in the long term because soil
contaminants would continue to infiltrate into the ground water.
When paired with the appropriate source control alternative, it
would attain MCLs more effectively. Treatment residuals, such as
dewatered sludge, would be transported off site for disposal at
an approved facility. Therefore, no long-term risks would be
posed by these treatment residuals. Treated effluent would be
jnonitored to ensure that it meets applicable discharge criteria.
Alternative SS-5, Capping, would involve engineering controls to
minimize leachate production and soil contact via installation of
a multi-layer cap. Long-term maintenance and monitoring of the
cap would be required to ensure its effectiveness.
Alternative SS-4, Excavation and Off-Site Treatment/Disposal,
would remove soil contaminants to levels protective of human
health and the environment. The risks posed by the contaminated




                                                          R2-0003238

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               24
soils would be reduced. The threat of further ground-water
degradation would be reduced by controlling the infiltration of
soil contaminants. This alternative would provide long-term
effectiveness and permanence.
Reduction in Toxicitv. Mobility or Volume
Under Alternative SS-4, it is anticipated that soils contaminated
with PCBs/organic compounds would be treated at an approved off-
site incinerator, while soils contaminated with heavy metals
would be disposed of at a landfill. Toxicity, mobility, and
volume of contaminants would be reduced by treatment of the
excavated soil at an approved off-site incinerator. Mobility of
the heavy metals would be reduced by stabilization of the soil
prior to disposal. However, the disposal of contaminated soil at
an approved landfill without stabilization would not reduce the
toxicity, mobility or volume of the contaminants.
Alternative SS-5, Capping, would reduce the mobility of
contaminants. This alternative would not involve active
treatment for the contaminated soil. The toxicity and volume of
the soil contaminants would remain at current levels for an
•extended period of time. The volume of contaminants could
increase if the cap fails or if future ground-water table
fluctuations bring it into contact with contaminated soil.
Alternative GW-3, Extraction and Treatment of Ground Water, would
reduce mobility and volume of the contaminants because it would
reduce ground-water contamination and control migration. The
•treatment system would remove contaminants from the extracted
ground water, thereby reducing their mobility and volume.

Short-Term Effectiveness
Risks to workers and nearby residents from airborne contaminants
would be minimized during the implementation of Alternative SS-4
or SS-5 through the use of appropriate engineering controls and a
comprehensive health and safety plan.
Appropriate levels of protection for workers would be specified
in the health and safety plan to avoid direct contact with
contaminated soils and ground water during construction
activities called for in Alternative GW-3.
The suspected presence of DNAPLs at the Site, which is
characterized by the high concentrations of PCE and TCE in the
shallow ground water, may have an influence on the time frame
required or ability to fully achieve cleanup levels.
Alternatives SS-4 and SS-5 would take approximately 1 and 2
years, respectively, to implement. The implementation period for




                                                          R2-0003239

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               25
Alternative GW-2 is estimated to be 6 months, while Alternative
GW-3 is approximately 30 years.


Implementabilitv
Under Alternative SS-4, excavation would involve conventional and
readily implementable construction methods. Acceptance by an
approved treatment/disposal facility is not!expected to pose a
problem due to the small quantity of contaminated soil that would
be sent off site.
Impermeable multi-layer caps, as described in Alternative SS-5,
are a proven technology., involve readily available materials, and
could be readily implemented.
Alternative GW-3 would include the installation of an interceptor
trench, ground-water extraction wells, a ground-water collection/
piping system, precipitation process equipment, an ultra-
filtration unit, an air stripping tower, and associated piping
and instrumentation. There is sufficient property on site to
construct and install this equipment. Construction and
installation of these components can be accomplished using common
techniques and readily available equipment.
Interceptor trenches and extraction wells are proven technologies
for extracting ground water. The extraction wells would be
placed near potential source areas to enhance removal of the
contaminants and reduce migration. Precipitation and ultra-
filtration processes are proven technologies for the removal of
heavy metals found in ground water, and have often been used to
reduce the levels of metals in wastewater. Air stripping of VOCs
is a proven technology. All the process units required for the
treatment system are readily available, transportable to the
Site, and easily installed. Sludge generated during treatment
would require transportation to an approved facility on a
periodic basis.

Cost
Estimated capital costs, annual O&M costs, and the total present
worth of all the remedial alternatives are summarized in
Tables 4A and 4B. Present worth costs are based on a 30-year
period and a discount rate of 5 percent.
Alternative GW-3, Extraction and Treatment of Contaminated Ground
Water, is the most expensive, with a present worth cost of
$5,914,000.




                                                          R2-0003240

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                26
The estimated present worth cost of Alternative SS-4 is $739,000.
The most costly alternative is Alternative SS-5, with a present
worth cost of $2,180,000.


State Acceptance

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
concurs with the preferred alternatives.

Community Acceptance
Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public
comment period. Written comments received during the public
comment period, as well as verbal comments during the public
meeting on May 13, 1992, were evaluated. The response to those
comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary.
Comments received during the public comment period indicated that
the local residents were in favor of the preferred alternatives
for the remediation of ground-water and soil contamination (i.e.,
GW-3 and SS-4). However, some local residents were dissatisfied
with the Proposed Plan and the preferred remedial alternatives
with respect to sediments. They believe that the Proposed Plan
should have included remedial alternatives to address sediment
contamination, particularly in the wetlands.

SELECTED REMEDY

Based upon consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the
detailed analysis of the alternatives, and public comments, the
NJDEPE and EPA have determined that Alternatives SS-4 and
GW-3 constitute the remedy that is protective of human health and
the environment, will maintain protection over time, and that
will minimize untreated waste.
 The soil and ground-water cleanup levels for the Ellis Property
 Site are listed in Tables 5 and 6. NJDEPE has requested that
 soil and ground-water contamination at the Site be remediated to
 the levels specified in its Proposed Cleanup Standards for
 Contaminated Sites (February 1992). shown in Tables 7A and 7B.
These proposed standards are not recognized as ARARs under
Section 121(d) of CERCLA because they are not yet promulgated.
However, EPA has determined that further remediation of the soil
 and ground water at the Site to the levels requested by the
NJDEPE, does not conflict, or is not inconsistent, with the
 selected remedy. The NJDEPE has agreed to fund the incremental
•costs associated with this additional cleanup.




                                                          R2-0003241

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               27
The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
     •    Excavation of contaminated soil and treatment/disposal
          at an approved off-site facility;
     •   .Extraction of contaminated ground water from the
         shallow aquifer underlying the Site;
     •    Treatment of the contaminated ground water in a
          facility to be constructed on site;
     •    Disposal of the treated ground water on the Site by
          reinjection; and
     •   Implementation of an environmental monitoring program
         to ensure the effectiveness of the remedy.
The goal of this remedial action is to restore the ground water
to its beneficial use, in this case, a source of drinking water.
However, EPA recognizes that the selected remedy may not achieve
this goal because of the technical difficulties associated with
achieving ground-water cleanup levels. It may become apparent,"
during implementation or operation of the ground-water
extraction/treatment system, that contaminant levels have ceased
to decline and are remaining constant at levels higher than the
remediation goal. In such a case, the systems' performance
standards and/or the remedy may be reevaluated. Performance
monitoring of .the ground-water extraction and treatment system
will be implemented. The data collected would be used to suggest
system adjustments or modifications to provide more effective or
efficient attainment of cleanup levels. Such adjustments or
modifications may include: increasing or decreasing the
extraction rate, initiating a pulsed pumping schedule, installing
additional extraction wells (or drains), or ceasing extraction at
wells where cleanup levels have been achieved. Monitoring data
will be used to assess the effectiveness of the modifications
implemented and may be used to re-assess the time frame required
to achieve cleanup levels.
While a DNAPL source was not observed during the RI, further
investigations will be conducted during the design phase to
locate, or determine, the existence of such a source. If a DNAPL
source is found, it will be addressed in the ground-water
extraction and treatment system design.
Because the ground-water extraction system may adversely impact
the wetlands, a wetlands assessment will be conducted during the
design phase to evaluate the potential effects due to the
extraction and discharge of ground water. Adverse impacts to the
wetlands will be mitigated through engineering controls to the
Maximum extent practicable.




                                                            R2-0003242

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               28

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS

The remedy selected by EPA for ground-water and soil remediation
at the Site complies with the requirements of Section 121 of
CERCLA, as amended by SARA. The selected remedy is protective of
human health and the environment, complies with Federal and State
requirements that are applicable, or relevant and appropriate to
this action, and is cost-effective. The selected remedy utilizes
permanent solutions, and alternative treatment technologies or
resource recovery technologies, to the maximum extent
practicable. The statutory preference for treatment that reduces
toxicity, mobility or volume will be satisfied by the selected
remedy. The selected remedy provides the best balance of trade-
offs among the criteria. The following sections discuss how the
selected remedy meets these statutory requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the
environment, dealing effectively with the threats posed by the
contaminants which were identified.
The principal threat posed by the Site is the contaminated soils.
The pathways associated with this threat include the infiltration
of soil contaminants into the ground water and the potential
migration of contaminated ground water into the deeper aquifers.
By excavating the soil contaminants, and extracting and treating
the contaminated ground water, the threats to human health and
the environment will be reduced. Contaminants in the ground
water will be reduced to levels that are acceptable for drinking
water. The removal of soil contaminants will prevent further
degradation of the wetlands caused by surface soil erosion.

Compliance with ARARs
The selected remedy will comply with the substantive requirements
of the statutes and regulations listed in Table 8 to the extent
they are applicable or relevant and appropriate to the
remediation at this Site.

Action-Specific ARARs
Sludge produced by the ground-water treatment system and
excavated soils will be disposed in accordance with RCRA
requirements at RCRA-permitted facilities. The excavated soil
will be stabilized prior to disposal, if necessary. Sludge and
soil will be disposed at a facility that meets RCRA requirements.
PCB-contaminated soil will be treated at a facility that meets




                                                         R2-0003243

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               29
TSCA requirements. Federal and State Department of
Transportation requirements, including hazardous waste manifests,
will be met for transportation of sludge and excavated soil from
the Site to treatment/disposal facilities.
The air stripper will be designed to meet the New Jersey Air
Pollution Control Regulations for VOC and toxic emissions (NJAC
7:27-16 & 17). The ground-water treatment system will be
designed to treat the extracted ground water to MCLs prior to
reinjection.

Chemical-Specific ARARs
The contaminants of concern in the ground water will be
remediated to meet MCLs. The cleanup levels for the ground-water
contaminants are listed in Table 6. These levels represent the
concentrations which would be attained in the treated water
before reinjection. The discharge of treated ground water will
meet the levels specified in the New Jersey Ground Water Quality
Criteria (Table 9).
Emissions from the air stripper will be designed to comply with
the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulations for VOC and
toxic emissions (NJAC 7:27-16 & 17).
The cleanup levels for soils are provided in Table 5. The
selected remedy will reduce exposure risks posed by site soils to
the acceptable range of 10"4 to 10"6 for carcinogens, and to an HI
less than 1.0 for noncarcinogens.

Location-Specific ARARs
The contaminated ground water, which is located in a sole source
aquifer, will be treated to meet Federal and State drinking water
MCLs.
To comply with the National Historic Preservation Act, a Stage IB
excavation survey will be conducted during the remedial design
phase. If cultural resources are found, a cultural resources
mitigation plan will be developed to reduce the impact to these
resources as much as possible.
In addition, a survey of the Site will be conducted during the
remedial design phase to confirm the presence or absence of swamp
pink and other threatened/endangered species._ If threatened/
endangered species are found to inhabit the Site, impacts to the
species and its habitat will be minimized to the maximum extent
practicable.




                                                          R2-0003244

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               30
The substantive requirements of the Freshwater Wetlands Act (NJAC
7:7A-1.1 et sea.1 will be met. The wetlands delineation will be
extended to include all areas that could be affected by the
installation of an interceptor trench and/or ground-water extrac-
tion wells.
To ensure that remedial action process equipment and buildings
are not constructed or installed in flood-prone areas, the
remedial design activities will include a 100-year and 500-year
floodplain delineation. The substantive requirements of
Executive Order 11988, Protection of Floodplains, and the New
Jersey Flood Hazard Area Control Act (NJSA 58:16A-50 et seq.)
will be met if the floodplain delineation shows that facilities
vould be located in areas subject to flooding.

Advisories. Guidance and Criteria To Be Considered
The shipment of hazardous wastes off site to a treatment/disposal
facility will be conducted in accordance with EPA's Office of
Solid ivaste and Emergency Response Directive No. 9834.11,
"Revised Procedures for Planning and Implementing Off-site
Response Actions." The intent of this directive is to ensure
that facilities authorized to accept CERCLA-generated waste are
in compliance with RCRA operating standards.

Cost-Effectiveness
Of the alternatives which most effectively address the threats
posed by site contamination, the selected remedy provides for
overall effectiveness in proportion to its cost. The estimated
total project cost is $6,653,000.

Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable
Contaminants in the ground water will be removed and treated
before reinjection. Hazardous wastes generated by the treatment
process will be disposed of at an approved off-site facility.
This will significantly reduce the toxicity, mobility and volume
of the contaminants, and offers a permanent solution to the risks
posed by the contaminated ground water. The treatment of soils
contaminated with PCBs/organic compounds at an approved off-site
incinerator will significantly reduce the toxicity, volume and
mobility.
The disposal of heavy metals-contaminated soil at an approved
off-site landfill does not represent a permanent solution with
respect to the risks associated with the contaminants because
toxicity, volume or mobility would not be reduced. However,

                                                                    f



                                                         R2-0003245

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               31

treatment of the soil by stabilization prior to disposal, if
required, would reduce the mobility of the contaminants. As
demonstrated in the FS, treatment of all the soil contaminants by
one single technology was not practicable. Furthermore, the cost
of constructing an on-site treatment system was not justified by
the small volume of metals-contaminated soil (690 yd5).
Considering the relatively small volume of metals-contaminated
soil, EPA believes that the selected remedy represents the
maximum extent to which permanent solutions and treatment
technologies can be utilized in a cost-effective manner.

Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element
With respect to ground-water contamination, the selected remedy
satisfies the statutory preference for treatment as a principal
•element. The selected remedy reduces levels of contaminants in
the ground water through treatment using precipitation and
ultrafiltration for metals and air stripping for VOCs, thereby
reducing the risk to human health.
The disposal of heavy metals-contaminated soil in an approved
off-site landfill without stabilization does not satisfy the
statutory preference for treatment. Due to the different types
of contaminants present in the soil, treatment of the soil by one
technology is not practicable. As shown in the FS, there was no
one single treatment technology that was effective for treating
organic compounds, PCBs, and heavy metals in soils; however,
contaminated soils will be stabilized prior to disposal, if
required. The selected remedy calls for the off-site treatment
of soil contaminated with PCBs and/or organic compounds, and
hence, satisfies the preference for treatment for this portion of
the remedy.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Ellis Property Site was released to the
public on May 1, 1992. The Proposed Plan identified the
preferred alternatives for ground-water and soil remediation.
LPA reviewed all written and verbal comments received during the
public comment period. Upon review of these comments, EPA
determined that no significant changes to the selected remedy, as
it was originally identified in the Proposed Plan, were
necessary.




                                                         R2-0003246

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                          APPENDIX I
                            FIGURES

Figure 1 Ellis Property Site Location
Figure 2 Ellis Property Site Plan
Figure 3 Ellis Property Site Drainage




                                        R2-0003247

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

            FIGURE 1.   ELLIS PROPERTY SITE LOCATION




    4




                  EVESHAM                              MEDFORD
                  TOWNSHIP                             TOWNSHIP


    4
        i
"




                                                            R2-0003248

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                      FIGURE 2.   ELLIS PROPEFriY SITE PLAN




                                                                              ——   Former Drum Waste In

                                                                                   Fomwr BuMng lotadn



J*n. 72. IMS and BBM TmragrauNc Map
tfa»a>up»U by AON Aitocial**, Int




                                                                              R2-0003249

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

               FIGURE 3. ELLIS PROPERTY SITE DRAINAGE


r




                                                                 ToStap*




i h} *
II WofNrf:
I   '•   *-S




                                             .Aci._
                                                        R2-0003250

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      APPENDIX II
                         TABLES
Table 1A   Endangered/Threatened Species Observed Within a
           Three-Mile Radius of the Ellis Property Site.
Table IB   Endangered/Threatened Species Occurring in
           Burlington County, New Jersey.

Table 2    Predominant Contaminants and Range of
           Concentrations Detected at the Ellis Property
           Site.
Table 3    Comparison of Predominant Ground-water
           Contaminants Found at the Ellis Property Site With
           Drinking Water Standards.
Table 4A   Summary of Remedial Alternative Costs for Soil.
Table 4B   Summary of Remedial Alternative Costs for Ground
           Water.
TaMe 5     EPA's Risk-based Soil Remediation Levels.
Table 6    Ground-Water Remediation Levels for Predominant
           Contaminants
Table 7A   NJDEPE's Proposed Soil Cleanup Standards for
           Contaminated Sites (February 1992)
Table 7B   NJDEPE's Proposed Ground Water Cleanup Standards
           for Contaminated Sites (February 1992)
Table 8    Summary of Federal and State Applicable or
           Relevant and Appropriate Requirements (ARARs) for
           the Ellis Property Site.
Table 9    Ground Water Quality Criteria (NJAC 7:9-6)




                                                        R2-0003251

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

    Table 1A. Endangered/Threatened Species Observed Within a Three-Mile
                      Radius of the Ell 1s Property Site


COMMON' NAME                    SCIENTIFIC NAME                       CLASSIFICATION8
Upland piper                    Bartramia longicauda                  Endangered
Elog turtle                     Clemys muhlenbergii                   Endangered
Pine Barrens treefrog           Hyla andersonii                       Endangered
Grasshopper sparrow             Amodramus savannarum                  Threatened
American bittern                Botaurus lentiginosus                 Threatened
Wood turtle                     Clemys insculpta                      Threatened
Bobolink                        Do? ichonyx orhyzovorus               Threatened
Red-headed woodpecker           Helanerpes erythrocephalus            Threatened


  Classified by the State of New Jersey.




               Table IB. Endangered/Threatened Species Occurring in
                           Burlington County, New Jersey


COMMON NAME                     SCIENTIFIC NAME                       CLASSIFICATION8
Cooper's hawk                   Accipiter cooper/7                    Endangered
Corn snake                      Elaphe gut tat a                      Endangered
Northern harrier                Circus cyaneus                        Endangered
Pied-billed grebe               Podilymbus podiceps                   Endangered
Tiger salamander                Ambystoma tigrinum                    Endangered
Timber rattlesnake              Crotalus horridus                     Endangered
Vesper sparrow                  Pooecetes gramineus                   Endangered
Barred owl                      Stn'x van'a                           Threatened
Black rail                      Lateral!us jamaicensis                Threatened
Brook trout                     Salvelinus fontinaTis                 Threatened
Great blue heron                Ardea herodias                        Threatened
Mud salamander                  Pseudotriton montanus                 Threatened
Osprey                          Pandion haliaetus                     Threatened
Pine snake                      Pituophis oielanoleucus               Threatened


  Classified by the State of New Jersey.




                                                                           R2-0003252

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     Table 2. Predominant Site Contaminants and Range of Concentration Detected at the tins Property Site


                                                                        WETLANDS            DRAINAGE WAYS
                                       SOIL        GROUND
                                                    HATER       SEDIMENT   SURFACE       SEDIMENT      SURFACE
                CONTAMINANT          (in ppm)                               WATER                       WATER
                                                   (in ppb)     (in ppm) . (in ppb)      (in ppm)      (in ppb)
 Antimony                            4.5-8.9      19-2,123.3        ND           ND          ND           ND
 Arsenic                             1.4-31.8       15.8-91         ND           ND       3.5-7.3       1.2-7.3
 Beryl 11 urn                        0.2-1.7      1.55-10.2         ND           NO       0.7-2.4         ND
 Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate       0.045-2.3         1-5           ND           ND      0.13-0.56         ND
 Chromium                            11.8-493       12-404       23.6-108     7.3-139     15.2-267       6-59
 1,2-Dichloroethene                     ND          5-520      0.008-0.53       2-9          ND           ND
 Lead                               2.2-3,790       4.3-71       53.8-204      4-633      7.8-263      3.8-86.9
 Methyl ene Chloride                0.002-0.12       6-52       0.14-0.91      12-17    0.037-0.083        ND
 Nickel                              1.26-19.1     10.9-147         ND           ND        5.3-27        6.4-9
 Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)   0.31-23.1         NO            ND           ND     0.017-0.21         ND
 Tetrachloroethene (PCE)          0.0009-0.0085   760-33,000       ND              ND       ND             ND
 1,1, 2-Trichloroethane                 ND           3-14          ND              ND       ND            ND
 Trichloroethene (TCE)              0.001-0.19    11-24,000    0.048-5.4       3-290        ND            ND

ppb « Parts per billion
ppm « Parts per million
ND - Not detected




                                                                                                     R2-0003253

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      Table 3. Comparison of Predominant Ground Water Contaminants Found
           at the Ellis Property Site With Drinking Water Standards'


                           FREQUENCY            RANGE OF              DRINKING
       CONTAMINANT             OF            CONCENTRATION        WATER STANDARD
                          OCCURRENCE1*        ports per billion   parts per billion

    Antimony                  1/4            19 - 2,123.3                6f
    Arsenic                   4/4              15.8 - 91                50C
    Beryllium                 4/4             1.55 - 10.2                4f
    Chromium                  6/6               24.2 - 404               50C
    1,2-Dichloroethene        4/7                5 - 520                10d
    Lead                      5/6                5 - 71                 15C
    MethyTene Chloride        7/7                6 - 52                  5f
    Nickel                    4/4        .     10.9 - 147              100f
    Trichloroethene           5/7                11 - 24,000              ld
    Tetrachloroethene         1/7            15000 - 33,000              ld


a    Includes ground water sampling results taken by NJDEPE on November 14, 1991.
b   Number of sampling locations at which the contaminant was detected compared
    with the total number of sampling locations.
c   National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, Maximum Contaminant Levels,
    40 CFR Part 141.
d   New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act, Maximum Contaminant Levels,
    NOAC 7:10-16.
e   National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, Action Level for Lead, 40 CFR
    Part 141.
    National Primary Drinking Water Regulations, Maximum Contaminant Levels,
    40 CFR Part 141 (promulgated July 17, 1992).




                                                                               R2-0003254

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

   Table 4A. Summary of Remedial Alternative Costs for Soil8


Alternative 68-1:     NO ACTION
Estimated Capital Cost:                                    $      0
Estimated Annual Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Cost:       $ 42,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                          $117,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                           None

Alternative 66-2:     INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS
Estimated Capital Cost:                                    $ 40,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:                                 $ 25,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                          $110,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                       6 months

Alternative 86-4:     EXCAVATION AND OFF-SITE    TREATMENT/DISPOSAL
Est.•!•-_--: Capital Cost:                                 $560,000
Es    ?.v.l Ar.LV«al O&M Cost:  '                          $188,200
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                          $739,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                         1 year

Alternative 86-5:     CAPPING OF SURFACE SOILS

Estimated Capital Cost:                                     $630,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:                                  $100,800
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                         $2,180,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                         2 years


     Alternative SS-3, Excavation and on-site treatment, is not
     included because it did not pass the screening process.

     One year only.




                                                               R2-0003255

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        Table 4B. Summary of Remedial Alternative Costs
                        for Ground Water

Alternative GW-l:   NO ACTION
Estimated Capital Cost:                                $     30,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:                             $     61,000
                                                             W J» f W W W

Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                      $    200,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                           None

Alternative GW-2:   INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS
Estimated Capital Cost:                                $     74,000
Estimated Annual O&M Cost:                             $    180,000
E'stimated Net Present Worth Cost:                     $    575,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                       6 months

Alternative GW-3:   EXTRACTION AND TREATMENT OF CONTAMINATED
GHQUND WATER
E2»ti7n-.e*.'.•" Capital Cost:                         $1,340,000
Etetimsttd Annual O&M Cost:
         years 1-3                                     $ 365,000
         years 4-30                                    $ 283,000
Estimated Net Present Worth Cost:                      $5,914,000
Estimated Implementation Time Frame:                       30 years




                                                            R2-0003256

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       Table 5. EPA*s Risk-Based Soil Remediation Levels



                                       REMEDIATION LEVEL
CHEMICAL                           in parts per million (ppm)
Arsenic                                        20
Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate                   46
Chromium                                      945
Lead                                          500
Poiyc&Iorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)                1




                                                           R2-0003257

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       T.fcl
               s S. Ground-Water Reined{atIon Levels for Contaminants of Concern at the Ellis Property Site

                                      NATIONAL PRIMARY           NEW JERSEY S"F               NEW JERSEY GROUND                                         REMEDIATION
                                       DRINKING WATER             DRINKING WAT                  WATER QUALITY                                              LEVEL
          CONTAMINANT                 REGULATIONS MCLa           ACT PRIMARY \                    CRITERIA0
                                            (ppb)                      (ppb)                         (ppb)                                                 (ppb)
  Antimony                                      6                                                                                                             6
  Arsenic                                      50                                 -, .                         50                                            50
  Barium                                     1000                                '"< -,                       1000                                          1000
  Beryl 1 i urn                                4                                                                                                              4
  Cadmium                                      10                                   -                              10                                         10
                                                                               :
  Chromium (total)                             50                               " -                                50                                        50
                                                                                              <••,                     ^ypW -•&—•,
  Copper                                    1300d                      ,                                                                                   1300d
   Cyanide                                    200                                                             200                                           200
                                                                                                     , -' ^. ' - ,-f?ri7 rfj * -
   1,1 Dichloroethene                          7e                          2                                                                                  2
                                        •^ S
   1,2 Dichloroethene                          v   -.       '
                                                                         10                                                      - ',                         10
   Lead                                     1 15   d           " * A ^"x
                                                                     •   r
                                                                         •: *4' ^ **                                                                         15d
                                                                                                                   50
  Methyl ene Chloride                           5                           .>                ,«• ^< x , wsf.>( ^.yr^.^^JilSl,,\
                                                                                                                                                              5
  Nickel                                      100                                >        - ...-:::. :'* ,,'..*-> ^>.<.                                      100
   Selenium                                   100                   •                     A                            s
                                                                                                                               ""^     t
                                                                                                                                                             100
   Silver                                      50                   -,                                    5
                                                                                                              •-
                                                                                                                    '
                                                                                                                           V


                                                                                                                                / >-
                                                                                                                                     'V'"t
                                                                                                                                                             50
   1 , 1 , 2-Tri chl oroethane                 3e r                                                                                      v •,   *"V %          5
                               +•$&» ^s^"'^* *s<r^v
  Tetrachloroethene (PCE)               -• <     r
                                                     ^ '-" ^ '
                                                     '                     i                                       ,            ''"-                           1
   Trlchloroethene (TCE)                                                   i                                                             \

                                                                                                                                                               1
MCL Maximum contaminant level.
     - Parts per billion.
     - No standard for this specific contaminant.
       40 CFR Part 141.
       NJAC 7:10-16.8.
       NJAC 7:9-6.6; for ground water classified as GW-2.
       Action level established in 40 CFR 141.8(c).
       Maximum contaminant level goal, 40 CFR 141.50(b).



                                                                                                                                                                   R2-0003258

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Table 7A. NJDEPE Proposed Residential Soil Cleanup Levels for Contaminated Sites
                for Contaminants of Concern at the Ellis Property Site

  CONTAMINANT                         SURFACE SOIL (ppm)     SUBSURFACE SOIL (ppm)
  Acenaphthene •                            3,400                     100
  Aceione                                   1,000                     50
  Antimony                                    14
  Arsenic (Total)                            20
  Barium                                     600
  Benzene                                     3                        1
  Benzo (a) anthracene                       0.66                     500
  Benzo (a} pyrene                           0.66                     100
  Benzo (b) fluoranthene                     0.66                     500
  Benzo (g,h,i) perylene                     0.66                     500
  Benzo (k) fluoranthene                     0.66                    500
  Beryllium                                    2
  Bis (2-ethylhexy!) phthalate                49                      100
  Butylbenzyl phthalates                    10,000                    100
  Cadmiirn                                    1
  Chic      .. _••-.;-                        37                       1
  Chrysene                                   0.66                    500
  Copper                                   , 600
  4,4'-DDD                                    3                       100
  4,4'-DDE                                    2                       100
  4,4'-DDT                                    2                       100
  Dibenzo (a,h) anthracene                   0.66                    500
  Di-n-butyl phthalate                      5,700                    100
  Endrin                                      17                     50
  Fluoranthene                              2,300                    500
  Indeno (1,2,3-cd) pyrene                   0.66                    500
  Lead (Total)                               100
  Methoxychlor                               280                     500
  Mercury (Total)                             14
  Methylene chloride                         49                       10
  Nickel (soluble salts)                     250
  n-Nrtrosodiphenylamine                     140                     100
  F'henol                                   10,000                   50
  Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)          0.45                     100
  Fyene                                     1,700                    500
  Selenium (Total)                            1
  Silver                                     40
  Tetrachloroethene                           9                       1
  Toluene                                   1,000                    500
  1,1,1-Trichloroethane                      210                      50
  Trichloroethene                            23                       1
  Vanadium                                   380
  Zinc                                      1,500
pprn * parts per million.




                                                                            R2-0003259

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         Table 7B. NJDEPE Proposed Ground-Hater Cleanup Levels for
  Contaminated Sites for Contaminants of Concern at the Ellis Property Site
                                                 . CLEANUP LEVEL
 CONTAMINANT                                    (parts per billion)
 Antimony                                               20
 Arsenic (Total)                                          8
 Barium                                                2000
 Beryllium                                               20
 Bis (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate                            30
 Butyl benzyl phthalates                                100
  Cadmium                                                 4
  Chloroform                                              6
  Chromium (Total)                                      100
  1,1-Dichloroethene                                      2
  1,2-Dichloroethene (cis)                               10
;
  l',2-Dichloroethene (trans)                           100
Diethyl phthalate                                      5000
Di-n-butyl phthalate                                    90.0
2,4-Dinitrotoluene                                      100
Fluoranthene                                           300
Lead (Total)                                            100
Methylene chloride •                                      3
Nickel (soluble salts)                                  100
Pentachlorophenol                                         1
Pyrene                                                 200
Selenium (Total)                                         50
Silver                                                   20
Tetrachloroethene                                        1
Toluene                                                1000
1 , 1 ,2-Trichloroethane                                 3
Trichloroethene                                          1
Zinc                                                   5000




                                                                      R2-0003260

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Table 8. Summary of Federal and State Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
              Requirements (ARARs) for the Ellis Property Site

                   FEDERAL ARARs                            CITATION
Safe Drinking Water Act--                           40 CFR Part 141
National Drinking Water Regulations
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)--     40 CFR 268, Subpart D
Land Disposal Restrictions
RCRA Standards for Owners & Operators of            40 CFR Part 264
Hazardous Waste Treatment, Storage, and Disposal
Facilities
Toxic Substances Control Act--                      40 CFR Part 761
Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) Manufacturing,
Processing, Distribution in Commerce, and Use
Prohibition
Protection of Wetlands                              Executive Order 11990
Floodplain Management                               Executive Order 11988
Endangered Species Act                              16 USC 1531 et seq.
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act                  16 USC 661 et seq.
National Historic Preservation Act                  16 USC 470 et seq.
Department of Transportation Regulations            49 CFR 178 et seq.
                    STATE ARARs                             CITATION
New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act                  NJAC 7:10 et seq.
New Jersey Water Pollution Control Regulations--    NJAC 7:9-6 et seq.
Ground Water Standards
New Jersey Water Pollution Control Regulations--    NJAC 7:9-4 et seq.
Surface Water Quality Standards
New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulations        NJAC 7:27 ct seq.
Flood Hazard Area Control Act                       NJSA 58:16A-50 et seq.
Flood Hazard Area Regulations                       NJAC 7:13 et seq.
New Jersey Requirements for Ground Water            NJAC 7:26-9 et seq.
Monitoring
New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System   NJAC 7:14A et seq.
New Jersey Fresh Water Wetlands Protection Act      NJSA 13.-9B-1 et seq.
Mew Jersey Hazardous Waste Regulations              NJAC 7:26 et seq.
Endangered and Non-Game Species Act                 NJSA 23-.2A-1 et seq.




                                                                       R2-0003261

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

  Table 9. Ground Water Quality Criteria for Contaminants of
              Concern at the Ellis Property Site


          CONTAMINANT               STANDARD for GW-2 (ppb)
 Arsenic and compounds                        50
 Barium                                      1000
 Cadmium and compounds                        100
 Chromium (hexavalent) and                    50
 compounds
 Lead and compounds                           50
 Selenium and compounds                       10
 Silver and compounds                         50

Source: New Jersey Ground Water Quality Criteria (NJAC 7:9-6.6)
ppb = parts per billion.




                                                         R2-0003262

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY

                    RECORD OF DECISION


                    Ellis Property Site
Evesham and Medford Townships, Burlington County, New Jersey




       United States Environmental Protection Agency
                         Region II
                    New York, New York




                                                       R2-0003263

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                1
                     RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                      ELLIS PROPERTY SITE
  Evesham and Medford Townships, Burlington County, New Jersey

INTRODUCTION

This Responsiveness Summary provides a summary of significant
comments received from the public, and the responses to those
comments, regarding the Proposed Plan for remediation of the
Ellis Property Site (the Site).
A public comment period for the Site was originally in effect
from May 1 through May 30, 1992, and was extended to June 15,
1992 at the request of the Ellis Property Task Force, a local
citizens group. The purpose of the comment period was to provide
interested parties the opportunity to comment on the Proposed
Plan for the Ellis Property Site. The New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) held a public
meeting, on May 13, 1992 at 7:00 p.m. at the Evesham Township
Municipal Building to present the preferred remedial alternative.

OVERVIEW

The preferred remedial alternative, which was presented in the
May 1992 Proposed Plan, addresses contaminated soil and ground
water at the Site. The major components of the preferred
alternative included excavation of the contaminated soil and
treatment/disposal at an approved off-site facility; extraction
of contaminated ground water from the shallow aquifer underlying
the Site; treatment of the contaminated ground water in a
facility to be constructed on site; and disposal of the treated
water on the Site by reinjection.
Comments received during the public comment period supported the
remedial alternative chosen to remediate the soil and groundwater
at the Site. The Feasibility Study (FS) report contained
remedial alternatives to address sediment contamination in the
wetlands, but these were excluded in the Proposed Plan. In
response to local community concerns about project delays, NJDEPE
made every effort to expedite the completion of both the remedial
investigation (RI) and FS for the Site. A baseline risk
assessment, which consists of a human risk assessment and an
ecological risk assessment, is normally conducted prior to the FS
to determine whether the contaminants of concern identified at a
site pose a current or potential risk to human health or the
environment. To save time on the Ellis schedule, the NJDEPE
contractor prepared the Baseline Risk Assessment and the FS
concurrently, based on the data obtained during the RI. Since




                                                          R2-0003264

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

some hazardous substances were detected in the wetlands, remedial
alternatives to address the wetlands were included in the FS, on
the assumption that the risk assessment would provide the basis
for an action to be taken. Part of the assessment for the Ellis
Site focused on surface water and sediments in the wetlands. For
both the current land-use and future unrestricted land-use
scenarios, human health risks associated with the contaminants in
the wetland area were below the range that would trigger a
cleanup under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA). Similarly, the
Baseline Risk Assessment indicated that the environmental risks
associated with the wetland parcel were negligible. Based on the
results of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) determined that the
contaminants in the wetlands and drainage ways do not pose an
unacceptable risk to human health or the environment. The levels
of contamination in the wetlands and drainage ways permit
unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. Accordingly, there was
no basis for developing remedial alternatives under CERCLA for
the surface water and sediments in the wetlands; therefore, the
Proposed Plan did not include remedial alternatives for the
•wetlands and drainage ways.

BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS

Since 1981, when the RI was initiated, Evesham Township officials
have been communicating with NJDEPE and EPA. State and local
officials have also been interested in the actions taken at this
Site. The Site received significant media coverage because it
was one of the first to be addressed under the New Jersey Spill
Compensation Fund.
In 1984, the Evesham Township Council ordered Mr. Irving Ellis,
the owner, to remove all remaining empty drums and debris from
the Site. On October 21, 1984, the council passed a resolution,
in support of an EPA Superfund cleanup at the Site. The Evesham
Township Environmental Commission informed the NJDEPE and the
Burlington County Health Department about the problems at the
Site. The Evesham Township Municipal Utilities Authority,
responsible for the Township's water supply, has also been
following the situation attentively.
In 1986, the Evesham Town Council formed the Ellis Property Task
Force, comprised of representatives from the Town Council, the
Evesham Township Environmental Commission, the Evesham Township
Municipal Utilities Authority, the Coalition Against Toxics, and
the public. Since 1986, the NJDEPE held meetings with the Ellis
Property Task Force on numerous occasions regarding site
activities.




                                                         R2-0003265

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, CONCERNS, AND RESPONSES
RECEIVED DURING THE PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD

Major comments received during the public meeting on May 13, 1992
and during the comment period from May 1, 1992 through June 15,
1992 are summarized below.

COMMENTS RAISED DURING THE PUBLIC MEETING ON MAY 13. 1992
COMMENT: Explain the relationship between NJDEPE and the EPA
         in terms of the management of this Superfund site
         cleanup, and the role of the State in terms of
         concurrence or nonconcurrence with site remedial
         decisions.
RESPONSE: CERCLA provides for a state to be the lead agency in a
          response action at a Superfund site. As the lead
          agency, the State can apply for a cooperative agreement
          to finance the response action. The NJDEPE was granted
          a cooperative agreement by EPA for the Ellis Property
          Site, and is authorized under CERCLA to take a response
          action using Trust Fund monies. The NJDEPE must follow
          the provisions of the National Oil and Hazardous
          Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP). NJDEPE
          was responsible for overseeing all technical and
          financial aspects of remedial activities, such as the
          Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study (RI/FS).
          EPA, as the support agency, played a review and
          concurrence role throughout the remedial process.
         The Proposed Plan for the Site was prepared by the
         NJDEPE with support from EPA. As required by CERCLA,
         EPA selected a remedy for the Site. This is documented
         in the Record of Decision (ROD), which is being issued
         by EPA. The NJDEPE concurs with the remedy that was
         selected.

COMMENT: The surface water quality criteria for the protection
         of aquatic wildlife, an applicable or relevant and
         appropriate requirement (ARAR), is violated in the
         wetlands for at least one metal; and the surface water
         is not even considered for remediation.
RESPONSE: We presume that this comment is referring to the levels
          of lead and chromium detected in the surface water of
          wetlands, which are presented in Table 2 of the ROD.
          EPA develops two kinds of Federal Water Quality
          Criteria (FWQC), one for protection of human health and
          another for protection of aquatic life. FWQC are non-
          enforceable guidelines used by the States to set Water




                                                            R2-0003266

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

         Quality Standards for surface water. States designate
         the use of a given water body based on its current and
         potential use, and apply the FWQC to set pollutant
         levels that are protective of that use. Accordingly,
         NJDEPE promulgated the New Jersey Surface Water Quality
         Criteria (NJSWQC) for the protection of designated
         water bodies and their uses. The wetlands at the Site
         are not designated a surface water by the NJDEPE.
         Therefore, the NJSWQC are not applicable or relevant
         and appropriate.
         More importantly, there was little or no surface water
         in the wetlands during the RI sampling events.
         "Surface water" was created in the wetlands by
         depressing a beaker, or digging a hole, into the
         surface and allowing water to fill the depression or
         hole. Samples were taken with a bailer, which stirred
         up sediments. This resulted in artificially high
         levels of lead. Therefore, we believe that these
         ST;-oles are not representative of actual surface water
         Ir. -;:he wetlands. Furthermore, the Baseline Risk
         Assessment indicated that there was no unacceptable
         risks to human health from exposure to the surface
         water and sediments in the wetlands and the drainage-
         ways. The potential for aquatic exposure to
         contaminants in the surface water and sediments is low,
         considering that there is seldom any standing surface
         water in the wetlands. Therefore, surface water
         remediation in the wetlands is not warranted.

COMMENT: There is no written analysis that shows what the
         impacts to the wetlands would be, if it were to be
         remediated as described in Alternative SED-4 in the FS
         report.
RESPONSE: The impacts to the environment associated with the
          implementation of Alternative SED-4, Excavation and
          Off-Site Disposal of Sediments, were described in
          Section 5.4.3 of the FS report. In summary, excavation
          of the wetlands may adversely affect the wildlife in
          the wetlands, and their habitat. Restoration of the
          wetlands to its original functional value would be
          difficult to achieve. Heavy equipment, such as a
          tractor, would be used to excavate the sediments in the
          wetlands. As a consequence, the wetlands may be
          permanently degraded or destroyed.

COMMENT: Why didn't the Proposed Plan include a discussion of
         remediation of the wetlands? Why wasn't the sediments
         in the drainage ways mentioned in the Proposed Plan?




                                                          R2-0003267

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

RESPONSE: The inclusion of remedial alternatives to address the
          sediments in the wetlands in the FS report, and its
          exclusion from the Proposed Plan, has led to some
          confusion. In response to local community concerns
          about project delays, NJDEPE made every effort to
          expedite the completion of both the RI and FS for the
          Site. A baseline risk assessment is normally conducted
          prior to the FS to determine whether the contaminants
          of concern identified at a site pose a current or
          potential risk to human health or the environment. To
          save time on the Ellis schedule, the NJDEPE contractor
          prepared the Baseline Risk Assessment and the FS
          concurrently, based on the data obtained during the RI.
          Since some hazardous substances were detected in the
          wetlands, remedial alternatives to address the wetlands
          were included in the FS, on the assumption that the
          risk assessment would provide the basis for an action
          to be taken. Part of the assessment for the Ellis Site
          focused on surface water and sediments in the wetlands.
          For both the current land-use and future unrestricted
          land-use scenarios, human health risks associated with
          the contaminants in the wetland area were below the
          range that would trigger a cleanup under CERCLA.
          Similarly, the Baseline Risk Assessment.indicated that
          the environmental risks associated with the wetland
          parcel were negligible. Based on the results of the
          Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined
          that the contamination in the wetlands does not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment,
          and that the levels of contamination in the wetlands
          permit unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.
          Accordingly, there was no basis for developing remedial
          alternatives under CERCLA for the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands; therefore, the Proposed Plan
          did not include remedial alternatives for the wetland
          area. Because there were no unacceptable risks
          associated with the surface water and sediments in the
          wetlands and drainage ways, they were not discussed in
          the Proposed Plan.

COMMENT:   A strong case could be made that ignoring the wetlands
           is not consistent with the law. A "No Action"
           alternative was taken for the wetlands without going
           through the proper analysis. This is in violation of
           CERCLA and the NCP.
RESPONSE: NJDEPE and EPA have acted consistent with both CERCLA
          and the NCP in their decision not to evaluate a
          remedial action addressing the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands. Pursuant to Section
          300.430(d) of the NCP, a remedial investigation was




                                                           R2-0003268

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

conducted to characterize the Site for the purpose of
developing and evaluating effective remedial
alternatives. The remedial investigation data did show
that there were hazardous substances in the wetlands.
A baseline risk assessment was then performed to
determine whether the contaminants of concern
identified at the Site posed a current or potential
risk to human health or the environment. Part of this
assessment focused on the health risks associated
specifically with surface water and sediments in the
wetlands. In the current land-use scenario, the risks
to human health associated with exposure to
contaminants
          8
              in the wetlands ranged from 2.52 x 10'10 to
3.37 x 1CT . In the future unrestricted land-use
scenario, 5the risks ranged from 2.86 x 10'10 to
4.12 x 10" . These risks are below or within the
acceptable risk range of 1 x 10^ to 1 x 10*.
EPA and NJDEPE determined that the contaminants in the
surface water and sediments in the wetlands did not
pose an unacceptable risk to the environment for the
following reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure
to contaminants in the surface water and sediments is
low, considering that there is seldom any standing
surface water in the wetlands. The surface water
samples that were collected are not believed to be
representative of actual surface water in the wetlands.
There was little or no surface water in the wetlands
during the RI sampling events. "Surface water" was
created by depressing a beaker, or digging a hole into,
the surface of the wetlands and allowing water to fill
the depression or hole. Samples were taken with a
bailer, which stirred up the sediments. Because lead
adheres to sediment particles, the presence of
sediments in the water samples resulted in artificially
high concentrations of lead. The calculated risks
associated with the contaminated sediments in the
wetlands are not believed to be representative of
actual risks. The risks associated with the sediments
were formulated using overly- conservative assumptions
based on toxicity values that are more applicable to
saltwater systems. However, NJDEPE and EPA routinely
use these toxicity values as a screening mechanism, not
to establish cleanup levels. Exceedance of these
toxicity values does not necessarily indicate that an
ecological risk exists at the Site. Therefore, a
remedial action to address the wetlands was not
necessary.
There was no basis for developing remedial alternatives
to address the surface water and sediments in the
wetlands, as there is no current or future unacceptable




                                                 R2-0003269

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           risk associated with this discrete segment of the Site.
           Therefore, CERCLA Section 121 cleanup standards for
           selection of a remedy (i.e., a detailed analysis of
           alternatives and the requirement to meet ARARs) are not
           triggered.
            As stated in the Proposed Plan, the wetlands will be
            included as part of the overall Site review to be
            conducted at least every five years. CERCLA and the
            NCP require five-year reviews to be conducted at sites
            where the selected remedy results in hazardous
            substances remaining above levels that allow for
            unlimited use and unrestricted exposure. Five-year
            reviews are intended to evaluate whether the response
            action remains protective of public health and the
            environment. The purpose of these reviews is: (1) to
            confirm that the remedy remains effective at protecting
            human health and the environment, and (2) to evaluate
            whether original cleanup levels remain protective of
            human health and the environment. While five-year
            reviews are not required for the Ellis Property Site
           •because the selected remedy will not result in
            hazardous substances remaining above levels that allow
            for unlimited use and unrestricted exposure after
            completion of the remedial action, as a matter of
            policy, EPA will conduct five-year reviews at this
            Site, and other sites where the cleanup levels will
            require five or more years to attain.    In addition,
            five-year reviews would consider whether relevant
            standards of protectiveness have become more stringent
            since completion of the remedial action.
           The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
           protect human health and the environment from current
           and potential threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
           waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
           removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
           that there are no unacceptable risks to human health or
           the environment. NJDEPE and EPA have considered a full
           range of factors to ensure that the remedial actions at
           this Site are sensible, reliable solutions for
           identified site problems, consistent with CERCLA and
           the NCP, and protective of human health and the
           environment.

COMMENT:   The analysis for the white-tailed deer in the
           Ecological Risk Assessment shows that they are at risk,
           and the largest portion of the risk is from the
           ingestion of contaminated surface water at the Site.
           Why isn't surface water being addressed?




                                                           R2-0003270

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                8
RESPONSE: We disagree with this comment. The greatest risk to
          the white-tailed deer is attributed to browse
          ingestion, which is an order of magnitude larger than
          that of surface water ingestion (see Table 2-21 of the
          Ecological Risk Assessment). The risk associated with
          browse ingestion will be mitigated by the surface soil
          remediation. We believe that the surface water samples
          taken during the RI are not representative of actual
          surface water in the wetlands. There.was little or no
          surface water in the wetlands during the RI sampling
          events. "Surface water" was created in the wetlands by
          depressing a beaker, or digging a hole, into the
          surface and allowing water to fill the depression or
          hole. Samples were taken with a bailer, which stirred
          up sediments. This resulted in artificially high
          levels of lead. Consequently, the risks associated
          with the surface water are also not representative.
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water of the
          wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to the white-
          tailed deer, since there is rarely any standing surface
          water in the wetlands. Therefore, a remedial action to
          address the wetlands is not necessary.

COMMENT:   Why didn't you choose remedial alternative SED-1 (No
           Action) or SED-2 (Institutional Controls) given your
           decision not to excavate the sediments and dispose of
           them off site (SED-4)? Why didn't you choose a "No
           Action" alternative for the wetlands and state that it
           will be fenced?
RESPONSE: There was no need to choose among alternatives, since
          the contamination in the wetlands does not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          The surface water and sediment contamination in the
          wetlands are at levels that permit unlimited use and
          unrestricted exposure; therefore, no institutional
          controls are necessary.

COMMENT:   There was no written analysis explaining [the
           rationale] that there should be no remediation of the
           contaminated surface water and sediments in the wetland
           area. The NJDEPE should write a backup to its decision
           not to choose a remedial alternative for the wetlands,
           and that has to be available for public comment.
RESPONSE: The Proposed Plan was available for public comment, and
          explained why remedial alternatives for the sediments
          were not included. Since NJDEPE and EPA determined
          that the contaminants in the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable




                                                           R2-0003271

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           risk to human health or the environment, there was no
           need to evaluate a remedial action to address the
           wetlands. Consequently, the statutory cleanup
           standards of CERCLA Section 121 are not triggered, and
           these requirements need not be addressed in documenting
           the decision that no remedial action is necessary at
           this Site. At the public meeting, NJDEPE explained
           that there was no justification to take a remedial
           action under CERCLA to address the wetlands. Surface
           soil erosion is believed to be a cause of surface water
           and sediment contamination in the wetlands.
           Remediation of the contaminated surface soil would
           reduce the potential for soil erosion.

COMMENT: Why didn't you go through the nine criteria and include
         remedial alternatives for the wetlands and select Mo
         Action?
RESPONSE: Since NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water
          and sediments in the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment,
          an analysis of remedial alternatives would serve no
          purpose.

COMMENT:   Is the decision not to choose a remedial alternative
           for the wetlands a "No Action" alternative for the
           wetlands? If not, why not?
RESPONSE: No, the decision not to evaluate a remedial action to
          address the wetlands does not represent that the "No
          Action" alternative (SED-1) was selected. Based on the
          results of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA
          determined that the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, a remedial action is not warranted in the
          wetlands, and the statutory cleanup standards of CERCLA
          Section 121 (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives)
          are not triggered. The irNo Action" alternative is
          normally used only to establish a baseline for
          comparison to other alternatives. In limited
          situations, it is selected because CERCLA does not
          provide the authority to take a remedial action (e.g.,
          petroleum), or no effective action can be taken using
          currently available technology.

COMMENT: What type of wetland is this; is it a Class A
         wetlands?




                                                           R2-0003272

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               10
RESPONSE: The National Wetland Inventory Maps, prepared by the
         U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, indicate that there are
         two wetland systems found at the Site. The two systems
         are classified as palustrine broad-leaved deciduous
         scrub/shrub and palustrine emergent. NJDEPE is not
         aware of any wetlands classification system that has
         "Class A" as a category.

COMMENT: What does emergent wetland system mean?
RESPONSE: Emergent refers to the habit and form of the vegetation
          in a wetland area. Emergent vegetation is that which
          grows erect in, and above, the water column, and is
          rooted in saturated or inundated soils. Cattails are
          the dominant emergent plant of the wetlands at the
          Site.

COMMENT: Ws prefer sediment alternative SED-4, but, barring SED-
         4, why didn't the NJDEPE choose SED-1 or SED-2? If
         NJDEPE didn't choose SED-4, why didn't the agency at
         least impose institutional controls (i.e. fencing)? -
         There is nothing in the future to prevent digging up of
         the wetlands and the use of the wetlands for food crop.
         At the very least, there should be institutional
         controls such as a fence around the wetland to reduce
         the potential 'for direct human contact with
         contaminated sediment in the wetland and semiannual
         water and sediment sampling as described in SED-2.
RESPONSE: NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment, and that the contaminants
          are at levels that permit unlimited use and
          unrestricted exposure within the realm of wetlands use
          restrictions. Therefore, there is no need for
          institutional controls or remedial alternatives to
          address the wetlands. It should also be noted that the
          wetlands will be included as part of the overall Site
          review to be conducted every five years. The wetlands
          are protected from development by Freshwater Wetlands
          Protection Act. Any and all activities that would
          affect the wetlands must comply with this regulation.

COMMENT: Are any ARARs exceeded in the wetlands?
RESPONSE: No ARARs are exceeded in the wetlands. There are no
          ARARs for sediments. In the absence of ARARs, the need
          for remediation is based on whether a baseline risk




                                                          R2-0003273

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               11
         assessment indicates an actual or potential threat to
         human health or the environment.

(COMMENT: Are any ARARs exceeded for surface water in the
          wetlands?
RESPONSE: There are no ARARs applicable to the surface water in
          the wetlands. The wetlands at the Site are riot
          designated a surface water by the NJDEPE. Therefore,
          the New Jersey Surface Water Quality Criteria are not
          applicable or relevant and appropriate. The FWQC are
          not ARARs because they are not enforceable in and of
          themselves, but rather they are guidelines used to
          establish state standards. In the absence of ARARs,
          the need for remediation is based on whether a baseline
          risk assessment indicates an actual or potential threat
          to human health or the environment.

CQMMEBT: Are any soil ARARs exceeded?
RESPONSE: No. There are no ARARs for soils. New Jersey's
          Proposed Cleanup Levels for Hazardous Waste Sites are
          not ARARs because they have not yet been promulgated.
          In the absence of ARARs for soils, contaminated soils
          would be remediated to risk-based levels.

COMMENT: We object to your method of risk assessment (averaging
         the contaminant levels). Clarify the definition of
         soil versus sediment, as the differences are not clear
         to us.
RESPONSE: Risk assessments conducted by the NJDEPE must be
          consistent with CERCLA and-the NCP. The NCP mandates
          the use of a "reasonable maximum exposure scenario," a
          conservative methodology which assesses potential
          exposures that are reasonably expected to occur at a
          site. Under this methodology, potential exposure to
          the average concentration of contaminants is likely or
          expected to occur. Exclusive long-term exposure to the
          maximum concentration of contaminants in "hot spots" at
          the Site is unrealistic, since the probability of a
          receptor visiting the hot spot is equal to the
          probability of visiting any other point within the area
          of concern. Because the probability of exposure is
          equal for all points in the area of concern, using the
          mean or average concentration of sample points is a
          reasonable maximum exposure.




                                                            R2-0003274

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               12          .     -    •
         The NJDEPE defines soil as unconsolidated mineral and
         organic matter on the surface of the earth that has
         been subjected to, and influenced by, geologic and
         other environmental factors. NJDEPE does not have a
         formal definition of sediment. However, for the Site,
         sediment was considered to be surface deposits that are
         permanently inundated or saturated with water. Soil
         and sediment can be further distinguished by the
         different suites of receptors associated with each
         media.

COMMENT: Is there a dense nonaqueous phase layer underneath the
         Site?
11ESPONSE: The existence of a dense nonaqueous phase liquid
           (DNAPL) in the ground water has not been confirmed.
           The high concentrations of trichloroethene (TCE) found
           in monitoring well MW-2 and tetrachloroethene (PCE) in
           well MW-7 raise the potential for the existence of
           DNAPLs, however, a DNAPL source at the Site has not
           been observed.

COMMENT: Is the aquifer there sufficient enough so that it would
         prevent the percolation of the TCE and PCE?
FESPONSE: Ground-water monitoring wells were installed in the
          shallow, intermediate, and deep aquifers. Since no
          contamination has been found in the intermediate or
          deep wells, we believe that the low permeability
          clay/silt layer located approximately 17 to 25 feet
          below the ground surface is impeding the downward
          movement of ground-water contaminants into the deeper
          aquifers.

COMMENT: In the remedial investigation, the boundary of ground-
         water contamination was not well defined.
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE agrees with this comment. Consequently,
          additional monitoring wells will be installed during
          the design phase to further delineate the
          contamination.

COMMENT: You may want to extend the interceptor trench [in
         Alternative GW-3] a little bit farther, along the
         easterly line. Is NJDEPE going to be digging a trench
         around a semi-circle for ground-water pump and treat
         operations?




                                                           R2-0003275

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                13
.RESPONSE: The purpose of the interceptor trench is to capture the
           contaminant plume in the shallow aquifer as it flows
           downgradient. The diagram of the trench, in the FS is
           only a preliminary estimate and does not represent the
           absolute dimension or configuration. The final
           dimensions and specifications of the trench will be
           determined during the design phase.

COMMENT: Will this area be enclosed with a fence?
RESPONSE: A fence would be installed around the trench area at
          the Site for safety and security reasons. However,
          there may not be a need to fence the trench area if
          there are no above-ground safety or security issues.
          This will be determined during the design.

COMMENT: There is a particularly high sample [of PCE] in the
         southeast [in well MW-7]; you should examine how it got
         there.
RESPONSE: Of all the monitoring wells that were sampled, PCE was
          only detected at well MW-7, at levels of 15,000 parts
          per billion (ppb) and 33,000 ppb. During the remedial
          design, we will conduct additional studies to ascertain
          the source of PCE contamination.

COMMENT:   How long will the lime that was tilled in the former
           acid spill area stay in the ground?
RESPONSE: Lime was tilled into the soil in 1989 to neutralize the
          hydrochloric acid that had spilled or leaked onto the
          ground. By this time, it has probably all reacted with
          the acid. Lime is commonly used in gardening and
          agriculture to reduce the acidity of soil.

COMMENT:   Will the monitoring wells affect my ground-water
           supply?
RESPONSE: No. The monitoring wells will not affect the water
          supply because they will be used only to take discrete
          samples on a limited basis. Water is not continually
          drawn from the monitoring wells. However, as part of
          the ground-water remediation at the Site, extraction
          wells may be installed to withdraw contaminated ground
          water from the shallow aquifer. These wells would be
          installed in locations which would cause minimal impact
          to private wells. Drinking water wells installed in,




                                                          R2-0003276

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                14
           or below, the Wenonah-Mount Laurel aquifer should not
           be affected.

COMMENT:   During the last cleanup of debris, hydraulic oil was
           spilled on the road, and is still evident.
:&£SPONSE: A hydraulic oil spill did occur on the road. An NJDEPE
           representative oversaw the cleanup, which was
           satisfactorily completed by the contractor.

COMMENT:   Did you find contaminated water in the shallow aquifer?
           Was the aquifer tested deeper down?
RESPONSE: Yes, contamination was found in the shallow aquifer.
          Volatile organic compounds were found in five of the
          eight monitoring wells in the shallow aquifer. Trace
          levels of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons, such as
          phthalates, were found in. three wells. In addition,
          arsenic, chromium, lead, nickel, and selenium were also
          detected. Monitoring wells were installed in the two
          aquifers directly beneath the shallow aquifer. Based
          on data obtained during the RI, ground-water quality in
          these aquifers had not been impacted by site
          contamination.

COMMENT:   Will you be building a tower as part of the ground-
           water cleanup? Will it be inside the fence?
RESPONSE: A packed tower will be constructed as part of the
          treatment system; it will be approximately 30 feet
          high. A fence will likely be installed around the
          entire treatment plant.

COMMENT:   Was bioremediation considered as a ground-water
           alternative in the FS? If so, why was it not
           recommended?
RESPONSE: Bioremediation was considered in the FS, but was
          screened out because it would not treat all the
          contaminants in the ground water. While bioremediation
          can be successful for treating organic compounds, it
          will not treat metals. The contaminants found in the
          ground water at the Site include heavy metals, which
          need to be treated. Therefore, bioremediation was not
          considered further.




                                                             R2-0003277

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                15

COMMENT:   The Evesham Township Municipal Utility Authority wants
           to know where the treated effluent would be discharged.
           Will it be discharged into the sewer line?
RESPONSE: There are no plans to discharge the treated effluent to
          the sewer line. The treated discharge from the ground-
          water treatment plant will be reinjected into the
          aquifer.

COMMENT: Were any samples taken from the Wenonah-Mount Laurel
         aquifer? Did you go into the Potomac-Raritan-Magothy
         (PRM) aquifers?
RESPONSE: Seven monitoring wells were installed in the Wenonah-
          Mount Laurel aquifer, the deep aquifer at the Site. No
          contamination-was detected in these wells. In
          addition, wells installed in the intermediate aquifer
          (Navesink) also showed no signs of contamination.
          No wells were installed in the PRM aquifers, which are
          beneath the Wenonah-Mount Laurel aquifer. Since
          contamination was not detected in the two aquifers
          directly beneath the shallow aquifer, there was no
          reason to suspect that contamination had reached the
          PRM aquifers.

COMMENT:   In the course of the remediation, will you be
           monitoring the drinking water periodically over the
           years?
RESPONSE: Ground water at the Site will be sampled during the
          design phase to further characterize the ground-water
          contamination. In addition, a long-term monitoring
          program will be developed during design to evaluate the
          effectiveness of the remediation. The long-term
          monitoring program may include the sampling of potable
          wells.

COMMENT:   Is cost a barrier to cleanup of the wetlands?
RESPONSE: No. Cost was not a factor in the decision not to
          evaluate a remedial action to address the wetlands.

COMMENT: The Proposed Plan should indicate a "No Action"
         alternative for the wetlands so that the wetlands
         will have a specific site review every five years as
         required by the NCP." The NJDEPE then, in five years,
         would go back and make a re-evaluation. This is
         extremely important because the acceptable standards




                                                           R2-0003278

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

           for lead levels have been on the decline, and proposed
           regulations indicate they'll become more stringent.
RESPONSE: There is no justification for selecting a remedial
          alternative for the wetlands where a remedial action is
          not warranted. Based on the results of the Baseline
          Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined that the
          surface water and sediments in the wetlands do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. However, as stated in the Proposed Plan,
          the wetlands will be included as part of the overall
          site review to be conducted every five years. If
          necessary, a remedial action would be evaluated at that
          time to address any problems identified with the
          wetlands. Should monitoring in the future indicate
          that the wetlands pose an unacceptable risk,
          remediation of the wetlands would be reconsidered.

COMMENT: Are there going to be any institutional controls, such
         as deed restrictions, on the wetlands to protect it
         from being excavated in the future?
RESPONSE: There is no justification for implementing any
          institutional controls in the wetlands. Based on the
          results of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA
          determined that the contaminants in the wetlands do not
          pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment, and that the contaminants are at levels
          that permit unlimited use and unrestricted exposure,
          within the realm of wetlands use restrictions. The
          wetlands are protected from development by the
          Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act. Any and all
          activities that would affect the wetlands must comply
          with this regulation.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM COALITION AGAINST TOXICS. DATED MAY 13.
JUL92
COMMENT:   Failure to remove contaminants in the wetlands could
           re-contaminate the aquifer and endanger human and
           aquatic life in the wetlands.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands do not_pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment. We believe that the
          contaminants in the wetlands would not re-contaminate
          the aquifer because ground, water at the Site discharges
          into the wetlands. The ground-water extraction wells
          will be designed to capture the contamination plume in




                                                           R2-0003279

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                17
           the shallow aquifer, and will not withdraw water from
           the wetlands. Contaminants in the sediments, such as
           lead and chromium, are adsorbed onto the sediment
           particles. It is unlikely that the ground-water table
           that discharges into the wetlands would carry these
           contaminants back into the aquifer. Therefore, there
           is no need for a remedial action to address the
           wetlands.

COMMENT:   Failure to remove contaminants in the wetlands may
           incur liability for future cleanup costs to either the
           State or the municipality. Since it is not clear who
           will be the owner of the property, the liability
           question is paramount. In order to clarify the
           liability question, the State of New Jersey should take
           title to the land now.
KESPONSE: The State of New Jersey will not take title to the land
          at this time. However, as part of its cost recovery
          program, it may do so at a later date. The Township
          should consult an attorney regarding the liabilities
          under CERCLA associated with foreclosure of the
          property. However, should monitoring in the future
          indicate that there is an unacceptable risk in the
          wetlands, remediation of the wetlands would be
          reconsidered. In this event, CERCLA funds could be
          used for any action determined to be necessary. Even
          after a site is delisted from the National Priorities
          List (NPL), a CERCLA action can be taken, if required,
          without re-listing the site. Therefore, the State and
          municipality would not have to bear any future
          financial liability.

COMMENT: Future residential or agricultural development in the
         immediate Sharp Road area may be affected by off-site
         migration of pollutants. The lead and chromium
         migrated into the wetlands; they can also migrate out.
         It doesn't belong in the wetlands and your agency is
         being remiss if it allows it to stay. I don't think
         anyone intended to leave wetlands out of the cleanup of
         Superfund sites, and by doing so, NJOEPE and EPA are
         not complying with the law.
RESPONSE: We disagree with this comment. Based on the results of
          the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined
          that the contaminants in the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable
          risk to human health or the environment. The
          contaminants in the wetlands are at levels that permit
          unlimited use and unrestricted exposure within the




                                                          R2-0003280

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               18
         realm of wetlands use restrictions. Therefore, there
         is no basis for a remedial action to address the
         wetlands. The ground-water and soil remediation would
         mitigate the potential for off-site migration of
         contaminants. The primary 'mandate of the Superfund
         program is to protect human health and the environment
         from current and potential threats posed by
         uncontrolled hazardous substances. However, CERCLA
         does not require the complete removal of hazardous
         substances where it has been shown that there is no
         unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
         NJDEPE and EPA have considered a full range of factors
         to ensure that the remedial actions at this Site are
         sensible, reliable solutions for identified site
         problems, consistent with CERCLA and the NCP, and
         protective of human health and the environment.
         Furthermore, as stated in the Proposed Plan, the
         wetlands will be included as part of the overall site
         review to be conducted every five years. If necessary,
         remedial actions would be evaluated at that time to
         address any problems identified with the wetlands.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM DR. HENRY S. COLE. DATED MAY 13. 1992

COMMENT: Although NJDEPE and EPA have chosen sound approaches to
         the cleanup of soils and ground water at the Ellis
         Property Site, the Proposed Plan fails to meet the
         requirements of the Superfund Amendments and
         Reauthorization Act of .1986 (SARA) and CERCLA with
         regard to contaminated surface water and sediments in
         the wetlands, and should be rewritten to include
         specific remedies for contamination in the wetlands and
         in the drainage ditches.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that contaminants in the
          surface water and sediments in the wetlands and
          drainage ways do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment. Therefore, remedial
          alternatives to address the surface water and sediments
          are not required. NJDEPE and EPA have acted consistent
          with both CERCLA and the NCP in their decision not to
          evaluate a remedial action to address the surface water
          and sediments in the wetlands and drainage ways.

COMMENT; EPA and NJDEPE should specify soil cleanup levels in
         the Record of Decision (ROD).
RESPONSE: The soil and ground-water cleanup levels for the Ellis
          Property Site are listed in Tables 5 and 6 of the ROD.




                                                          R2-0003281

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                19

           NJDEPE has requested that the soil and ground-water
           contamination at the Site be remediated to the levels
           specified in its Proposed Cleanup Standards for
           Contaminated Sites (February 1992). shown in Tables 7A
           and 7B of the ROD. These proposed standards are not
           recognized as ARARs under Section 121(d) of CERCLA,
           because they are not yet promulgated. However, EPA has
           determined that further remediation of the soil and
           ground water at the Site to the levels requested by the
           NJDEPE, does not conflict, or is not inconsistent, with
           the selected remedy. The NJDEPE has agreed to fund the
           incremental costs associated with this additional
           cleanup.

COMMENT:   The Ellis Site Task Force requests to have the
           opportunity to review the remedial design phase
           specifications for the removal and post-remedial
           testing to ensure that the cleanup levels for soil
           contaminants are met.
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE will work with the Ellis Property Task Force
          during the design phase-to ensure that their concerns
          are considered.

COMMENT: Special care should be taken to ensure that the release
         of dust is mitigated during excavation and transport of
         the contaminated soils and materials from the Site.
RESPONSE: Appropriate measures would be taken to minimize the
          generation of dust during excavation and
          transportation. A health and safety plan will be
          prepared and implemented to protect the workers and the
          community during remedial construction.

COMMENT: The final remedial objective in the Record of Decision
         should state "reduce contaminant concentrations in
         ground water to promulgated State and Federal
         standards." This should cover the contingency in which
         contamination of lower aquifers is discovered during
         the remedial design phase.
RESPONSE: Contamination appears to be limited to the shallow
          aquifer, since no contamination was detected in the two
          aquifers directly beneath the shallow aquifer.
          Therefore, there is no reason to suspect that the
          deeper aquifers are contaminated at this time.
          However, should monitoring indicate that they are being
          adversely impacted, appropriate remedial alternatives
          will be considered at that time.




                                                           R2-0003282

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                20
COMMENT: Explain the basis for a combination of extraction wells
         and interceptor trench, rather than a system comprised
         solely of extraction wells (regarding contaminated
         ground water).
RESPONSE: Extraction wells and an interceptor trench were both
          included in the remedial alternative to add flexibility
          to the design of the extraction system. It is likely
          that an interceptor trench will be installed west of
          the wetlands to act as a hydraulic barrier and
          extraction wells will be installed in "hot spots"
          located further away from the trench. However, the
          exact nature of the extraction system will be
          determined during remedial design.

COMMENT:   It is recommended that activated carbon be required,
           rather than considered, in the ROD as a component of
           the remedy.
RESPONSE: In the FS report, an activated carbon adsorption unit
          was recommended to control volatile organic compound
          (VOC) emissions from the air stripper to comply with
          the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Regulations.
          However, it may not be necessary if the emissions
          comply with the regulations.

COMMENT: The ROD should require a aiore rigorous examination of
         the shallow aquifer and its base for the presence of
         DNAPLs, given the high concentrations of TCE and PCE
         compounds which have a tendency to form DNAPLs.
RESPONSE: Additional monitoring wells will be installed during
          the design phase to further characterize the ground-
          water contamination. As stated in the ROD, further
          testing and studies will be performed during the design
          phase to delineate the extent of ground-water
          contamination and to determine if a DNAPL is present.

COMMENT: The Proposed Plan for the cleanup of the Ellis Property
         Site should be rewritten to include SED-4, removal of
         contaminated sediments from the wetlands and drainage
         areas, and treatment/disposal at an off-site landfill.
         The Proposed Plan not only fails to clean up the
         wetlands, but has not explained its failure to address
         the wetlands.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands and drainage ways do not pose an unacceptable




                                                           R2-0003283

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               21
         risk to human health or the environment, therefore, a
         remedial action to address the wetlands and drainage
         ways is not justified. The Proposed Plan did explain
         why remedial alternatives to address the sediments were
         not included.

COMMENT: The Proposed Plan contains no systematic evaluation of
         possible remedial approaches for the wetlands, as was
         done for both ground water and soils. The de facto "No
         Action" remedy fails to include or consider
         institutional controls that would prevent residential
         or agricultural development of the land in the future.
         The arbitrary and summary dismissal of remediation of
         the wetlands has precluded formal consideration of
         physical remediation (e.g., excavation and removal, or
         vegetative removal of toxic substances), land-use
         restrictions, or even actions such as fencing the
         contaminated area in the Proposed Plan. As such, the
         document is flawed. Moreover, the document does not
         make it clear that toxic substances remaining in the
         wetlands following remediation would require five year
         review required in SARA.
RESPONSE: The decision not to evaluate a remedial action to
          address the wetlands does not represent that the "No
          Action" alternative (SED-1) was selected. Based on the
          results of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA
          determined that the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, a remedial action is not warranted in the
          wetlands. The statutory cleanup standards of CERCLA
          Section 121 (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives)
          are not triggered and need not be addressed in
          documenting this decision. The wetlands are protected
          from development by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection
          Act. Any and all activities that would affect the
          wetlands must comply with this regulation.
         The "No Action" alternative is normally used only to
         establish a baseline for comparison to other
         alternatives. In limited situations, it is selected
         because CERCLA does not provide the authority to take a
         remedial action (e.g., petroleum), or no effective
         action can be taken using currently available
         technology. The contaminants in the wetlands are at
         levels that permit unlimited use and unrestricted
         exposure, therefore, no institutional controls are
         necessary. Furthermore, it is not the intent of CERCLA
         to hinder or prevent development of land where there
         are no associated threats. The Proposed Plan did state
         that the wetlands will be reviewed every five years.




                                                          R2-0003284

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                22
COMMENT:   The Proposed Plan is inconsistent with the NCP, which
           requires that an evaluation [of the alternatives to
           address the wetlands] be made with regard to the nine
           criteria.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the wetlands do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. Therefore, a remedial action to address,
          the wetlands is not warranted. The statutory cleanup
          standards of CERCLA Section 121 (i.e., a detailed
          analysis of alternatives) are not triggered and need
          not be addressed in documenting this decision.

COMMENT:   EPA and NJDEPE have proposed a No Action approach for
           contaminated wetlands and drainage ways behind closed
           doors, without a publicly commentable written
           explanation.
RESPONSE: The decision not to evaluate a remedial action
          addressing the wetlands and drainage ways does not
          represent that the No Action Alternative (SED-1) was
          selected. Based on the results of the Baseline Risk-
          Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined that the wetlands
          and drainage ways do not pose an unacceptable risk to
          human health or the environment. Therefore, a remedial
          action to address the wetlands and drainage ways is not
          warranted. The statutory cleanup standards of CERCLA
          Section 121 (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives)
          are not triggered and need not be addressed in
          documenting this decision. The public comment period
          provided the public the opportunity to review and
          comment on the Proposed Plan and the preferred remedial
          alternatives. The Proposed Plan, which was available
          for public comment, stated the reason why remedial
          alternatives to address the sediments in the wetlands
          were not included.

COMMENT:   Sediment samples SD-14 and SD-15 (in the wetlands)
           exceed the proposed NJDEPE standard for lead in
           residential soils of 100 parts per million (ppm); yet
           no consideration was given to remedies that would
           prevent development of this area or that would
           remediate the area to mitigate the exposure of
           residents to excessive lead soil concentrations in the
           event that the wetlands are drained and developed.
RESPONSE: Lead in sediment samples SD-14 (204 ppm) and SD-17
           (154 ppm) exceeded 100 ppm. The concentrations of lead
           in the other 18 sediment samples were below 100 ppm.




                                                           R2-0003285

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                23

           Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
           NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminated surface
           water and sediments in the wetlands do not pose an
           unacceptable risk to human health or the environment,
           for both the current and future unrestricted land-use
           scenarios. Therefore, the concentrations of lead in
           the sediments are at levels that permit unlimited use
           and unrestricted exposure, and no institutional
           controls are necessary. In addition, the wetlands are
           protected from development by the Freshwater Wetlands
           Protection Act. Any and all activities that would
           affect the wetlands must comply with this regulation.

COMMEKT: Table 1-5 (p. 1-22) of the Baseline Risk Assessment
         shows an average lead concentration of 222 parts per
         billion (ppb) in the wetlands surface water. Page 2-57
         of the Baseline Risk Assessment indicates that lead
         levels in surface water in the wetlands would pose both
         acute and chronic risks to aquatic organisms. For
         acute risks, the hazard index (based on average
         concentration) is 7, for chronic risks the hazard index
         is 172.
FiESPONSE: We believe that the surface water samples taken during
           the RI are not representative of actual surface water
           in the wetlands. There was little or no surface water
           in the wetlands during the RI sampling events.
           "Surface water" was created in the wetlands by
           depressing a beaker, or digging a hole, into the
           surface and allowing water to fill the depression or
           hole. Samples were taken with a bailer, which stirred
           up sediments. This resulted in artificially high
           levels of lead. Consequently, the risks associated
           with the surface water are_ also not representative.
           NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water of the
           wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to aquatic
           life because the exposure pathway is not probable,
           since there was little or no surface water in the
           wetlands.

COMMENT:   The Proposed Plan ignores the findings of the RI/FS and
           the Baseline Risk Assessment. These documents indicate
           that a No Action alternative for the wetlands would
           leave significant risks uncorrected. Thus the remedy
           proposal is inconsistent with Section 121 of CERCLA and
           the NCP.
RESPONSE: We disagree with this comment. The Proposed Plan and
          the preferred remedial alternatives were in fact based
          on the findings of the RI/FS and the Baseline Risk




                                                          R2-0003286

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                24
           Assessment. In response to local community concerns
           about project delays, NJDEPE made every effort to
           expedite the completion of both the RI and FS for the
           Site. A baseline risk assessment is normally conducted
           prior to the FS to determine whether the contaminants
           of concern identified at a site pose a current or
           potential unacceptable risk to human health or the
           environment. To save time on the Ellis schedule, the
           NJDEPE contractor prepared the Baseline Risk Assessment
           and the FS concurrently, based on the data obtained
           during the RI. Since some hazardous substances were
           detected in the wetlands, remedial alternatives to
           address the wetlands were included in the FS, on the
           assumption that the risk assessment would provide the
           basis for an action to be taken. Part of the
           assessment for the Ellis Site focused on surface water
           and sediments in the wetlands. For both the current
           land-use and future unrestricted land-use scenarios,
           human health risks associated with the contaminants in
           the wetland area were below the range that would
           trigger a cleanup under CERCLA. Similarly, the
           Baseline Risk Assessment indicated that the
           environmental risks associated with the wetland parcel
           were negligible. Based on the results of the Baseline
           Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined that the
           contamination in the wetlands does not pose an
           unacceptable risk to human health or the environment,
           and that the levels of contamination in the wetlands
           permit unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.
           Accordingly, there was no basis for developing remedial
           alternatives under CERCLA for the surface water and
           sediments in the wetlands; therefore, the Proposed Plan
           did not include remedial alternatives for the wetland
           area. Because there were no unacceptable risks
           associated with the surface water and sediments in the
           wetlands and drainage ways, they were not discussed in
           the Proposed Plan. Therefore, the selected remedy is
           consistent with CERCLA and the NCP.

COMMENT:   The statement, "NJDEPE and EPA have determined that
           remediation of the sediments in the wetlands would be
           more detrimental than beneficial" was not
           substantiated.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable
          risk to human health or the environment. Therefore,
          remediation of the wetlands is not necessary. The
          wetlands at the Site is a sensitive ecosystem, and
          provide potential critical habitat for threatened/




                                                          R2-0003287

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               25
         endangered wildlife in Burlington County. Excavation
         of the wetlands may adversely affect wildlife and their
         habitat. Restoration of the wetlands to its original
         functional value would be difficult to achieve. Heavy
         equipment, such as a tractor, would be used to excavate
         the sediments in the wetlands. As a consequence, the
         wetlands may be permanently degraded or destroyed.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM MR. RANDY BLUME
COMMENT: What you have in the wetlands is contaminated soil.
         There are action levels for soil, therefore, NJDEPE can
         justify a cleanup.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands and drainage ways do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. Therefore, a cleanup action under CERCLA
          is not justified. Furthermore, NJDEPE's promulgated
          soil standards do not apply to sediments.

COMMENT: I object to the NJDEPE averaging the contamination in
         the wetlands [regarding the risk assessment]. Studies
         identified hot spots of contamination. Using "clean"
         areas to lower the average [concentration of
         contaminants in an area] is simply using a dilution
         approach to avoid a needed cleanup.
RESPONSE: Risk assessments conducted by the NJDEPE must be
          consistent with CERCLA and the NCP. The NCP mandates
          the use of a "reasonable maximum exposure scenario," a
          conservative methodology which assesses potential
          exposures that are reasonably expected to occur at a
          site. Under this methodology, potential exposure to
          the average concentration of contaminants is likely
          expected to occur. Exclusive long-term exposure to the
          maximum concentration of contaminants in "hot spots" at
          the Site is unrealistic, since the probability of a
          receptor visiting the hot spot is equal to the
          probability of visiting any.other point within the area
          of concern. Because the probability of exposure is
          equal for all points in the area of concern, using the
          mean or average concentration of sample points is a
          reasonable maximum exposure.

COMMENT: I urge you to reject an argument put forth at the
         public meeting by NJDEPE Risk Assessment staff. The
         argument was that because the area of contamination in




                                                          R2-0003288

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                26

           the wetlands is small and there are other areas in the
           state that have much higher contamination, cleanup is
           not warranted. I'm being told that because someone
           else's backyard is dirtier, Superfund does not have to
           do a good job on my cleanup.
RESPONSE: A cleanup action in the wetlands is not substantiated
           by the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment; NJDEPE
           and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
           wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
           health or the environment. Contamination in areas
           other than this Site was not considered in the
           decision.

COMMENT:   The Proposed Plan did not address the issue that in the
           wetlands the soil contamination levels increased with
           depth and that the extent of the depth of contamination
           was not ascertained.
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE has examined the results of the RI with
          regard to the sediments in the wetlands. The data,
          presented in Table 3-21 of the RI report, is
          inconclusive with respect to increasing concentrations
          of contaminants with increasing depth. Sample DEP-1
          indicates that the levels of lead and chromium
          decreased with depth. Samples DEP-3 and DEP-5 show
          that chromium increased with depth, but lead decreased
          with depth. In samples DEP-2 and DEP-4, both lead and
          chromium increased with depth. Notwithstanding, the
          increase or decrease in concentrations are not
          significant.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM THE TOWNSHIP OF EVESHAM. DATED JUNE 1. 1992
COMMENT: While we support the cleanup remedies suggested for
         soil and ground water, we reject the lack of
         remediation in the wetlands, and feel that the
         incompleteness of the cleanup does not satisfy
         statutory requirements to protect human health and the
         environment.. Furthermore, by eliminating all proposed
         choices of a wetland sediment alternative from the
         Proposed Plan, NJDEPE and EPA have precluded public
         comment on that decision process.
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE and EPA have acted consistent with both
          CERCLA and the NCP in their decision not to evaluate a
          remedial action addressing the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands. Pursuant to Section
          300.430(d) of the NCP, a remedial investigation was
          conducted to characterize the Site for the purpose of




                                                           R2-0003289

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                     27
developing and evaluating effective remedial
alternatives. The remedial investigation data did show
that there were hazardous substances in the wetlands.
A baseline risk assessment was then performed to
determine whether the contaminants of concern *
identified at the Site posed a current or potential
risk to human health or the environment. Part of this
assessment focused on the health risks associated
specifically with surface water and sediments in the
wetlands. In the current land-use scenario/ the risks
to human health associated with exposure to
contaminants in the wetlands ranged from 2.52 x 10'10 to
3.37 x 10*. In the future.unrestricted land-use
scenario, 6the risks ranged from 2.86 x 10'10 to
4.12 x 1CT . These risks are below or within the
acceptable risk range of 1 x 10"4 to 1 x 10*.
NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
surface water and sediments of the wetlands do not pose
an unacceptable risk to the environment for the
following reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure
to contaminants in the surface water and sediments is
low, considering that there is seldom any standing
surface water in the wetlands. The surface water
samples that were collected are not believed to be
representative of actual surface water. There was
little or no surface water in the wetlands during the
RI sampling events. "Surface water" was created by
depressing a beaker or digging a hole into the surface
of the wetlands and allowing water to fill the
depression or hole. Samples were taken with a bailer,
which stirred up the sediments. This resulted in
artificially high concentrations of lead. Because lead
adheres to sediment particles, the presence of
sediments in the water samples resulted in artificially
high concentrations of lead. The calculated risks
associated with the contaminated sediments in the
wetlands are not believed to be representative of
actual risks. The risks associated with the sediments
were formulated using overly conservative assumptions
based on toxicity values that are more applicable to
saltwater systems. However, NJDEPE and EPA routinely
use these toxicity values as a screening mechanism, not
to establish cleanup levels. Exceedance of these
toxicity values does not necessarily indicate that an
ecological risk exists at the Site. Therefore, a
remedial action to address the wetlands was not
necessary.
Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
NJDEPE and EPA determined that there is no basis for
developing remedial alternatives to address the surface




                                                R2-0003290

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               28

         water and sediments in the wetlands, as there is no
         current or future unacceptable risk associated with
         this discrete segment of the Site. Therefore, CERCLA
         Section 121 cleanup standards for selection of a remedy
         (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives and the
         requirement to meet ARARs) are not triggered. As
         stated in the Proposed Plan, the wetlands will be
         included as part of the Site review to be conducted at
         least every five years.
         The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
         protect human health and the environment from current
         and potential threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
         waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
         removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
         that there are no unacceptable risks to human health or
         the environment. NJDEPE and EPA have considered a full
         range of factors to ensure that the remedial actions at
         this Site are sensible, reliable solutions for
         identified site' problems, consistent with CERCLA and
         the NCP, and protective of human health and the
         environment.
         The public was given the opportunity to comment on the
         Proposed Plan and the preferred remedial alternatives
         during the public comment period, which was from May 1
         through June 15, 1992. The Proposed Plan explained why
         remedial alternatives for the sediments in the wetlands
         were not included.

COMMENT: Failure to remove contaminants in the wetlands could
         re-contaminate the aquifer.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment. We believe that the
          contaminants in the wetlands would not re-contaminate
          the aquifer because ground water at the Site discharges
          into the wetlands. The ground-water extraction wells
          will be designed to capture the contamination plume in
          the shallow aquifer, and will not withdraw water from
          the wetlands. Contaminants in the sediments, such as
          lead and chromium, are adsorbed onto the sediment
          particles. It is unlikely that the ground-water table
          that discharges into the wetlands would carry these .
          contaminants back into the aquifer. Therefore, there
          is no need for a remedial action to address the
          wetlands.




                                                          R2-0003291

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               29
COMMENT: Failure to remove contaminants in the wetlands now may
         incur liability for future cleanup costs to either the
         state or the municipality. In order to clarify the
         liability question, the State of New Jersey should take
         title of the land now.
RESPONSE: The State of New Jersey will not take title to the land
           at this time. However, as part of its cost recovery
           program, it may do so at a later date. The
           contaminants in the wetlands do not pose an
           unacceptable risk to human health or the environment..
           The Township should consult an attorney regarding the
           liabilities under CERCLA associated with foreclosure of
         • the property. Should monitoring in the future indicate
           that there is an unacceptable risk in the wetlands,
           remediation of the wetlands would be reconsidered.
           Even after a site is delisted from the NPL, an action
           can be taken under CERCLA, if required, without re-
           listing the site.

COMMENT: Future residential, commercial, or agricultural
         development in the immediate Sharp Road area may be
         affected by off-site migration of pollutants. Lead,
         chromium, TCE and other contaminants have already
         migrated into the wetlands; they can also migrate out.
         The risk assessment does not address future exposure
         pathways should the wetlands be developed.
RESPONSE: The Baseline Risk Assessment indicated that health
          risks in the future residential land-use scenario was
          associated with the contaminated soils and ground
          water. NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants
          in the surface water and sediments in the wetlands do
          not pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. ^Furthermore, the contaminants in the
          wetlands are at levels that permit unlimited use and
          unrestricted exposure within the realm of wetlands use
          restrictions. The ground-water and soil remediation
          would mitigate the potential for off-site migration of
          contaminants.
         The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
         protect human health and the environment from current
         and potential threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
         waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
         removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
         that there is no unacceptable risk to human health or
         the environment. NJDEPE arid EPA have considered a full
         range of factors to ensure that the remedial actions at
         this Site are sensible, reliable solutions for
         identified site problems, consistent with CERCLA and




                                                          R2-0003292

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                30

           the NCP, and protective of human health and the
           environment. Development of the wetlands is restricted
           by the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act. Any and all
           activities that would affect the wetlands must comply
           with this regulation.

COMMENT:   It has always been the Township's position that the
           Site be restored to its original pristine state and
           while we believe in maintaining Evesham's wetlands, we
           feel in this case the best approach to their
           maintenance is to remove the contaminants so that they
           can perform their unique cleansing function.
RESPONSE; Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment. Therefore, a remedial
          action to address the wetlands is not justified. EPA
          is not authorized to take an action under CERCLA where
          there are no unacceptable risks to human health or the
          environment.
           The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
           protect human health and the environment from current
           and potential threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
           waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
           removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
           that there is no unacceptable risk to human health or
           the environment. Furthermore, restoration of the
           wetlands to its original functional value would be very
           difficult to achieve. Heavy equipment, such as a
           tractor, would be used to excavate the sediments in the
           wetlands. As a consequence, the wetlands at the Site
           could be permanently degriided or destroyed.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM THE EVESHAM MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.
DATED JUNE 12. 1992
COMMENT?   The indication that only one monitoring well will be
           installed in the Wenonah-Mount Laurel Aquifer is not
           acceptable. The failure to recommend any monitoring at
           all for the Potomac-Raritan-Magothy (PRM) aquifers is
           not acceptable. At least three monitoring wells should
           be located in each of the potable drinking water
           aquifers (Wenonah-Mount Laurel and PRM aquifers).
           These wells should be located in such a manner that
           they would indicate potential contamination of the
           drinking water, well in advance of this water's
           entrance into the public water supply source. These
           wells should be tested on a monthly basis. The testing




                                                          R2-0003293

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               31

         should include A-280 for organics, as well as primary
         and secondary tests for metals as outlined in of the
         National Primary Drinking Water Standards.
RESPONSE: Seven monitoring wells were installed in the Wenonah-
          Mount Laurel aquifer during the RI. Additional
          monitoring wells will be installed during the design
          phase to determine the extent of the contaminant plume
          and the possible existence of a DNAPL source. These
          monitoring wells will be installed in locations that
          provide data to make these determinations. Since no
          contamination was detected in the two aquifers directly
          beneath the shallow aquifer, there is no reason at this
          time to suspect that the PRM aquifers have been
          contaminated. The aquifers above the PRM will be
          monitored. Should this monitoring indicate contaminant
          migration downward, installation and monitoring of
          wells in the PRM will be reconsidered. Appropriate
          analyses and the frequency of testing these monitoring
          wells will be determined during the design phase.

COMMENT: Failure to remove contaminants from the wetlands is a
         gross injustice to the customers of the Evesham
         Municipal Utilities Authority.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediment contamination in the wetlands does not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, a remedial action in the wetlands is not
          justified.

COMMENT: Failure to remove the lead and chromium, could lead to
         severe problems in the future. Present information
         cannot guarantee that these materials will not end up
         in the municipal water supply.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health or the environment. We believe that the
          contaminants in the wetland would not re-contaminate
          the aquifer because ground water at the Site discharges
          into the wetlands. The ground-water extraction wells
          will be designed to capture the contamination plume in
          the shallow aquifer, and will not withdraw water from
          the wetlands. Contaminants in the sediments, such as
          lead and chromium, are adsorbed onto the sediment
          particles. It is unlikely that the ground-water table
          that discharges into the wetlands would carry these




                                                          R2-0003294

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                32
           contaminants back into the aquifer. Therefore, there
           is no need for -a remedial action to address the
           wetlands. As stated in the Proposed Plan, the wetlands
           will be included as part of the overall site review to
           be conducted every five years. If necessary, remedial
           actions would be evaluated at that time to address any
           problems identified.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM ELLIS SITE TASK FORCE. DATED JUNE 7. 1992

COMMENT: The Ellis Task Force urgently request that you
         reinstate the wetlands into the cleanup plan for the
         Site.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediment contamination in the wetlands does not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, a remedial action to address the wetlands is
          not justified.

COMMENT: Failure to choose an alternative to address sediment
         contamination in the wetlands undercuts the success of
         soil and ground-water cleanup strategies.
RESPONSE: We disagree with this comment. We believe that the
          contaminants in the wetlands would not affect the
          ground-water and soil remediation at the Site. The
          ground-water interceptor trench and/or extraction wells
          will be designed to capture the contamination plume in
          the shallow aquifer, and will not withdraw water from
          the wetlands. Contaminants in the sediments, such as
          lead and chromium, are adsorbed onto the sediment
          particles. It is unlikely that the ground-water table
          that discharges into the wetlands  would carry these
          contaminants back into the1, aquifer.

COMMENT:   Failure to choose Alternative SED-4 means that the
           evaluation criteria for proper cleanup will not be met
           for sediments.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that there was no basis for
          developing remedial alternatives to address the surface
          water and sediments in the wetlands, as there is no
          current or future unacceptable risk associated with
          this discrete segment of the Site. Therefore, CERCLA
          Section 121 cleanup standards for selection of a remedy
          (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives and the




                                                          R2-0003295

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                33

           requirement to meet ARARs) are not triggered. As
           stated in the Proposed Plan, the wetlands will be
           included as part of the Site review to be conducted at
           least every five years.

COMMENT:   Favoring No Action in the wetlands over removal of
           contaminants does not seem warranted, based on the
           scope of the contamination and the exceedance of hazard
           indices by tenfold. We disagree with the risk
           assessment conclusion that only a conservative marginal
           risk to the ecosystem exists,
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Ecological Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          surface water and sediments in the wetlands do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to the environment for the
          following reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure
          to contaminants in the surface water and sediments is
          low, considering that there is seldom any standing
          surface water in the wetlands. The surface water
          samples that were collected in the wetlands during the
          RI are not believed to be representative of actual
          surface water. There was little or no surface water in
          the wetlands during the RI sampling events. "Surface
          water" was created by depressing a beaker, or digging a
          hole, into the surface of the wetlands and allowing
          water to fill the depression or hole. Samples were
          taken with a bailer, which stirred up the sediments.
          This resulted in artificially high concentrations of
          lead. Because lead adheres to sediment particles, the
          presence of sediments in the water samples resulted in
          artificially high concentrations of lead. The
          calculated risks associated with the contaminated
          sediments in the wetlands are not believed to be ,
          representative of actual risks. The risks associated
          with the sediments were formulated using overly
          conservative assumptions based on toxicity values that
          are more applicable to saltwater systems. However,
          NJDEPE and EPA routinely use these toxicity values as a
          screening mechanism, not to establish cleanup levels.
          Exceedance of these toxicity values does not
          necessarily indicate that an ecological risk exists at
          the Site. The wetlands at the Site is a sensitive
          ecosystem, and provide potential critical habitat for
          threatened/endangered wildlife in Burlington County.
          Excavation of the wetlands may adversely affect
          wildlife and their habitat. Restoration of the
          wetlands to its original functional value would be
          difficult to achieve. Heavy equipment, such as a
          tractor, would be used to excavate the sediments in the
          wetlands. As a consequence, the wetlands may be




                                                          R2-0003296

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                34

           permanently degraded or destroyed. Therefore, a
           remedial action to address the wetlands is not
           necessary.

COMMENT:   Failure to choose a remedial action in the wetlands
           (sediments) leaves the municipality and the State in a
           position of liability for future cleanup.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminated surface
          water and sediments in the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Furthermore, the contaminants are at levels that permit
          unlimited use and unrestricted exposure within the
          realm of wetlands use restrictions. Therefore, a
          remedial action to address the wetlands is not
          justified. However, should monitoring in the future
          indicate an unacceptable risk in the wetlands,
          remediation of the wetlands could be reconsidered. In
          this event, CERCLA funds could be used for any action
          determined to be necessary. Even after a site is
          delisted, a CERCLA action can be taken, if required,"
          without re-listing the site. Therefore, the State and
          municipality would not have to bear any future
          financial liability.

COMMENT:   The cost of sediment removal and wetlands restoration
           is minimal and the rehabilitation of the wetlands is
           feasible. [Justification for a remedial action in the
           wetlands.]
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          remediation of the wetlands is not justified; the
          contaminants in the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          EPA is not authorized to take an action under CERCLA
          where there is no unacceptable risk to human health or
          the environment, just because the cost is low.

COMMENT:   Monitoring of the Site should continue almost
           indefinitely, as no one can really assess the scope of
           contamination or the potential effect of high volume
           production wells in the future.
RESPONSE: Monitoring at the Site will continue until the cleanup
          levels listed in the ROD are achieved.




                                                             R2-0003297

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                35

COMMENT: Was a change in future drainage/hydrology considered,
         i.e., if the wet areas were dry, would the levels of
         lead and chromium then trigger a cleanup?
RESPONSE: A change in hydrologic conditions in the wetlands was
          not considered in the Baseline Risk Assessment, since
          it is highly unlikely that the wetlands would become
          dry land. Nonetheless, if the hydrology of the
          wetlands were the only thing to change at the Site, the
          current levels of contaminants would still not trigger
          a cleanup action under CERCLA.

COMMENT:   Ground-water pumping may dry out the wetlands or
           reinjection may make them wetter and cause run-off.
           Under either of these scenarios, the [proposed] soil
           standards and surface water standards are exceeded for
           lead, chromium, and TCE in the wetlands, and therefore,
           we believe there is ample justification for cleanup in
           the wetlands.
RESPONSE: As previously stated, there is no justification for a
          remedial action to address the wetlands because the
          contaminated surface water and sediments do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health and the environment.
          A study of the effects of extraction and discharge of
          ground water on the hydrology of the wetlands will be
          performed during the design phase. The hydrologic
          impacts to the wetlands will be avoided or minimized to
          the maximum extent practicable. If it is determined
          during design that the extraction of contaminated
          ground water will adversely affect the hydrology of the
          Wetlands, engineering controls will be designed to
          mitigate the hydrologic impacts to the wetlands. It is
          unlikely that the wetlands-would dry up completely
          because there is a high ground-water table in the
          wetlands. NJDEPE's promulgated soil standards and
          surface water regulations do not apply to contaminated
          sediments in the wetlands. New Jersey's proposed soil
          and ground-water standards are not ARARs because they
          are not yet promulgated.

COMMENT:   Failure to remove contaminants in the wetlands could
           re-contaminate the aquifer. There is potential for
           continual recontamination of the aquifer by the
           contaminated sediments, the same aquifer being cleansed
           by the pump and treat system. This piecemeal approach
           would seem to doom the aquifer cleansing process to
           failure.




                                                          R2-0003298

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                36

RESPONSE: We believe that the contaminants in the wetlands would
          not re-contaminate the aquifer because ground water at
          the Site discharges into the wetlands. The ground-
          water extraction wells will be designed to capture the
          contamination plume in the shallow aquifer, and will
          not withdraw water from the wetlands. Contaminants in
          the sediments, such as lead and chromium, are adsorbed
          onto the sediment particles. It is unlikely that the
          ground-water table that discharges into the wetlands
          would carry these contaminants back into the aquifer.
          We believe that the contaminants in the wetlands will
          not affect the performance of the ground-water
          extraction and treatment system.

COMMENT: Why was Alternative SED-4 rejected?
RESPONSE: The decision not to evaluate a remedial action
          addressing the wetlands does not represent that the No
          Action alternative (SED-1) was selected, or that
          Alternative SED-4 was rejected. Based on the results
          of the Baseline Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA
          determined that the contaminants in the wetlands do not
          pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. Therefore, a remedial action to address
          the wetlands is not warranted, and the statutory
          cleanup standards of CERCLA Section 121 (i.e., a
          detailed analysis of alternatives) are not triggered.

COMMENT:   In the Proposed Plan, why aren't the ranges of
           contaminants listed for sediments the way they were for
           soil and ground water?
RESPONSE: It was not discussed in the Proposed Plan because the
          Baseline Risk Assessment indicated that there were no
          unacceptable risks associated with the sediments in the
          wetlands and drainage ways.

COMMENT:   Based on the ranges of contaminants in the sediments,
           we believe biological harm in leaving them in the
           wetlands is worse than the temporary disruption in the
           wetlands due to removal of discrete amount of sediments
           in SD 14 - 18. The sediment contamination does exceed
           the Effects Range-Low (ER-L) and sediment criteria that
           trigger cleanup action.
RESPONSE: The Ecological Risk Assessment indicated that
          contaminants in the sediments posed a marginal, but not
          unacceptable, risk to aquatic life. NJDEPE and EPA
          determined that the sediments in the wetlands do not




                                                           R2-0003299

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               37
         pose an unacceptable risk to the environment,
         considering that there is seldom any standing surface
         water in the wetlands. The ER-Ls are used by NJDEPE as
         reference toxicity values to identify the potential for
         adverse affects to aquatic life, and are not used to
         establish cleanup levels. The ER-L represents a
         concentration above which biological effects begin, or
         are predicted, for sensitive life species and stages.
         These numbers were developed by the National Oceanic
         and Atmospheric Administration based on studies
         conducted primarily in saltwater. The wetlands at the
         Site are freshwater. However, NJDEPE and EPA routinely
         use these toxicity values as a screening tool, and
         exceedance of these toxicity values does not
         automatically necessitate a remedial action. Heavy
         equipment, such as a tractor, would be used to excavate
         the sediments in the wetlands. As a consequence, the
         wetlands could be permanently degraded or destroyed.

COMMENT: The statement that "excavation of contaminated
         sediments from the wetlands would likely cause
         irreparable damage" is not substantiated.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable
          risk to human health or the environment. Therefore,
          remediation of the wetlands is not necessary. The
          wetlands at the Site is a sensitive ecosystem, and
          provide potential critical habitat for threatened/
          endangered wildlife in Burlington County. Excavation
          of the wetlands may adversely affect wildlife and their
          habitat. Restoration of the wetlands to its original
          functional value would be difficult to achieve. Heavy
          equipment, such as a tractor, would be used to excavate
          the sediments in the wetlands. As a consequence, the
          wetlands may be permanently degraded or destroyed.

COMMENT: Not choosing any of the proposed alternatives for
         sediments in the FS appears to circumvent the law,
         especially the responsibility to protect the natural
         resources. We believe the risk assessment conclusion
         to not clean up contaminants in the wetlands fails to
         protect the natural resource, and is not borne out by
         the risk assessment document itself. Elimination of
         the wetlands from the cleanup at the Site violates the
         spirit and letter of the evaluative criteria and goals
         of CERCLA.




                                                          R2-0003300

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                38
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE and EPA have acted consistent with both
          CERCLA and the NCP in their decision not to evaluate a
          remedial action addressing the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands. Pursuant to Section
          300.430(d) of the NCP, a remedial investigation was
          conducted to characterize the Site for the purpose of
          developing and evaluating effective remedial
          alternatives. The Rl data did show that there were
          hazardous substances in the wetlands. A baseline risk
          assessment was then performed to determine whether the
          contaminants of concern identified at the Site posed a
          current or potential risk to human health or the
          environment. Part of this assessment focused on the
          health risks associated specifically with surface water
          and sediments in the wetlands. In the current land-use
          scenario, the risks to human health associated with
          exposure to   contaminants in the wetlands ranged from
          2.52 x 10'10 to 3.37 x 10"5. In the future unrestricted
          land-use scenario,
                    8
                               the risks ranged from 2.86 x 10'10 to
          4.12 x 10" . These risks are below   or within the
          acceptable risk range of 1 x 10"4 to 1 x 10"6.
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants in the
          surface water and sediments in the wetlands do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to the environment for the
          following reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure
          to contaminants in the surface water and sediments is
          low, considering that there is seldom any standing
          surface water in the wetlands. The surface water
          samples that were collected during the RI are not
          believed to be representative of actual surface water.
          There was little or no surface water in the wetlands
          during the RI sampling events. "Surface water" was
          created by depressing a beaker, or digging a hole, into
          the surface of the wetlands and allowing water to fill
          the depression or hole. Samples were taken with a
          bailer, which stirred up the sediments. This resulted
          in artificially high concentrations of lead. Because
          lead adheres to sediment particles, the presence of
          sediments in the water samples resulted in artificially
          high concentrations of lead. The calculated risks
          associated with the contaminated sediments in the
          wetlands are not believed to be representative of
          actual risks. The risks associated with the sediments
          were formulated using overly conservative assumptions
          based on tbxicity values that are more applicable to
          saltwater systems. However, NJDEPE and EPA routinely
          use these toxicity values as a screening mechanism, not
          to establish cleanup levels. Exceedance of these
          toxicity values does not necessarily indicate that an
          ecological risk exists at the Site.




                                                            R2-0003301

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               39
         Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
         NJDEPE and EPA determined that there was no basis for
         developing remedial alternatives to address the
         surface water and sediments in the wetlands, as there
         is no current or future unacceptable risk associated
         with this discrete segment of the Site. Therefore,
         CERCLA Section 121 cleanup standards for selection of a
         remedy (i.e., a detailed analysis of alternatives and
         the requirement to meet ARARs) are not triggered. As
         stated in the Proposed Plan, the wetlands will be
         examined as part of the Site review to be conducted at
         least every five years.
          The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
         •protect human health and the environment from current
          and potential.threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
          waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
          removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
          that there are no unacceptable risks to human health or
          the environment. NJDEPE and EPA have considered a full
          range of factors to ensure that the remedial actions at
          this Site are sensible, reliable solutions for
          identified site problems, consistent with CERCLA and
          the NCP, and protective of human health and the
          environment.

COMMENT: The Ecological Risk Assessment indicates that Hazard
         Indices exceed unity (1.0) for a wide range of
         contaminants in the wetlands and drainage ways for
         surface water. We disagree with the conclusion that
         the risk to wildlife is "marginal" based on the
         exceedances of the ER-Ls and sediment criteria and
         surface water criteria.
RESPONSE: We disagree with this comment. The Ecological Risk
          Assessment, which was based on conservative
          assumptions, indicated that lead is the only
          contaminant for which the hazard quotient exceeds
          unity. The His in Table 2-22, on page 2-51, of the
          Ecological Risk Assessment are presented in exponential
          notation and must be interpreted as such. For example,
          the HI for 1,2-Dichloroethene is 5.49E-04, which
          represents the number 0.000549, .not 5.49. Based on the
          results of the Ecological Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and
          EPA determined that the contaminants in the surface
          water and sediments of the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to the environment for the following
          reasons. The potential for aquatic exposure to
          contaminants in the surface water and sediments is low,
          considering that there is r>eldom any standing surface
          water in the wetlands. The surface water samples that




                                                          R2-0003302

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                40
           were collected in the wetlands during the RI are not
           believed to be representative of actual surface water.
           As indicated above, there was little or no surface
           water in the wetlands during the RI sampling events.
           "Surface water" was created by depressing a beaker, or
           digging a hole, into the surface of the wetlands and
           allowing water to fill the depression or hole. Samples
           were taken with a bailer, which stirred up the
           sediments. This resulted in artificially high
           concentrations of lead. Because lead adheres to
           sediment particles, the presence of sediments in the
           water samples resulted in artificially high
           concentrations of lead. The calculated risks
           associated with the contaminated sediments in the
           wetlands are not believed to be representative of
           actual risks. The risks associated with the sediments
           were formulated using overly conservative assumptions
           based on toxicity values that are more applicable to
           saltwater systems. The ER-Ls are used by NJDEPE as
           reference toxicity values to identify the potential for
           adverse affects to aquatic life, and are not used to
           establish cleanup levels. The ER-L represents a
           concentration above which biological effects begin, or
           are predicted, for sensitive life species and stages.
           These toxicity values were developed by the National
           Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration based on studies
           conducted primarily in saltwater. The wetlands at the
           Site are freshwater. NJDEPE and EPA routinely use
           these toxicity values as a screening tool, and
           exceedance of these values does not necessarily
           indicate that an ecological risk exists at the Site.
           The New Jersey Surface Water Quality Criteria do not
           apply to surface water in the wetlands. .
           The wetlands at the Site is a sensitive ecosystem, and
           provide potential critical habitat for threatened/
           endangered wildlife in Burlington County. Excavation
           of the wetlands may adversely affect wildlife and their
           habitat. Restoration of the wetlands to its original
           functional value would be difficult to achieve. Heavy
           equipment, such as a tractor, would be used to excavate
           the sediments in the wetlands. As a consequence, the
           wetlands may be permanently degraded or destroyed.
           Therefore, a remedial action to address the wetlands
           was not necessary.

COMMENT:   Accounting for regional differences in background
           levels, NJDEPE should use local background levels of
           contaminants as a guide for cleanup action, not more
           heavily on contaminated areas of the State. Because
           local background levels of contaminants are very low at




                                                           R2-0003303

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                41
           the Ellis Site, it becomes more compelling to cleanup
           the wetlands to the strictest standard in order to
           restore the Site to its former status and in order to
           be consistent with the unrestricted future use goal
           that is being used for the rest of the Site.
JRESPONSE: Local background levels were considered at the Site.
           The primary mandate of CERCLA is to protect human
           health and the environment from current and potential
           threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous substances.
           However, CERCLA does not require the complete removal
           of hazardous substances where it has been shown that
           there are no unacceptable risks to human health or the
           environment. Furthermore, cleaning up to background
           levels at the Site ^is not necessary to achieve
           protection of human health or the environment because
           the background levels for some contaminants are, or
           close to, zero.

COMMENT: At the public meeting, the focus of the risk assessment
         discussion seemed to be limited to lead. Not enough
         attention was paid to the high levels of chromium, TCE,
         and DCE contamination in the wetlands, nor the additive
         effects of these contaminants when combined in one
         concentrated location.
RESPONSE: We believe that the Baseline Risk Assessment addressed
          the potential risks of all contaminants to an
          appropriate level of detail. While synergistic or
          antagonistic effects have not been directly assessed,
          the built-in conservatism is assumed to be protective
          of such effects. This approach is both common and
          valid, as the state of science cannot yet predict such
          effects.                  —

COMMENT:   If the choice is made not to remove contaminants from
           the wetlands and drainage ways, containment measures
           must be instituted to halt the spread of the
           contaminants, and to protect the public from direct
           contact with the hot-spots in the wetlands. If NJDEPE
           and EPA fail to select either remedy, they fail to
           adequately remediate the Site, as required under
           CERCLA.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the surface water and
          sediments in the wetlands and drainage ways do not pose
          an unacceptable risk to human health or the
          environment. In addition, the contaminants in the
          surface water and sediments in the wetlands and




                                                           R2-0003304

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                42
           drainage ways are at levels that permit unlimited use
           and unrestricted exposure. Therefore, containment
           measures or institutional controls are not necessary.
           EPA is not authorized to take an action under CERCLA
           where there are no unacceptable risks to human health
           or the environment.

COMMENT: At the very least, if NJDEPE's rationale is that the
         benefit of not excavating the wetland outweighs leaving
         heavy metal and VOC contaminants in the wetlands, the
         alternative selected for the wetlands should be spelled
         out in the final Proposed Plan. Failure to remove
         contaminants in the wetlands could re-contaminate the
         aquifer and endanger human and aquatic life in the
         wetlands.
RESPONSE: There is no need to select an alternative to address
          the wetlands. Based .on the results of the Baseline
          Risk Assessment, NJDEPE and EPA determined that the
          contaminants in the wetlands do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, CERCLA Section 121 cleanup standards for
          selection of a remedy (i.e., a detailed analysis of
          alternatives and the requirement to meet ARARs) are not
          triggered. We believe that the contaminants in the
          wetlands would not re-contaminate the aquifer because
          ground water at the Site discharges into the wetlands.
          The ground-water extraction wells will be designed to
          capture the contamination plume in the shallow aquifer,
          and will not withdraw water from the wetlands.
          Contaminants in the sediments, such as lead and
          chromium, are adsorbed onto the sediment particles. It
          is unlikely that the ground-water table that discharges
          into the wetlands would carry these contaminants back
          into the aquifer.

COMMENT: We don't believe the risk assessment fully calculated
         the risk of future human exposure based on an
         incomplete cleanup.
RESPONSE: We disagree with this statement. On the contrary, the
          Baseline Risk Assessment evaluated the potential
          threats to human health as if no remedial action was
          taken at the Site. We believe the Baseline Risk
          Assessment was complete in its assessment of all likely
          scenarios.

COMMENT:   In January 1989, the NJDEPE Bureau of Ground-Water
           Pollution Abatement (BGWPA) recommended: 1) denying a




                                                           R2-0003305

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                43

           permit for a new municipal well (Well No. 11) in
           Medford Township because of its proximity to the Ellis
           Superfund Site; or 2) relocating the well. They made
           this recommendation based on the preliminary ground-
           water contamination results found in the Phase I
           Remedial Investigation. The location of this well was
           to be downgradient and to the east and south of the
           wetland area of the Ellis Site. If approved, this well
           would have had a likely effect on the plume coming from
           the Site, and could draw contaminants into its sphere
           of influence. If institutional controls are not
           required at the Site, a future application for a well
           might be approved in Medford because no restrictions
           were placed on siting new wells within a mile or more
           of the Site.
RESPONSE: The NJDEPE is presently evaluating the need for a
          ground-water impact area around the Site, which would
          reduce the likelihood of exposure to contaminated
          ground water by restricting the use and installation of
          future wells in the impact area. Proposed wells in the
          impact area would be evaluated using factors, such as
          use, depth (i.e., formation), pumping rate, and
          distance from the Site. If a ground-water impact area
          is established, it may be reduced in size as the
          ground-water cleanup progresses. The BGWPA's original
          statement, that downgradient monitoring wells screened
          in the Hornerstown and Wenonah-Mount Laurel aquifers at
          the Site revealed the presence of organic and heavy
          metal contamination, was based on the results of the
          Phase I RI, which was completed in 1988. The more
          detailed Phase II RI, which was completed in 1992, •
          indicates that ground-water contamination at the Site
          appears to be limited to the Hornerstown formation
          (shallow aquifer), and that the Navesink and Wenonah-
          Mount Laurel aquifers, located directly beneath the
          shallow aquifer, were not impacted. Well No. 11 was
          proposed to be installed in the Wenonah-Mount Laurel
          formation (deep aquifer). In addition, the BGWPA
          recognizes there are three sources of ground-water
          contamination that affect the Wenonah-Mount Laurel
          formation, and that they are located 4.4 to 9.2 miles
          from proposed Well No. 11 (refer to Item 9 of page 4 of
          the attachment to written comments from the Ellis Site
          Task Force, dated June 7, 1992, located in the
          Administrative Record). These sources are being
          addressed by the NJDEPE.

COMMENT:   If the Site is not cleaned up, the close proximity of
           the wetlands to future development presents an




                                                           R2-0003306

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               44
         attractive nuisance and the potential for additional
         human exposure.
RESPONSE: The contaminants in the surface water and sediments in
          the wetlands do not pose an unacceptable risk to human
          health. The levels of contaminants in the wetlands
          permit unlimited use and unrestricted exposure.

COMMENT: The risk assessment also did not consider future
         possible agricultural uses of the wetland, for example
         food or botanical production, or excavation of the
         wetlands for a farm irrigation pond. These are
         traditional agricultural uses currently practiced in
         South Jersey in the wetlands.
RESPONSE: This scenario was not considered plausible due to the
          extensive modifications to the wetland that would be
          necessary in order to accommodate these agricultural
          uses. The development of the wetlands is restricted by
          the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act. Any and all
          activities that would affect the wetlands must comply
          with this regulation.

COMMENT: Explain the difference between the To-Be-Considered, or
         TBObased soil cleanup, and the risk-based ARARs
         cleanup cost estimates described on pages 5-68 and 5-69
         of the FS report. Why did the risk-based alternative
         cost more?
RESPONSE: The cost estimates were based on cleanup of the Site to
          New Jersey's proposed cleanup standards and to risk-
          based levels derived in the FS report. The risk-based
          cleanup levels derived in the FS were calculated
          incorrectly. These levels were later recalculated by
          EPA (see letter from R. Ho to G. Braun, dated April 29,
          1992, in the Administrative Record for the Site).
          Because of this discrepancy, the risk-based alternative
          appears to cost more. However, remediation to EPA's
          risk-based levels would actually cost less than cleanup
          to NJDEPE's proposed cleanup levels.

COMMENT: Will the extraction wells capture the PCE of unknown
         source found in MW-7? Will the extraction wells
         capture pools of contaminants that have settled at the
         bottom of the aquifer?
RESPONSE: The source of any potential PCE DNAPL has not been
          located. Presently, there is no evidence of PCE
          "pools" in the ground water at the Site. Additional




                                                          R2-0003307

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               45

         wells will be installed and studies will be performed
         during the design to determine the possible existence
         of a DNAPL source. If found, the extraction wells will
         be designed to extract the DNAPL.

COMMENT: How will the pump and treat system address the wide
         range of contaminants described on pages 1-20 to 1-23
         of the FS report? We are concerned that the full
         extent of the contamination is still not adequately
         documented. Will midpoint corrections be made if
         further evidence is discovered regarding additional
         areas of contamination?
RESPONSE: We believe that the pump and treat system is capable of
          remediating the ground water to Safe Drinking Water Act
          Maximum Contaminant Levels. During the design phase,
          additional monitoring wells will be installed to
          further delineate the contamination. If additional
          areas of contamination are discovered during the design
          phase, they will be addressed appropriately.

WRITTEN COMMENTS FROM RANCOCAS CONSERVANCY. DATED JUNE 12. 1992

COMMENT: Failure to remediate the heavy metal contamination in
         the wetlands is unacceptable; the levels of
         contamination would warrant cleanup were it not for an
         arbitrary classification of these soils as sediment.
RESPONSE: Based on the results of the Baseline Risk Assessment,
          NJDEPE and EPA determined that the contaminants
          identified in the wetlands at the Site do not pose an
          unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
          Therefore, no cleanup is justified in the wetlands.
         The primary mandate of the Superfund program is to
         protect human health and the environment from current
         and potential threats posed by uncontrolled hazardous
         waste. However, CERCLA does not require the complete
         removal of hazardous substances where it has been shown
         that there is no unacceptable risk to human health or
         the environment. NJDEPE and EPA have considered a full
         range of factors to ensure that the remedial actions at
         this Site are sensible, reliable solutions for
         identified site problems, consistent with CERCLA and
         the NCP, and protective of human health and the
         environment.




                                                          R2-0003308
