LOSSLESS TEXT CAPTURE PROVENANCE
Source title: Record of Decision - Fried Industries Site, Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey, June 27, 1994
Official source URL: https://semspub.epa.gov/src/document/02/99988
Retrieved: 2026-08-16
Source SHA-256: 599edb9ae2b22940201fc9ac26d55269ace2bed045c4d97812070baaf2ccce09
Source PDF pages: 223
Transformation: pdftotext -layout -enc UTF-8; page boundaries made visible; no substantive source text edited.
END PROVENANCE

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 1 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   SDMS Document



                                                       99988




                   RECORf> OF OEejSIOM



                  Fried Industries ^ite
Township of Ee»st Brunswick, Middlesex county. New Jersey




      United States Environmeintal Protection Agency
                        Region 11
                   New York, Ktfw york
                        June, ii'Si




                                                       500001

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 2 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

              DECLARATION FOR THE RECORD OF DECISION



SITE NAME AND LOCATION
Fried Industries

Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey

STATEMENT OF BASIS AND PURPOSE

This decision document presents the selected remedial action for
the Fried Industries Site, which was chosen in accordance with the
requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensa-
tion and Liability Act, as amended, and to the extent practicable,
the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency
Plan. This decision document is based on the administrative record
file for this Site.

The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
concurs with the selected remedy.

ASSESSMENT OF THE SITE

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from the
Fried Industries Site, if not addressed by implementing the
response action selected in this Record of Decision, may present an
imminent and substantial threat to public health, welfare, or the
environment.


DESCRIPTION OF THE SELECTED REMEDY
The selected remedy represents the first and only planned operable
unit for the Fried Industries Site.     It addresses contaminated
surface soils on the site and groundwater contamination in the
underlying shallow and deep aquifers.

The major components of the selected remedy include the
following:
          Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal, of
          approximately 900 cubic yards of surface soil contaminat-
          ed with arsenic;

          Excavation, and off-site treatment and disposal, of
          approximately 2,700 cubic yards of soil contaminated with
          volatile organics;

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 3 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     •    Extraction of groundwater contaminated with volatile
          organics from the bedrock and shallow aquifers, with on-
          site treatment and discharge to surface water; and
     •    Appropriate environmental monitoring     to   ensure   the
          effectiveness of the remedy.

DECLARATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the environ-
ment, complies with Federal and State requirements that are legally
applicable or relevant and appropriate to the remedial action, and
is cost-effective. If any effluent limitation for discharge to Bog
Brook is not technically achievable within the range of the
treatment system identified in the Feasibility Study and this
Record of Decision, the Environmental Protection Agency, in
conjunction with the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy, may either relocate the treated groundwater
discharge to Lawrence Brook to meet that limitation, or waive the
effluent limitation for Bog Brook, The remedy utilizes permanent
solutions and alternative treatment (or resource recovery)
technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and it satisfies
the statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment which
reduces toxicity, mobility, or volume as their principal element.

Because this remedy will result in hazardous substances remaining
on the site above health-based levels (contaminated groundwater),
a review will be conducted within five years after commencement of
the remedial action to ensure that it continues to provide adequate
protection of human health and the environment.




William J. Mus/yns^iy^^.E.
Deputy Regional Admi;"-strator
                   /




                                                             twm»

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 4 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   RECORD OF DECISION
                    DECISION SUMMARY


                 Fried Industries Site
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey




     United States Environmental Protection Agency
                       Region II
                  New York, New York




                                                      9W9H

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 5 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            TABLE OF CONTENTS



                                                  PAGE
SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION                2
SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES             3
HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION               5
SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION                   6
SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS                     6
SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS                               8
REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES                         15
DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES               15
SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF ALTERNATIVES    20
SELECTED REMEDY                                    26
STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS                           29
DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES               34




ATTACHMENTS

APPENDIX I.       FIGURES

APPENDIX II.      TABLES

APPENDIX III,     ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX

APPENDIX IV.      STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE




                                                  5900M

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 6 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SITE NAME, LOCATION, AND DESCRIPTION
The Fried Industries Superfund Site (the Site) is located at
11 Fresh Ponds Road, in the Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex
County, New Jersey (Figure 1 ) .

Approximately 25,000 persons live within 3/4 mile of the Site.
The closest community, with a population of about 7,000 persons,
is Milltown, whose center lies approximately 3/4 mile north of
the Fried Industries Site. The Site is located approximately 1
mile southeast of Route 1, and about 1.2 miles from three shop-
ping malls located at the intersection of Routes 1 and 130.
North Brunswick High School is located about 1 mile from Fried
Industries.

The Fried Industries property is approximately 2 6 acres in size,
occupying Lot 20.03, Block 308.19 on the Township of East Bruns-
wick Tax Map. The property encloses a pond, a marsh area,
several other separate wetlands areas, woodland/upland areas, and
a building complex (Figure 2 ) . The building complex occupies
about three acres, and is comprised of several single story
buildings/structures, a staging/loading area, several above-
ground and below-ground storage tanks, a number of trailers, and
an abandoned railroad boxcar. Wetlands occupy approximately
70 percent of the total Site acreage, including a three-acre pond
resulting from excavations predating Fried Industries operations
(Figure 3 ) . The Site is drained by two unnamed streams which
flow into Bog Brook. Bog Brook, in turn, empties into Lawrence
Brook, a tributary to the Raritan River.

The Site is roughly rectangular in shape, bordered on the north-
east by a strip of land adjoining Bog Brook, on the northwest by
a residential area, on the southeast by Fresh Ponds Road, and on
the southwest by a swamp and undeveloped woodland. The sole en-
trance to the Site is in the southeast part of the property,
about a quarter mile southwest of the juncture of Dutch Road and
Fresh Ponds Road. A dirt road leads from the entrance gate to
the building complex.

As recently as ten years ago, the deep bedrock aquifer supplied
many of the residences in the area with potable water. At the
present time, neither of the two aquifers (the deep bedrock and
the Farrington Sand aquifers) is being used as a source of
potable water in the immediate vicinity of the Site. Residences
located along Fresh Ponds Road no longer make use of private
wells and are now being serviced by a public water supply ob-
tained from a surface water source. Although there are approxi-
mately 150 wells located within a three-mile radius of the Site,
the nearest well immediately downgradient of the contaminated
ground-water plume is about 1/4 mile from the Site. Since the
contaminated ground-water plume lies entirely within Site bound


                                                            »00««<

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 7 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                3
aries, this well has not been impacted by Site contamination.

SITE HISTORY AND ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES
From 1906 to 1920, the Milltown Sand and Clay Company operated a
clay pit on the Fried Industries Site property. After quarry
operations concluded, no significant activities at the Site
occurred until 1965, when the East Brunswick Planning Board
granted permission to manufacture detergents and floor finishers
on the current Fried Industries Site property. In 1985, Mr.
Philip Fried, the owner of the property and the company, agreed
to cease all manufacturing and production operations.
During the years that Fried Industries operated at this location,
the company manufactured industrial strength aqueous detergent
solutions, floor finishing products, adhesives, and algicides.
Products were formulated using chemicals purchased in bulk
quantities. Ingredients included xylene, butyl cellosolve,
methyl carbitol, sodium metasilicate, formaldehyde, sodium
tripolyphosphate, ammonia, methylene chloride, soap, surfactants,
mineral spirits, and quaternary amines, among other chemicals.
In addition, Fried Industries produced chemical products from
components such as toluene and 1,1,1-trichloroethane. At times,
Mr. Fried also leased Site facilities to other companies for the
manufacture of automotive antifreeze products, including ethylene
glycol and methanol.

In July 1983, the Township of East Brunswick Department of Health
(EBDOH) received a complaint from a resident living on Fresh
Ponds Road regarding taste and odor problems in water from the
resident's well. The EBDOH confirmed the presence of contamina-
tion in the area by analyzing samples from five homes along Fresh
Ponds Road. All five wells were contaminated with volatile
organics (VOCs), including chloroform at concentrations up to 250
parts per billion (ppb). Because of a possible threat to human
health, the Township connected a number of residents in the area
to the public water supply.
In August 1983, representatives from the EBDOH and the Middlesex
County Department of Health (now the Department of Environmental
Health) analyzed well water and septic tank samples from the
Fried Industries Site, revealing a wide range of volatile organic
contaminants, at concentrations up to 2000 ppb. In December
1983, a task force comprised of federal, state, county, and
township agencies, and headed by the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), obtained a search warrant and investigated the
Fried Industries Site. Along with evidence of soil contamination
caused by chemical spills, analysis of the samples obtained
during this investigation revealed that hazardous wastes were
improperly stored on the Site.



                                                            900e#T

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 8 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Subsequent investigations revealed evidence of numerous sources
of contamination, including deteriorated buried drums, drum spill
areas, and stained soil areas. Process waste waters and contami-
nated water from the drum storage and handling areas were dis-
charged directly onto the ground. Other sources of contamination
included leaking and improperly stored drums, abandoned laborato-
ry equipment and chemicals, and contaminated process and septic
tanks. Historical aerial photographs also indicate extensive
soil disturbances on the Fried Industries Site.

Based on the information obtained during these early Site inves-
tigations, EPA proposed the Fried Industries Site for inclusion
on the National Priorities List (NPL) in October 1984. The Site
was added as part of the June 1986 update to the NPL, making it
eligible for cleanup under EPA's Superfund program.

EPA notified Mr. Fried, via letter dated April 30, 1985, that it
intended to conduct a Remedial Investigation & Feasibility Study
(RI/FS) at the Site. This study was subsequently undertaken by
contractors funded by EPA. On May 26, 1987, a Consent Decree was
entered in the U.S. District Court, District of New Jersey,
relating to the Site. Under the terms of that Decree, Mr. Fried
agreed to cease all manufacturing and production operations at
the Site, and to allow federal officials and agents to enter the
Site for activities related to the RI/FS.

In December 1987, EPA awarded a contract to Ebasco Services,
Incorporated (Ebasco) to conduct an RI at the Site. The main
purposes of the remedial investigation were to determine the
physical characteristics of the Site and the sources of contami-
nation, to evaluate the nature, magnitude, and extent of contami-
nation, and to characterize the potential health risks and
environmental impacts of the contaminants present at the Site.

Data obtained during the initial remedial investigation (Phase I
RI) indicated significant organic and inorganic contamination in
the vicinity of the Site buildings. In order to accurately
characterize and delineate the contamination discovered in the
Phase I RI, EPA conducted a supplemental study (Phase II RI).
Ebasco began work on the Phase II RI in October 1991. The Phase
II RI included additional soil borings and monitoring wells, an
aquifer pump test, a wetlands evaluation, and analyses of samples
taken from surface water, ground water, sediments, surface soils,
subsurface soils, and test pits. The Phase II RI was finalized
in September 1993.

During the initial remedial investigation, EPA determined that
many of the drums and containers at the Site contained hazardous
materials. Analytical results indicated there was a significant
risk to human health and the environment due to the ignitable,
toxic, and/or corrosive nature of the materials in the drums and



                                                            SOOOOf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 9 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

containers. To eliminate this immediate threat, EPA authorized a
Superfund Removal Action in September 1989 to install a security
fence around the building complex, and to remove, and properly
dispose of, nearly 1200 drums/containers and 4200 laboratory
items containing solid and liquid hazardous materials. This
significant action was completed in February 1992 at a cost of
approximately $1.5 million. Removing the containerized hazardous
materials, securing the Site with a fence around the building
complex, and providing public water to residences in the area
greatly reduced the immediate threat of exposure to hazardous
substances.


HIGHLIGHTS OF COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
A public meeting was held in the East Brunswick Courthouse on
August 18, 1988 to review the proposed RI activities. EPA
discussed conditions at the Site, and the objectives of the
investigation activities described in an RI Work Plan.

A public availability session was held in the East Brunswick
Public Library on March 4, 1992 to discuss the results of the
completed Phase I RI and the scope of the impending Phase II RI.
Between the public meeting and the availability session, the
public was kept informed of EPA activities by distributing
several Fact Sheets.

The Phase II RI report, FS report, and the Proposed Plan for the
Site were released to the public for comment on September 9,
1993. These documents were made available to the public in the
administrative record file at the EPA Docket Room in Region II,
26 Federal Plaza, New York, NY, and the information repository
at:

               Reference Desk
               East Brunswick Public Library
               2 Jean Walling Civic Center Drive
               East Brunswick, NJ 08816
The notice of availability for the above-referenced documents was
published in the Home News on September 8, 1993. The public
comment period on these documents was held from September 9, 1993
to October 8, 1993.
On September 21, 1993, EPA conducted a public meeting at the East
Brunswick Senior Center to inform local officials and interested
citizens about the Superfund process, to discuss the findings of
the RI, FS, and proposed remedial activities at the Site, and to
respond to any questions from area residents and other attendees.
EPA responses to the comments received at the public meeting, and
in writing during the public comment period, are included in the


                                                            soooot

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 10 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  6

Responsiveness Summary section of this Record of Decision.

SCOPE AND ROLE OF RESPONSE ACTION
EPA has decided to address the Site in one operable unit which
will address all remaining risks at the Site.

Therefore, this Record of Decision (ROD) will address remedial
alternatives for surface soils and for ground water, and is
expected to be the only ROD for the Fried Industries Site.

During the design, if significant contamination is found in the
underground storage tanks and tank car remaining on the Site, the
contaminated tanks, and any associated soil contamination, will
be removed and treated as part of the remedial action.
EPA previously conducted a removal action, completed in 1992.
This action addressed deteriorating drums, buckets, and other
vessels containing hazardous materials. During the design, if
significant soil contamination is found in the areas that were
used for staging drums, the contaminated soil will be removed and
treated as part of the remedial action.

To ensure the safety of on-site workers, and to facilitate heavy
equipment operations in implementing the selected remedy, the
building complex will be demolished to eliminate the physical
hazards associated with these unsafe structures. If significant
soil contamination is found beneath the main building, the cont-
aminated soil will also be removed and treated as part of the
remedial action.

Data obtained during the RI suggests the possible presence of
concentrated areas of contamination in the ground water, and
perhaps the soil, in the vicinity of Wells #8 and #14. Addition-
al sampling will determine the need to remove any such ground
water and/or soil "hot spots", thereby facilitating the removal
of contaminants from ground water during the remedial action
stage.


SUMMARY OF SITE CHARACTERISTICS
An RI was performed to determine the type and concentrations of
contaminants in various media at and around the Site. Samples
were collected from surface and subsurface soils, ground water,
surface water, air, and the building. Details of the results of
these sampling efforts may be found in the RI reports. The
collected samples were analyzed using the EPA Contract Laboratory
Program procedures.



                                                             5000|i

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 11 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Site Geology and Hydrology

The Fried Industries Site is located on the northern part of the
Atlantic Coastal Plain of New Jersey. The subsurface strata
generally consists of unconsolidated sand, gravel, silt, and
clay. The dominant aquifer system in this area is the Potomac-
Raritan-Magothy, in which the Farrington Sand is located. The
Farrington Sand is the major public water supply aquifer for
communities to the southeast.

The Site lies in an outcrop area of the Farrington Sand. The
Raritan Fire Clay, underlying the Farrington Sand, acts as an
aquitard. The Farrington Sand aquifer outcrop area, at and
around the Site (referred to as the shallow aquifer), is utilized
by private homeowners for potable water. Also in the vicinity of
the Site, the deep Triassic bedrock aquifer, until recently, was
used as a source of potable water for private residential wells.
Based on data obtained during the RI, ground water in both aqui-
fers was found to flow in a north-northeasterly direction.

More than two-thirds of the Site's acreage is wetlands
(Figure 3 ) . A man-made pond, near the entrance to the property,
discharges through one of the wetlands areas to a small stream
passing east of the building complex. As this stream flows
northward from the property's northern terminus, it combines with
an unnamed creek that runs along the southwest border of the
Site. The combined flow empties into Bog Brook, which, in turn,
drains into Lawrence Brook, a tributary of the Raritan River.


Nature and Extent of Contamination

The RI disclosed the presence of significant contamination in the
surface soil and ground water, and limited contamination in the
stream and swamp sediments. Determining the nature and extent of
the Site contamination required a comprehensive effort, includ-
ing, among other activities, thorough geophysical and soil gas
surveys, analysis of existing aerial photographs, geologic and
water quality investigations, an aquifer pump test, and a compre-
hensive sampling program. The RI sampling program, which was
conducted in two phases, included approximately 300 surface and
subsurface soil samples, 4 0 monitoring well samples, and about 50
sediment samples, in addition to numerous air, surface water,
drum, off-site residential well, and building wipe samples. To
obtain subsurface soil and ground-water samples, EPA drilled 17
monitoring wells, installed a pump test well and 6 piezometers,
excavated 20 test pits, and drilled 19 soil borings. In addition
to EPA activities, the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (NJDEPE) completed a supplemental soil
sampling program to determine background levels of arsenic and
other metals in undisturbed surface and subsurface soils. The


                                                                500011

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 12 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                8
data obtained in this effort was used to calculate the arsenic
cleanup level for surface soil in accordance with the NJDEPE's
technical requirements and/or proposed cleanup criteria.

The predominant soil contaminants, and their maximum detected
concentrations, in parts per million (ppm), are: arsenic
(557 ppm), lead (465 ppm), and xylenes (145 ppm). An illustra-
tion of the range of concentrations found in the soil is provided
in Table 2 and Table 3. The maximum detected concentrations of
the principal contaminants found in swamp and stream sediment in-
clude: arsenic (199 ppm), beryllium (7.7 ppm), zinc (525 ppm),
lead (221 ppm), antimony (118 ppm), and bis(2-ethylhexyl)
phthalate (2.9 ppm). The only contaminant of significance in the
pond sediment is beryllium, with a maximum detected concentration
of 14 ppm. A summary of the range of contamination found in
sediment is provided in Table 4. In surface water, contaminants
were found in concentrations that were considered not significant
(Table 5 ) .

The predominant ground-water contaminants present in the shallow
aquifer, and their maximum detected concentrations, include:
benzene (6.4 ppm), toluene (280 ppm), total xylenes (49 ppm),
1,1,1-trichloroethane (10 ppm), vinyl chloride (0.55 ppm), ethyl-
benzene (12 ppm), cis-1,2-dichloroethene (11 ppm), styrene (20
ppm), and trichloroethene (4.2 ppm). The principal groundwater
contaminants present in the deep bedrock aquifer include: 1,1-
dichloroethane (6.4 ppm), 1,1,1-trichloroethane (22 ppm), trans-
1,2-dichloroethene (0.99 ppm), and 1,1-dichloroethane (0.53 ppm).
An example of the range of contamination found in ground water is
provided in Tables 1-1 and 1-2, and in Figures 8 and 9.

The concentration levels of these and other contaminants, ob-
tained from ground water in both the shallow and deep bedrock
aquifers, exceed Federal and/or State drinking water Maximum
Contaminant Levels (MCLs) and/or State Ground-water Quality
Standards (Table 6 ) .

The plume of contaminated ground water in the shallow aquifer
encompasses the building complex and extends to the north-north-
east, and lying entirely within the boundaries of the Fried
Industries Site (Figure 4 ) . The estimated dimensions of this
plume are: 800 feet long by 400 feet wide by 10 feet deep.
Additional deep monitoring wells will be drilled into the bedrock
aquifer during the design stage to determine the dimensions of
the deep bedrock aquifer contaminant plume.


SUMMARY OF SITE RISKS
Based upon the results of the RI, a baseline risk assessment was
conducted to estimate the risks associated with current and
future Site conditions. The baseline risk assessment estimates


                                                                SOOOlt

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 13 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

the human health and ecological risk which could result from the
contamination at the Site if no remedial action were taken.

The following summarizes the finding of the Risk Assessment.
Additional information concerning public health risks is pre-
sented in the Risk Assessment section of the Phase II RI report.


Human Health Risk Assessment
The reasonable maximum human exposure is evaluated. A four-step
process is utilized for assessing site-related human health risks
for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario: Hazard Identifica-
tion—identifies the contaminants of concern at the Site based on
several factors such as toxicity, frequency of occurrence, and
concentration. Exposure Assessment—estimates the magnitude of
actual and/or potential human exposures, the frequency and
duration of these exposures, and the pathways (e.g., ingesting
contaminated well-water) by which humans are potentially exposed.
Toxicity Assessment—determines the types of adverse health
effects associated with chemical exposures, and the relationship
between magnitude of exposure (dose) and severity of adverse
effects (response). Risk Characterization—summarizes and
combines outputs of the exposure and toxicity assessments to
provide a quantitative (e.g., one-in-a-million excess cancer
risk) assessment of Site-related risks.

EPA uses a reference dose (RfD) and a slope factor, respectively,
to calculate the non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic risk, attrib-
utable to a particular contaminant. An RfD is an estimate of a
daily exposure level that is not likely to result in any appre-
ciable risk of deleterious effects during a person's lifetime. A
slope factor establishes the relationship between the dose of a
chemical and the response and is commonly expressed as a proba-
bility of a response per unit intake of a chemical over a human
lifespan.

To assess the overall potential for carcinogenic effects to
arise, EPA calculates excess cancer risk. Excess cancer risk is
an estimation of the incremental probability of an individual
developing cancer over a lifetime as a result of exposure to the
potential carcinogen. Current federal guidelines for acceptable
exposure are an excess carcinogenic risk in the range of 10'^ to
10'^ (approximately one in ten thousand to one in one million) .

The baseline risk assessment began with selecting contaminants of
concern (COCs) which would be representative of Site risks
(Table 7 ) . The COCs for the Fried Industries Superfund Site were
obtained by screening the RI data according to frequency of
occurrence, concentration, toxicity, and chemical characteris-
tics. The most significant COCs in the ground water include
vinyl chloride, toluene, cis-1,2-dichloroethene, trans-1,2-


                                                              900011

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 14 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                10
dichloroethene, 1,1-dichloroethane, benzene, 1,1-dichloroethene,
1,1,1-trichloroethane, total xylenes, ethylbenzene, and phenol.
COCs for soil and sediment include arsenic, beryllium, lead,
toluene, phenol, and bis(2-ethyl-hexyl)phthalate. Several of the
contaminants, including arsenic, vinyl chloride, and benzene, are
known to cause cancer in laboratory animals and are suspected of
being human carcinogens (Table 8).
The area surrounding the Fried property is zoned for residential
use, as evidenced by the presence of homes all around the Site.
Back in 1965, the East Brunswick Planning Board re-zoned the
Fried property for commercial use, including light industrial
use. However, because of the potential for future residential
use on the non-wetland portions of the 26-acre property, the more
stringent criteria required by a future residential use scenario
were incorporated in the risk assessment. Residential use of
land implies the use of ground water; accordingly, the potential-
ity for use of ground water had to be considered in the risk
assessment.
All possible exposure pathways were considered in the risk
assessment, including inhalation, ingestion, and absorption of
chemicals originating from subsurface and surface soil sources,
ground water from both the shallow and deep bedrock aquifers,
stream, pond, and marsh sediment, surface water, air, and build-
ing surfaces. Table 9 contains a summary of the carcinogenic and
non-carcinogenic risks arising from these sources.
Lifetime cancer risks were calculated for exposure pathways in
present and future land use scenarios (Tables 10-1 through 10-3
contain Site-specific parameters and assumptions used in the
calculation of chronic daily intakes and risks; Table 11 de-
scribes the derivation of Site-specific chronic daily intakes).
At the present time, there are no people residing on the Site
property.
Therefore, exposure pathways were evaluated for Site workers and
for adults and children trespassing on the Site property. Under
present use conditions, the pathways associated with the greatest
carcinogenic risks involved surface soil ingestion, with excess
cancer risks of 2.9 x lO*' for adult Site workers, and 1.5 x 10^
for adult trespassers. This means that nearly three additional
adult Site workers out of one million and two additional tres-
passing adults out of one million could be at increased risk of
developing cancer if the surface soil were ingested. Arsenic is
the primary contaminant responsible for the excess cancer risks
in surface soil. The estimated cancer risks for sediment inges-
tion in the present use scenario are 1.6 x 10"® for trespassing
adults, and 1.5 x 10** for trespassing children. Beryllium is the
primary COC responsible for the excess cancer risks in the sedi-
ment. All four of these estimated cancer risks are well within
the EPA guidelines for acceptable exposure (10'^ to 10'®) . Present

                                                             500014

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 15 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                11
use scenarios were not evaluated for ground-water pathways
because, at the present time, there are no pathways of exposure
for the consumption of ground water.

Because the potential exists for portions of the Fried property
to be developed into a residential area, pathways were examined
under a future residential land use scenario. The highest future
use risks are associated with surface soil ingestion under a
residential use scenario; namely, 3.8 x 10"® for resident adults,
and 3.0 x 10^ for resident children. Arsenic is primarily
responsible for these excess cancer risks in the surface soil.
Risks from sediment ingestion under the future residential use
scenario are 1.6 x 10** for resident adults, and 1.5 x 10"® for
resident children. Beryllium is the primary COC responsible for
these excess cancer risks in the sediment. All four estimates
are within the guidelines for acceptable exposure.

In addition to sediment and surface soil pathways, ground-water
exposure pathways were evaluated under a future use scenario.
Five ground-water exposure pathways exceeded the acceptable
cancer risk range of 10"' to 10"**. For ground water in the shallow
aquifer, the estimated cancer risks for ingestion, dermal contact
(while showering), and inhalation of volatiles (while showering),
by resident adults, are 1.6 x 10'^ (1.6 in a hundred), 2.0 x 10"^
(2.0 in a thousand), and 1.3 x 1 0 % respectively. The COCs
primarily responsible for these excess cancer risks in the
shallow aquifer are vinyl chloride, benzene, and arsenic.
Similarly, for deep bedrock aquifer ground water, the estimated
cancer risks for ingestion, dermal contact (while showering), and
inhalation of volatiles (while showering), by resident adults,
are 4.8 x 10"% 5.6 x 10"' (5.6 in a hundred thousand), and 3.9 x
10"% respectively. Vinyl chloride, benzene, and 1,1-dichlor-
oethene are the primary COCs responsible for the excess cancer
risks in the deep bedrock aquifer. The results of the baseline
risk assessment clearly indicate that ground water, in both the
shallow and bedrock aquifers, poses an unacceptable risk to human
health and the environment.

To assess the overall potential for non-carcinogenic effects, EPA
developed the Hazard Index (HI). This index is calculated by
comparing, as a ratio, the exposure level over a specified time
period (e.g., lifetime) with a reference dose derived for a
similar exposure period. Current federal guidelines for accept-
able exposures require His not to exceed 1.0.

The baseline risk assessment calculated the potentials for non-
carcinogenic effects (His) under the same present and future use
scenarios as for carcinogenic risks. For non-ground-water path-
ways under present use conditions, there were no instances where
the HI exceeded 1.0. For ground-water pathways, present use
scenarios were not evaluated due to the absence of realistic
routes of exposure.

                                                               5000U

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 16 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               12


Under the future use scenario, the highest His were calculated
for resident children and resident adults exposed to contaminated
ground water via various pathways; His for exposure to surface
soil and sediments did not exceed 1.0. For ground water in the
shallow aquifer, the maximum His associated with ingestion,
dermal contact (while showering), and inhalation of volatiles
(while showering), for resident children, are 197, 25.6, and 450,
respectively. Similarly, for adult residents, the corresponding
His are 98.3, 19.5, and 22 5. The primary COCs producing these
non-carcinogenic risks in the shallow aquifer ground water
include toluene, cis-1,2-dichloroethene, 2-butanone, and 2,4-
dimethylphenol. For deep bedrock aquifer ground water, the
maximum His for ingestion and inhalation of volatiles (while
showering) for resident children are 24.0 and 7.6, respectively.
Similarly, for adult residents, the corresponding His are 12.0
and 3.8. In the deep bedrock aquifer, the COCs responsible for
most of the non-carcinogenic risks include 1,1,1-trichloroethane,
1,1-dichloroethane, 1,1-dichloroethene, trans-1,2-dichloroethene,
and 2-methylphenol. As with the carcinogenic risks, evaluation
of the potentials for non-carcinogenic effects indicates that the
ground water, in both the shallow and bedrock aquifers, poses an
unacceptable risk to human health and the environment.

In summary, the baseline risk assessment identified unacceptable
carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic risks to human health and the
environment from ground water in the shallow and deep bedrock
aquifers. In addition to the extraction and on-site treatment of
ground water from both aquifers, remediation of the ground water
will be expedited and facilitated by excavating the surface and
subsurface soil from several locations containing high concen-
trations of volatile organics (Figure 7) and transporting this
material to an appropriate off-site facility for treatment and
disposal.

The baseline risk assessment for surface soils evaluated a large
data set representing more than 200 surface soil samples collect
ed across the entire 26 acre Site. Although the risk assessment
indicated that carcinogenic risks were within EPA's acceptable
risk range, EPA and NJDEPE have concerns about the elevated
concentrations of arsenic at several specific locations
(Figure 6) in the surface soil. Essentially all of the carcino-
genic risk in the surface soil is due to arsenic, a Class "A"
carcinogen. Under the future residential land use scenario,
resident children could be exposed to carcinogenic risks exceed-
ing 10"** if they play in the areas containing high levels of
arsenic in the surface soil. These localized areas have concen-
trations of arsenic that significantly exceed the concentration
used to calculate the risks posed by exposure to arsenic in
surface soil. Therefore, EPA and NJDEPE are proposing remedia-
tion of these localized areas of elevated arsenic contamination
as an appropriate risk management measure. For this purpose, an


                                                            900016

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 17 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                13
arsenic cleanup level of 27 ppm was determined using Site-specif-
ic arsenic background data (Table 12).

Environmental Risk Assessment

The reasonable maximum environmental exposure is evaluated. A
four-step process is utilized for assessing Site-related ecologi-
cal risks for a reasonable maximum exposure scenario: Problem
Formulation - a qualitative evaluation of contaminant release,
migration, and fate; identification of contaminants of concern,
receptors, exposure pathways, and known ecological effects of the
contaminants; and selection of endpoints for further study.
Exposure Assessment—a quantitative evaluation of contaminant
release, migration, and fate; characterization of exposure
pathways and receptors; and measurement or estimation of exposure
point concentrations. Ecological Effects Assessment—literature
reviews, field studies, and toxicity tests, linking contaminant
concentrations to effects on ecological receptors. Risk Char-
acterization—measurement or estimation of both current and
future adverse effects. Unlike human health risk assessments,
ecological risk assessments focus on the population and ecosystem
levels. Because there is a scarcity of toxicity data relevant to
wildlife, it is difficult to draw inferences at the population
and ecosystems level. Thus, this ecological assessment is
largely qualitative.

The ecological risk assessment evaluated the contaminants associ-
ated with the Site in conjunction with Site-specific biological
species/habitat information. The sediment and surface water COCs
for this assessment include: 1,1-dichloroethane, bis(2-ethyl-
hexyl) phthalate, 1,1-dichloroethene, lead, silver, and nickel.
Detailed information on the potential ecological effects of the
COCs and other Site contaminants is contained in Section 5.8 of
the Phase II RI report.

Approximately 70 percent of the Site is comprised of wetlands and
associated open water habitats. With the exception of the area
in the vicinity of the building complex, the Site contains
several different upland and wetlands habitats supporting numer-
ous and diverse wildlife species. Much of the Fried Industries
Site was previously disturbed by clay mining operations.

Although the Henslow's sparrow and the wood turtle (state endan-
gered and threatened, respectively) have both been recorded in
the vicinity of the Site, no endangered or threatened animal
species were recorded on the Fried property. Similarly, no
threatened or endangered plant species are known to inhabit, the
Site, although Swamp pink, a federally listed threatened species,
has been found to occur in this area of New Jersey.

The potential impacts of contaminant exposure on local biota were



                                                           900017

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 18 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               14
assessed with a review of available criteria and the relevant
literature. The primary sources for this information include the
Federal Ambient Water Quality Criteria (surface water) and data
complied by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(sediment).

Examination of the combined surface water and sediment data from
the RI, and comparison of this data to ecological assessment
values cited above, have revealed that organic and inorganic
contaminants are present at levels which, potentially, could
cause adverse ecological impacts. However, analysis of back-
ground soils and Bog Brook background surface water and sediment
indicate that contamination is due primarily, if not totally, to
regional natural background conditions. An EPA assessment of the
macroinvertebrate population present in this segment of the brook
indicated that the macroinvertebrates were severely impacted.
However, populations of macroinvertebrates present in segments of
the brook, located both upgradient (background) and downgradient,
were also severely impacted. Given this information, and the
fact that only a small portion of the Site drains to the brook,
the contamination and resultant impacts on the stream cannot be
exclusively related to Site contamination. Furthermore, any
minimal benefits which might be derived from remediation of the
stream would be shortlived unless the upgradient portion of the
stream were remediated in conjunction with the elimination of all
upgradient sources contributing to the contamination.

Actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances from this
Site, if not addressed by the preferred alternative or one of the
other active measures considered, may present a current or
potential threat to public health, welfare, or the environment.


Uncertainties

The procedures and inputs used to assess risks in this evalua-
tion, as in all such assessments, are subject to a wide variety
of uncertainties. In general, the main sources of uncertainty
include:
- environmental chemistry sampling and analysis
- environmental parameter measurement
- fate and transport modeling
- exposure parameter estimation
- toxicological data

Uncertainty in environmental sampling arises in part from the
potentially uneven distribution of chemicals in the media sam-
pled. Consequently, there is significant uncertainty as to the
actual levels present. Environmental chemistry-analysis error
can stem from several sources, including the errors inherent in
the analytical methods and characteristics of the matrix being


                                                             500018

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 19 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                15
sampled.

Uncertainties in the exposure assessment are related to estimates
of how often an individual would actually come in contact with
the chemicals of concern, the period of time over which such
exposure would occur, and in the models used to estimate the
concentrations of the chemicals of concern at the point of
exposure.

Uncertainties in toxicological data occur in extrapolating both
from animals to humans and from high to low doses of exposure, as
well as from the difficulties in assessing the toxicity of a
mixture of chemicals. Unidentified contaminants and tentatively
identified compounds (TICs) detected at the Site serve as addi-
tional sources of uncertainty. These uncertainties are addressed
by making conservative assumptions concerning risk and exposure
parameters throughout the assessment. As a result, the Risk
Assessment provides upper-bound estimates of the risks to popula-
tions near the Site, and is highly unlikely to underestimate
actual risks related to the Site.


REMEDIAL ACTION OBJECTIVES
Remedial action objectives are specific goals to protect human
health and the environment. These objectives are based on
available data, standards such as applicable or relevant and
appropriate requirements (ARARs), and risk-based levels estab-
lished in the risk assessment. The following remedial action
objectives were established:

  •   Prevent exposure to areas with arsenic concentrations
      in surface soils (approximately 900 cy greater than 27 ppm);
      and
  •   Restore contaminated ground water, in the shallow and bed-
      rock aquifers, to applicable drinking water standards.

DESCRIPTION OF REMEDIAL ALTERNATIVES

The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act, as amended (CERCLA), requires that each selected
site remedy be protective of human health and the environment, be
cost effective, comply with other statutory laws, and utilize
permanent solutions, alternative treatment technologies, and
resource recovery alternatives to the maximum extent practicable.
In addition, the statute includes a preference for the use of
treatment as a principal element for the reduction of toxicity,
mobility, or volume of the hazardous substances.

The FS report evaluates, in detail, four remedial alternatives



                                                              500010

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 20 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               16
for addressing the contamination associated with surface soil
(source control), and three remedial alternatives for addressing
the ground-water contamination.
These alternatives are:


                   SOURCE CONTROL ALTERNATIVES

The source control alternatives discussed below were developed to
address areas of concentrated arsenic contamination in the
surface soil. Accordingly, surface soil remedial alternatives
have been developed to effectively reduce the potential for human
ingestion of arsenic from areas of high arsenic contamination in
the surface soil.

Alternative SC-l: No Action

     Estimated Capital Cost:            $ 0
     Estimated Annual Operation and
          Maintenance (0 & M) Cost:     $ 0
     Estimated 5-Year Review Cost:      $ 20,000
     Estimated Present Worth Cost:      $ 43,200
     Estimated Construction Time:       None

CERCLA and the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution
Contingency Plan (NCP) require the evaluation of a "No Action"
alternative to serve as a point of comparison with other remedial
action alternatives. The "No Action" alternative for the Fried
Industries surface soil consists of leaving the contaminated soil
in place. Because this alternative would result in contaminants
remaining on the Site above health-based levels, CERCLA requires
that the Site be reviewed at least every five years. If justi-
fied by the review, remedial actions may be implemented to remove
or treat the contaminated soils. No other action is proposed
under this alternative.


Alternative SC-2: Limited Action (Institutional Controls)

     Estimated Capital Cost:       $ 73,400
     Estimated Annual O & M Cost: $ 6o,800
     Estimated 5-Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
     Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 74 6,600
     Estimated Construction Time: Six months

The "Limited Action" alternative would allow the Site to remain
in its present condition, as in the "No Action" alternative
(SC-l). In addition, this alternative includes monitoring, fence
installation, land use restrictions, and a public awareness and
education program for the community. Because this alternative


                                                            SOOOM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 21 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 17
would result in contaminants remaining on the Site, CERCLA
requires that the Site be reviewed at least every five years.

Alternative SC-3: Excavation/On-Site Treatment/On-Site Disposal

     Estimated   Capital Cost:       $ 561,500
     Estimated   Annual 0 & M Cost: $ 0
     Estimated   5-Year Review Cost: $ 2 0,000
     Estimated   Present Worth Cost: $ 604,600
     Estimated   Construction Time: One Year

This alternative consists of the excavation of approximately
900 cubic yards of contaminated surface soils, on-site stabiliza-
tion, and on-site disposal of the stabilized soil.

Surface soil contaminated with arsenic would be excavated and
treated in an on-site stabilization plant. Soil disturbance may
result in the generation of fugitive dust and volatiles, requir-
ing air monitoring and engineering controls. The excavated soil
would be mixed with chemicals and water, resulting in the metals
becoming bound within a solid matrix. The treated soil would
then be tested to ensure that surface soil cleanup levels are met
before redepositing on the Site. The excavated areas would be
backfilled with treated soil. An upland area near the Site
entrance would be used for the disposal of the additional volume
of material resulting from the addition of solidification agents
to the soil during the stabilization process. The surface would
be graded and provided with a topsoil cover.

In addition, the four underground storage tanks and tank car
still remaining on the Site would be investigated during the
design phase to determine if the tanks, and any significant
associated soil contamination, should be removed. If significant
soil contamination is found beneath the main building, and/or in
the areas used for staging drums removed during the removal
action, the contaminated soil will be removed and treated as part
of the remedial action. Additional sampling during the design
will determine the need for removal of soil "hot spots" contain-
ing zinc, in order to help meet surface water discharge require-
ments for treated ground water.


Alternative SC-4; Excavation/Off-Site Treatment/Off-Site Disposal
    Estimated Capital Cost:           $   6 5 2 ,, 5 0 0
    Estimated Annual O & M Cost:      $   0
    Estimated 5-Year Review Cost;     $   0
    Estimated Present Worth Cost;     $   6 5 2 ,, 5 0 0
    Estimated Construction Time:      One Year
Like Alternative SC-3, this alternative includes excavating 900


                                                                5000«1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 22 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 18
cubic yards of surface soil contaminated with arsenic. The
excavated material, however, would be transported to an off-site.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) permitted facility
for treatment and ultimate disposal. For costing purposes, it
was assumed that the material would be stabilized at the off-site
facility. Clean fill would be used to backfill the excavated
areas.

Additionally, the four underground storage tanks and tank car
still remaining on the Site would be investigated during the
design phase to determine if the tanks, and any significant
associated soil contamination, should be removed. If significant
soil contamination is found beneath the main building, and/or in
the areas used for staging drums removed during the removal
action, the contaminated soil will be removed and treated as part
of the remedial action. Additional sampling during the design
will determine the need for removal of soil "hot spots" contain-
ing zinc, in order to help meet surface water discharge require-
ments for treated ground water.


                      GROUND-WATER ALTERNATIVES
The ground-water alternatives discussed below were developed to
address the inorganic and organic contamination in the shallow
(Farrington Sand) and deep (underlying Triassic bedrock) aqui-
fers.


Alternative GW-1: No Action
     Estimated   Capital Cost:       $ 0
     Estimated   Annual O & M Cost: $ 0
     Estimated   5-Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
     Estimated   Present Worth Cost: $ 43,200
     Estimated   Construction Time: None

The CERCLA and NCP regulations require the evaluation of a "No
Action" alternative to serve as a baseline for comparison with
other remedial action alternatives. The "No Action" alternative
for the Fried Industries ground-water contamination consists of
leaving the ground water undisturbed. Because this alternative
would result in leaving contaminants on the Site above health-
based levels, CERCLA requires that the Site be reviewed at least
every five years. If justified by the review, remedial actions
may be implemented to remove or treat the contaminated ground
water. No other action is proposed under this alternative.


Alternative GW-2: Limited Action (Institutional Controls)
     Estimated Capital Cost:          $ 29,700


                                                            SQOOn

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 23 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               19
     Estimated Annual O & M Cost: $ 53,900
     Estimated 5-Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
     Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 742,100
     Estimated Construction Time: Six months

Like the "No Action" alternative (GW-1), the "Limited Action"
alternative would allow the ground water to remain undisturbed.
In addition, the "Limited Action" alternative includes a public
awareness and education program for the community, and water use
restrictions. Because this alternative would result in leaving
contaminants on the Site, CERCLA requires that the Site be
reviewed at least every five years.


Alternative GW-3: Pumping and Treating of Ground Water/Limited
                         Source Extraction
This alternative includes pumping contaminated ground water
collected from both the shallow and deep bedrock aquifers to an
on-site ground-water treatment system. The treatment system
would include chemical precipitation for metals removal, followed
by treatment of the organics. The treated ground water would
then be discharged to Bog Brook, at a rate of about 10 gallons
per minute. The ground water would be treated to meet applicable
Federal and State requirements (Table 14). To facilitate the
removal of organic contaminants from the ground water via the
ground-water treatment system, several areas of concentrated VOCs
contamination in the soil, encompassing approximately 2,700 cubic
yards (based on the presence of xylenes above 10 ppm and chloro-
form above 1 ppm), would be removed and transported to an appro-
priate off-site facility for treatment and/or disposal. Approxi-
mately 400 cubic yards of the VOC-contaminated soil is also part
of the soil volume contaminated with arsenic at concentrations
requiring remediation. This 400 cubic yards of soil would be
subject to off-site treatment and disposal in accordance with
RCRA and other waste disposal regulations. Clean fill would be
used to backfill the excavated areas.

Additional sampling during the design will determine the need for
removal of ground-water "hot spots" containing zinc, in order to
help meet surface water discharge requirements for treated ground
water.

Two different technologies for the treatment of organic contami-
nants in ground water are presented in the following two options.


     Option 1: Precipitation, Activated Carbon, and Discharge to
                         Surface Water
          Estimated Capital Cost:        $ 4,348,000
          Estimated Annual 0 & M Cost:   $ 476,500

                                                             50009S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 24 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               20
          Estimated 5-Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
          Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 10,304,400
          Estimated Construction Time: One Year
          Estimated Completion Time:    30 Years
    Ground water, pre-treated for metals removal, would pass
    through a carbon adsorption system, including multiple
    carbon units, for removal of the organic contaminants. The
    treated effluent would be discharged to Bog Brook
    (Table 14). The ground-water treatment system would be
    monitored to assure proper operation and confirm that sur-
    face discharge requirements are being met. For costing
    purposes, the length of time to complete the ground-water
    phase of the remedial action was estimated to be 30 years.
    The actual time required would be determined during the
    remedial design. The sludge and spent activated carbon
    would be prop erly disposed of at an off-site facility in
    accordance with Federal and State regulations.

    Option 2: Precipitation, Air Stripping/Activated Carbon, and
                        Discharge to Surface Water
         Estimated Capital Cost:       $ 4,440,600
         Estimated Annual O & M Cost: $ 599,800
         Estimated 5-Year Review Cost: $ 20,000
         Estimated Present Worth Cost: $ 11,926,500
         Estimated Construction Time: One Year
         Estimated Completion Time:    30 Years
    Option 2 is similar to Option 1, except that the organic
    contaminants would be removed via an air stripper, followed
    by an activated carbon unit. In addition to off-site dis-
    posal of the resulting sludge and spent carbon, the air
    stripper off-gas would be treated prior to being vented to
    the atmosphere.

SUMMARY OF COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OP ALTERNATIVES
In accordance with the NCP, a detailed analysis of each remedial
alternative was conducted with respect to each of the nine
criteria described below. This section discusses and compares
the performance of the remedial alternatives considered against
these criteria. All selected alternatives must at least attain
the Threshold Criteria. The selected alternative should provide
the best balance among the nine criteria. The Modifying Criteria
were evaluated following the public comment period. These nine
criteria were developed to address the requirements of Section
121 of CERCLA to ensure all important considerations are factored
into remedy selection decisions.



                                                            500024

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 25 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                21

Threshold Criteria
     1.   Overall Protection of Hvunan Health and the Environment
          addresses whether or not an alternative provides ade-
          quate protection and describes how risks posed through
          each pathway are eliminated, reduced, or controlled
          through treatment, engineering controls, or institu-
          tional controls.
     2.   Compliance with Applicable and Relevant and Appropriate
          Requirements (ARARs) addresses whether or not an alter-
          native will meet all of the ARARs of the Federal and
          State environmental statutes or provide a basis for
          invoking a waiver.
Primary Balancing Criteria
     3.   Long-term Effectiveness and Permanence refers to the
          magnitude of residual risk and the ability of an alter-
          native to maintain reliable protection of human health
          and the environment over time once remedial objectives
          have been met.
     4.   Reduction of Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume addresses
          the statutory preference for selecting remedial actions
          that employ treatment technologies that permanently and
          significantly reduce toxicity, mobility, or volume of
          the hazardous substances as a principal element.
     5.   Short-term Effectiveness refers to the period of time
          that is needed to achieve protection, as well as the
          alternative's potential to create adverse impacts on
          human health and the environment that may result during
          the construction and implementation period.
     6.   Implementability is the technical and administrative
          feasibility of a remedy, including the availability of
          materials and services needed to implement a particular
          alternative.
     7.   Cost includes estimated capital and operation and
          maintenance costs, and the present worth costs.
Modifying Criteria
     8.   State acceptance indicates whether, based on its review
          of the RI and FS reports and the Proposed Plan, the
          State supports, opposes, and/or has identified any
          reservations with the preferred alternative.
     9.   Community acceptance refers to the public's general

                                                              5006M

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 26 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               22
          response to the alternatives described in the Proposed
          Plan and the RI and FS reports. Responses to public
          comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary of
          this Record of Decision.

A comparative analysis of these alternatives, based upon the
evaluation criteria noted above, is presented below.


Overall Protection of Human Health and the Environment

In evaluating the source control (surface soil) alternatives, the
"No Action" (SC-l) and "Limited Action" (SC-2) alternatives do
not offer adequate protection of human health because of the
levels of arsenic that would remain untreated in the surface
soils under a future residential use scenario. Alternatives SC-l
and SC-2 would not reduce the human health hazards associated
with surface soil ingestion of arsenic, although SC-2 would
slightly reduce the likelihood of exposure. Alternative SC-3
would offer adequate overall protection by immobilizing arsenic
and other metals in a solid matrix disposed of on the Site.
Alternative SC-4, by removing the contaminated surface soil for
off-site treatment and disposal, would also offer adequate
protection.

In evaluating the ground-water alternatives, the "No Action"
(GW-1) and "Limited Action" (GW-2) alternatives offer some pro-
tection of human health, but do not offer adequate protection of
the environment because high levels of organics and inorganics
would remain in the ground water. Furthermore, the institutional
controls in Alternative GW-2 would provide some public health
protection through use restrictions and limited Site access. The
active remediation described in Alternative GW-3, however, would
attempt to restore the contaminated ground water to Federal and
State MCLs and New Jersey Ground-water Quality Standards, and
would provide better overall protection of human health and the
environment.


Compliance with ARARs

In evaluating the source control (surface soil) alternatives, the
"No Action" (SC-l) and "Limited Action" (SC-2) alternatives would
meet location-specific ARARs, as would active Alternatives SC-3
and SC-4. Based upon metals contents and leachability charac-
teristics of the soils, it is anticipated that Alternative SC-3
would comply with the RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions (LDRs). If
the selected treatment technology cannot meet the LDR standards
for characteristic wastes, a treatability variance may be re-
quired.

Up to six acres of wetlands may be disturbed during implementa-


                                                            500036

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 27 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               23
tion of the selected remedy. Appropriate remedial measures to
protect or restore such wetland areas will be determined during
the Remedial Design. Due to the proximity of surface water
bodies and wetlands, waivers may be needed for some location-
specific ARARs such as the State's transition area rules to
conduct remedial activities under Alternatives SC-3 and SC-4; the
need for such ARAR waivers would be determined during the remedi-
al design stage. Alternative SC-4 would comply with all ARARs
for transport, treatment, and disposal of the contaminated soil.
All activities would be conducted in accordance with action-
specific ARARs.

Contaminant levels in the ground water are above established
Federal and State MCLs and State Ground-water Quality Standards,
and calculations indicate that there would not be any appreciable
attenuation over time. Therefore, implementing the "No Action"
and "Limited Action" ground-water alternatives (GW-1 and GW-2)
would not meet ARARs in a reasonable amount of time. For Alter-
native GW-3, the extraction and treatment of the shallow and
bedrock aquifer ground water would continue until chemical-
specific ARARs are met. The treated ground-water discharge
stream would also be monitored for compliance with discharge to
surface water ARARs. Should any effluent limitation for dis-
charge to Bog Brook (which is an intermittent stream) not be
technically achievable within the range of the treatment system
identified in the Feasibility Study and the ROD, EPA, in conjunc-
tion with NJDEPE, may either relocate the treated ground-water
discharge to Lawrence Brook (which is a continuous flowing
stream) to meet that limitation, or waive the effluent limitation
for Bog Brook.
Since the Fried Industries Site is largely wetlands, ground-water
treatment facilities (Alternative GW-3) would be erected in the
large upland area near the entrance to the Site. It would be
necessary to waive location-specific ARARs because the treatment
facilities would be located within a wetlands transition area as
defined by New Jersey Transition Area Rules.
Several action-specific ARARs also address the conduct of remedi-
al actions around wetland areas. Since much of the Site is
either wetland or open water, an ARAR waiver may be necessary
because it is technically impracticable to implement the remedy
when there is inadequate room for treatment units and auxiliary
equipment. Impacted wetland areas are expected to be minimal;
however, those wetland areas that are impacted will be restored
in accordance with federal and State requirements.

Long-Term Effectiveness and Permanence
The "No Action" and "Limited Action" alternatives (SC-l, SC-2,
GW-1, and GW-2) would not provide an acceptable reduction in risk


                                                              5000«7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 28 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               24
in the surface soil and ground water. Each of these alternatives
would result in hazardous substances remaining on the Site; this
would require that EPA review the Site at least every five years.

Both Alternative SC-3 and Alternative SC-4 would remediate the
surface soil for arsenic and other metals. However, Alternative
SC-3 would require long-term monitoring to ensure the integrity
of the on-site stabilized material. Therefore, off-site stabili-
zation and disposal (SC-4) would provide superior long-term
effectiveness and permanence.

Alternative GW-3 would be consistent with the long-term effec-
tiveness goals for the Site by treating the ground water until
MCLs are achieved, or until it is demonstrated that it is techni-
cally infeasible to attain remediation goals.


Reduction in Toxicity, Mobility, or Volume
The "No Action" and "Limited Action" alternatives (SC-l, SC-2,
GW-1, and GW-2) do not achieve any significant reduction in the
toxicity of the contaminated soils and ground water. Migration
of contaminants in soil and in ground water would continue, and,
due to this mobility, the volumes of contaminated soil and ground
water would increase with time.

Alternative SC-3 would achieve effective reduction in mobility of
arsenic through stabilization. However, stabilization results in
an increase in the volume of contaminated material through the
addition of solidifying reagents. Although the toxicity actually
remains the same, the solidified matrix makes it inaccessible.

In Alternative SC-4, arsenic would be immobilized at an off-site
facility, and disposed of at an off-site landfill. Hence,
Alternative SC-4 would be effective at reducing the mobility of
arsenic contaminated surface soils; as in Alternative SC-3, the
toxicity of the material would not be reduced through stabiliza-
tion.

Alternative GW-3 is effective in reducing the toxicity, mobility,
and volume of ground-water contaminants by removing both organic
and inorganic contaminants via treatment.


Short-Term Effectiveness

The "No Action" and "Limited Action" alternatives (SC-l, SC-2,
GW-1, and GW-2) would have no significant short-term impacts.
The soil treatment alternatives (SC-3 and SC-4) involve disturb-
ing the soil, which would generate fugitive dust and volatiles
from Site operations. However, these concerns could be effec-
tively addressed through air monitoring and engineering controls.


                                                             500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 29 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               25
Both soil treatment alternatives would require the implementation
of a health and safety plan to minimize any risks to on-site
workers and nearby residents. The amount of time until protec-
tiveness is achieved could increase substantially for SC-3 if an
off-site staging area is required for implementation (see discus-
sion below). The time to reach protectiveness for Alternatives
SC-3 and SC-4 is estimated to be one year.
The installation of extraction wells and the collection system in
Alternative GW-3 also involves some soil disturbance, generating
fugitive dust and possibly volatiles from drilling and excavation
operations. Air monitoring and engineering controls may be
necessary to reduce airborne dust and emissions. A health and
safety plan would be required to minimize any risks to on-site
workers and nearby residents from well installation and trench
construction operations. The time to reach protectiveness for
Alternative GW-3 is estimated to be 3 0 years.

Implementability
There are no problems implementing the "No Action" alternatives
(SC-l and GW-1) because they would only involve five-year re-
views. The "Limited Action" alternatives (SC-2 and GW-2) are
also easily implementable, involving only five-year reviews,
monitoring, land use restrictions, and fence installation (SC-2).
Alternative SC-3 would be easily implemented from a technology
standpoint. However, Alternative SC-3 may require nearby areas
for the staging of equipment and materials handling, due to the
extensive on-site wetlands; therefore. Alternative SC-3 may not
be easy to implement logistically. The off-site stabilization
alternative (SC-4) uses the same proven technology, but would be
easier than Alternative SC-3 to implement because the excavated
soils would be treated and disposed of at off-site facilities,
obviating the need for additional staging areas near the Site.
Aside from the obvious impacts caused by the excavation of
contaminated soils from wetland areas, and the disturbances
arising from the installation of piping and related equipment for
the extraction wells and collection trench, there shouldn't be
any additional disruptions to the wetlands areas.
The treatment steps in ground-water Alternative GW-3 include
conventional wastewater treatment processes that have been used
extensively to treat contaminated ground water. The technology
is well-developed and commercially available. Although consider-
able institutional management is necessary to ensure proper
operation, maintenance, and compliance with various regulations
and requirements, these should not pose any unusual difficulties.
A common implementation problem encountered during remediation of
Superfund sites is the need for an on-site staging area. Any


                                                            500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 30 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               26
planned ground-water and/or soil remediation activities will
require staging areas for materials, equipment, decontamination,
and support services. The limited availability of a staging area
due to the presence of extensive wetlands at the Site, as well as
safety reasons, will likely require that the building complex be
demolished.


Cost

Estimated present worth costs for stabilization of surface soils
are $604,600 for Alternative SC-3 (on-site stabilization/dispo-
sal) and $652,500 for Alternative SC-4 (off-site stabiliza-
tion/disposal) . Due to the minor cost differences between the
two alternatives, and the more difficult implementability of
Alternative SC-3, Alternative SC-4 is considered to be the most
cost-effective alternative that would be protective of human
health and the environment.

The estimated present worth of the treatment options in Alterna-
tive GW-3 is $10,304,400 for Option 1 (activated carbon system)
and $11,926,500 for Option 2 (air stripping/activated carbon).
Alternative GW-3, Option 1, is the most cost-effective ground-
water alternative that would be protective of human health and
the environnent.


State Acceptance
The State of New Jersey supports the selected remedy presented in
this Record of Decision.


Community Acceptance

Community acceptance was evaluated after the close of the public
comment period. Written comments received during the public
comment period, as well as verbal comments during the public
meeting on September 21, 1993, were evaluated. The responses to
these comments are addressed in the Responsiveness Summary.

Comments received during the public comment period indicated that
the local residents were mostly satisfied with the preferred
alternatives for the soil and ground water.


SELECTED REMEDY
Based upon consideration of the requirements of CERCLA, the
detailed analysis of the alternatives using the nine criteria,
and public comments, EPA and NJDEPE have determined that Alterna-
tive SC-4 (Excavation/Off-Site Treatment/Off-Site Disposal), and


                                                             5000)8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 31 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               27
Alternative GW-3 Option 1 (Pumping and Treating of Ground Water/
Limited Source Extraction) is the most appropriate remedy for the
Fried Industries Site.
The major components of the selected remedy include the follow-
ing:
For surface soils:
    Excavation of about 900 cubic yards from areas of elevated
    arsenic contamination in the surface soil (Figure 6), off-
    site stabilization, and off-site disposal of the stabilized
    surface soil. Treatment residuals will be disposed of, at
    an appropriate off-site facility, in accordance with CERCLA
    requirements. During design, if significant soil contami-
    nation is found in the vicinity of the underground storage
    tanks and tank car, in the areas that were used for staging
    drums, and/or beneath the main building, the contaminated
    soils will be removed and treated as part of the remedial
    action. Additional sampling during the design will deter-
    mine the need for removal of soil "hot spots" containing
    zinc, in order to help meet surface water discharge require-
    ments for treated ground water.
For ground water:
    On-site ground-water extraction from the bedrock aquifer:
    collection of ground water from the shallow aquifer; com-
    bined ground-water flow is subject to metals pretreatment by
    precipitation, organics treatment by activated carbon sys-
    tem, and discharge to Bog Brook. In addition, excavation of
    approximately 2,700 cubic yards from areas of concentrated
    VOCs contamination in the soil (Figure 7), with appropriate
    off-site treatment and disposal (this includes treatment and
    disposal of 400 cubic yards of soil contaminated with both
    VOCs and arsenic). Additional sampling during the design
    will determine the need for removal of ground-water "hot
    spots" containing zinc, in order to help meet surface water
    discharge requirements for treated ground water.
Residual wastes such as precipitates and spent carbon will be
transported to an appropriate off-site facility for disposal in
accordance with RCRA and CERCLA requirements.
The goal of the ground-water portion of the remedial action is to
restore the ground water to its beneficial use, in this case, a
potential source of drinking water. Vinyl chloride, benzene,
toluene, and other contaminants present in the two aquifers will
be extracted/collected and treated until concentrations in these
aquifers are reduced to levels below the most stringent of the
Federal MCLs, New Jersey MCLs, or New Jersey Ground-water Quality
Standards. In addition, the effluent from the treatment process

                                                              500081

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 32 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               28
will achieve Federal and State surface water quality discharge
standards (Table 14).

EPA recognizes that the selected remedy may not achieve this
aquifer restoration goal because of the technical difficulties
associated with achieving ground-water cleanup levels. It may
become apparent, during implementation or operation of the
ground-water extraction/collection and treatment system that
contaminant levels have ceased to decline and are remaining
constant at levels higher than the remediation goals (Table 6)
for ground-water cleanup levels. In such a case, the system's
performance standards, and/or the remedy, may be reevaluated.
Performance monitoring of the ground-water extraction/collection
and treatment system will be implemented. The data collected
will be used to suggest system adjustments or modifications to
provide more effective or efficient attainment of cleanup levels.
Such adjustments or modifications may include: increasing or
decreasing the extraction rate, initiating a pulsed pumping
schedule, installing additional extraction wells, or ceasing
extraction at wells where cleanup levels have been achieved.
Monitoring data will be used to assess the effectiveness of the
modifications implemented and may be used to re-assess the time
frame required to achieve cleanup levels. In addition, contami-
nation in surface water and in sediments will be monitored to
insure there are no risks generated by these media.

The levels of volatile organic contamination in the soils, in
this case, do not pose unacceptable carcinogenic or non-carcino-
genic risks. However, several areas of concentrated volatile
organic contamination in the soil represent continuing sources of
high ground-water contamination. In order to facilitate the
removal of VOCs from the ground water, approximately 2,700 cubic
yards of contaminated soil will be removed from these areas
(Figure 7) and transported to an appropriate off-site facility
for treatment and disposal. The combined areas to be excavated,
including both arsenic-contaminated soils and VOCs-contaminated
soils, are represented in Figure 5.

EPA and NJDEPE have agreed that a site-specific arsenic cleanup
level of 27 ppm, statistically derived from Site background data,
will be used for surface soil remediation (Table 12), because of
the high background arsenic concentrations found at the Site.

The estimated present worth cost of off-site stabilization of
surface soils (Alternative SC-4) is $652,500. Due to the minor
cost differences between the two stabilization alternatives (SC-3
and SC-4), and the more difficult implementability of Alternative
SC-3, Alternative SC-4 is considered to be the most cost effec-
tive alternative that would be protective of human health and the
environment. The estimated present worth cost of on-site treat-
ment of ground water (Alternative GW-3 Option 1) is $10,304,400.
Option 1 (activated carbon system) was chosen in lieu of Option 2


                                                                 500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 33 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               29
(air stripping/activated carbon) because Option 1 is the most
cost-effective of the alternatives that would be protective of
human health and the environment. An analysis of the present
worth costs of the selected remedy (Source Control Alternative
SC-4 and Ground-water Alternative GW-3 Option 1), including
capital costs and operation and maintenance costs, are presented
in Tables 13-1 and 13-2.

STATUTORY DETERMINATIONS
Under its legal authorities, EPA's primary responsibility at
Superfund sites is to undertake remedial actions that are protec-
tive of human health and the environment. In addition. Section
121 of CERCLA establishes several other statutory requirements
and preferences. These specify that when complete, the selected
remedial action for the Fried Site must comply with applicable,
or relevant and appropriate environmental standards established
under federal and state environmental laws unless a statutory
waiver is justified. The selected remedy also must be cost
effective and utilize permanent solutions and alternative treat-
ment technologies or resource-recovery technologies to the
maximum extent practicable. Finally, the statute includes a
preference for remedies that employ treatment that permanently
and significantly reduce the volume, toxicity, or mobility of
hazardous wastes. The following sections discuss how the select-
ed remedy meets these statutory requirements.

Protection of Human Health and the Environment
The selected remedy is protective of human health and the envi-
ronment, as it effectively addresses the principal threats posed
by the Site, namely: the arsenic-contaminated surface soils and
the VOCs-contaminated ground water in the surface and deep
bedrock aquifers.
The arsenic in the surface soil, the contaminant of concern that
is responsible for almost all of the carcinogenic risk in surface
soil ingestion, will be excavated down to 27 ppm, a level repre-
senting an ingestion exposure risk of 2.1 x 10"* for carcinogens,
an HI less than 1.0 for non-carcinogenic effects, and the back-
ground concentration for arsenic in the area. Excavation and
off-site stabilization of arsenic-contaminated surface soil will
protect against future ingestion hazards. Additionally, the
removal of the contaminated soil from the Site will reduce
infiltration of arsenic into the ground water.
Capturing and treating contaminated ground water from the shallow
and deep bedrock aquifers will protect against future ingestion,
and direct contact and inhalation hazards while showering. The
contaminants in the ground water will be reduced to levels that


                                                              50009S

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 34 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 30
are acceptable for drinking water, thereby protecting human
health.

Sampling data indicated the building complex presented no signif-
icant risk from contamination. The buildings and other struc-
tures in and around the building complex are in poor condition,
constituting a safety hazard to Site workers as well as creating
an impediment to equipment operation. To ensure the safety of
these Site workers, and to facilitate heavy equipment operations
in implementing the selected remedy, the building complex will be
demolished to eliminate the physical hazards associated with
these unsafe structures.


Compliance with Applicable or Relevant and Appropriate
Requirements

Attainment of chemical-specific ARARs for the aquifer will be
achieved via the extraction/collection and treatment of ground
water. As previously discussed, should any effluent limitation
for discharge to Bog Brook (which is an intermittent stream) not
be technically achievable within the range of the treatment
system identified in the Feasibility Study and the ROD, EPA, in
conjunction with NJDEPE, may either relocate the treated ground-
water discharge to Lawrence Brook (which is a continuous flowing
stream) to meet that limitation, or waive the effluent limitation
for Bog Brook.

Action-specific and location-specific ARARs will be complied with
during implementation of the remedy. The specific ARARs for the
selected remedy are listed below.

Chemical-specific ARARs:

     •    Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA) Maximum Contaminant Levels
          (MCLs):
          (40 CFR Part 141)
     •    Clean Water Act Water Quality Criteria (WQC):
          (40 CFR Part 131)

     •• RCRA Maximum Concentration Limits (MCLs) :
        (40 CFR 264)

     •• RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions:
        (40 CFR 268)

     *•   New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act MCLs:
          (NJAC: 7:10-16)

     »• New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act Standards for
        Ground Water:


                                                               500094

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 35 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    31
          (NJAC: 7:9-6)

     •• New Jersey Water Pollution Discharge Elimination System:
        (NJAC: 7:14A)
     *-   New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards:
          (NJAC 7:9-4.1)
Location-specific ARARs:

     •    Clean Water Act, Section 404:
          (33 use 466)

     •    Executive Orders on Floodplain Management and Protection
          of Wetlands:
          (E.O. 11988, 11990)

     •• EPA/COE Memorandum of Agreement on Wetlands Protection

     -    Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act:
          (16 use 661)

     •    Endangered Species Act:
          (16 use 1531)
     •• National Historic Preservation Act:
        (16 use 470)

     •• New Jersey Flood Hazard Area Control Act:
        (NJSA 58:6A-50)

     •    New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act:
          (NJSA 13:9B-1)
     »• New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Transition Area Rules:
        (NJAC 7:7)

     *- New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Rules:
        (NJAC 7:7A)

     *• New Jersey Stream Encroachment Regulations:
        (NJAC 7:13-1.1)
Action-specific ARARs;

     »• Clean Water Act Water Quality Criteria (WQC) :
        (40 CFR Part 131)

     *•   RCRA Land Disposal Restrictions:
          (40 CFR 268)

     •• Clean Air Act National Ambient Air Quality Standards:

                                                             500045

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 36 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            32
     (40 CFR Part 50)
•• OSHA General Industry Standards:
   (29 CFR 1910)

•    OSHA Safety and Health Standards:
     (29 CFR 1926)

•    OSHA Record Keeping, Reporting, and Related Regulations:
     (29 CFR 1904)

•• RCRA Standards for Generators of Hazardous Waste:
   (40 CFR 262.1)
*•   RCRA Standards for Transporters of Hazardous Waste:
     (40 CFR 263.11, 263.20-21, and 263.30-31)

•    RCRA Standards for Owners/Operators of Permitted
     Hazardous Waste Facilities:
     (40 CFR 264.10-264.18)

»• RCRA - Preparedness and Prevention:
   (40 CFR 264.30-31)

»• RCRA - Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures:
   (40 CFR 264.50-264.56)

•• RCRA - Ground-water Protection:
   (40 CFR 264.90-264.109)
*•   RCRA - Standards for Excavation and Fugitive Dust:
     (40 CFR 264.251-264.254)

*• RCRA - Miscellaneous Units:
   (40 CFR 264.600-264.999)

•    RCRA - Closure and Post-Closure
     (40 CFR 264.110-264.120)

•    DOT Rules for Transportation of Hazardous Materials:
     (49 CFR 107, 171.1-172.558)
*•   New Jersey Hazardous Waste Manifest System Rules:
     (NJAC 7:26)

*•   New Jersey Hazardous Waste Treatment Storage and Disposal
     Facility Permitting Requirements:
     (NJAC 7:26)

•    New Jersey Water Pollution Discharge Elimination System:
     (NJAC: 7:14A)


                                                           5000U

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 37 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 33
     •    New Jersey Surface Water Quality Standards:
          (NJAC 7:9-4.1)
     •    New Jersey Clean Air Act:
          (NJSA 26:2C)

     *•   New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act:
          (NJAC 7:27-5, 13, 16, and 17)


Cost-Effectiveness

Of the alternatives which most effectively address the threats
posed by Site contamination, the selected remedy provides for
overall effectiveness in proportion to its cost. The estimated
total project cost, including both the selected surface soil and
ground-water alternatives, is $10,956,900 (derived from
Tables 13-1 and 13-2).


Utilization of Permanent Solutions and Alternative Treatment
Technologies to the Maximum Extent Practicable

Contaminants in the ground water will be removed and treated
before discharging to surface water. Hazardous wastes generated
by the treatment process will be disposed of at an approved
off-site facility. This will significantly reduce the toxicity,
mobility and volume of the contaminants, and offer a permanent
solution to the risks posed by the contaminated ground water.

Off-site stabilization of soil contaminated with arsenic in
excess of 27 ppm will reduce the mobility of this contaminant
and, therefore, represents a permanent solution to the risks
posed by the contaminated surface soil at the Site. Although the
toxicity and volume of the contaminated soil will not be reduced
at the actual treatment facility, the selected remedy represents
the maximum extent to which the toxicity, mobility, and volume
can be reduced at the Site in a cost-effective manner.


Preference for Treatment as a Principal Element

The selected ground-water remedy satisfies the preference for
treatment as a principal element. The on-site contaminated
ground water will be extracted/collected and treated, using
precipitation for metals and carbon adsorption for VOCs, to
reduce the levels of contaminants, thereby reducing the risk to
human health. The excavation and off-site treatment/disposal of
VOCs-contaminated soil was included for the purpose of facilitat-
ing the pump and treat process; the treatment of soils highly
contaminated with VOCs will also serve to further reduce any
potential threat to human health.


                                                           500097

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 38 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               34

The statutory preference for remedies that employ treatment as a
principal element will also be satisfied for the arsenic-contami-
nated soil. The arsenic-contaminated soil will be transported
for treatment and disposal at appropriate off-site facilities,
thereby reducing the risk to human health.

DOCUMENTATION OF SIGNIFICANT CHANGES
The Proposed Plan for the Site was released to the public on
September 9, 1993. The Proposed Plan identified the preferred
alternatives for ground-water and soil remediation. EPA reviewed
all written and verbal comments received during the public
comment period. Upon review of these comments, EPA determined
that no significant changes to the selected remedy, as it was
originally identified in the Proposed Plan, were necessary.
However, after the Proposed Plan became final in October, 1993,
several minor revisions to the remedy became necessary. Addi-
tional sampling will be included during the design, to determine
if there is significant soil contamination in the areas used to
stage drums and/or beneath the main building. Samples may also
be taken to identify soil and ground-water "hot spots". The
contaminated soil and ground water would be removed and treated
as part of the remedial action. Additional expenses that might
result from the above activities have not been included in the
cost of the remedy. Similarly, costs resulting from the possible
cleanup of the underground tanks and tank car contamination were
also not included in the cost of the remedy.




                                                            500096

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 39 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                  APPENDIX I


                   FIGURES



Figure #   Identification

     1     General Location Map
     2     Fried Industries Site Map
     3     Wetlands Areas on the Fried Property
    4      Extent of Ground-water Contamination Plume
     5     Areas to be Excavated
     6     Arsenic Contamination in Surface Soil
     7     VOCs Contamination in Soil
     8     Ground-water Contamination (Phase I RI)
     9     Ground-water Contamination (Phase II RI)




                                                     500018

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 40 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                                                r^^g




                                         ^ F A R R I N G T O N DAM




       «»:••/

                     Sob
                                                      ^'^me,
                 . su
          'Ooi                                \



                                                                             •   ^   ^   .




                                             BOG BROOK
                                             ^TRIBUTARY/                                               BOG BROOK
                                                                                                                0   V .N7


                                                               ?AY^2. ^ ^ J S I T E :
                                                                                     - i i-^^
                                                                                                      DIRECTION OF SURFACE
                                                                                                          WATER FLOW '•^




if^^            »,         SURFACE WATER
>~^             A          MONITORING     ^
•Oi==N                     LOCATION      ^-iO-X

                                 1000                 2000:

 . ^
  .              If
                     SCALE IN FEET
                           ^y-     . /
' S O U R C E : FROM USGS NEW BRUNSWICK QUAD.,1954
  EBASCO SERVICES INCORPORATED
                                                  -    •   U                                 _.


                                                                     U.S. ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
                                                                                                       i-t—   i-s^a-ra.
                                                                                                  T0P0.i^'VOT*S^S?r;O;vT
                                                                                                                            ^   —r
                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                O
                                           APPROVED
                                                                                 AGENCY
OEPT                       W..SK
DATE                       CH.
                                                                                                       Figure       1
SCALE.    r=2000'
                                                                                                                          wmssiamn^^si^mwL 00

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 41 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

CI

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 42 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     \iSU&




I?
ii
M

s
a
        SOOMt

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 43 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

500043

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 44 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

500044

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 45 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

LEGEND:

                       xicAnOH (SHdU-O* O«0«limo<) (I3i1JS.I«S -   I7/»I)

  •   m M n m n m x IOCAIWN (octp t a m a ) ( i « - i i / j i j
  A   OH-ait KOMwitNrnno* locxiran                   "im^
  A   SOI. K K M : ( U ) i2/ti. suorMX s/imx (ss| i2/«i       il
  •   sinfr cuMC
  A   Kooucrm i i / w ( P I - « IS H aenmoi)
  •   nst m i
  a   Sn)«NT SAMPtt IJ/fl (HIWWI lOCATIONS).
 MM   nsT nr i2/»i (imotL IDCAHONS)^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 46 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

U£{HB.:
                                                                        ctumu nrjtnm •
                                                                                         D+175/5+50 (18"-J6")
                            M.mt« - «M)



                                                    • lyi.   '—•rrurt




                                                                                                                                               —i
               TB2-01 (0-2")

       VOLATILE TIC'S           4.800 J       -s
                           ^ ^            _     /
              TB2-02 (2'-4')
                                              ^
                                                y
       VOLATILE TIC'S           7,310 J
                                           \
   \      -                               \
              TB2-03 (4'-6')               \
       2-BUTANONE
       raUENE
       VOLATILE TIC'S
                                1.100 J
                                140
                                1.078 J
                                              K
               TB2-04 (6'-8')
       2-BUTANONE               100 J
       TOLUENE                  48
       VOLATILE TIC'S           3.600
                                               V



                  rauENE




                                                                                                                                       iHC^-




                                                                                                                                   ncURt 3-3
                                                                                                                        E)(CAV«7I0N FOH SOUKCt RtMOVHL
                                                                                                                                      (voc.)


                                                                                                         l-l-l -   U'             I      1

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 47 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                    « HtW t K e r STAIt CCCOEDC >

                                   7 tiCAH SEA uya. /uwusmtHr soutOMr ,

Z - ^ S * s. n«n> «D JOHN i ^ T W ^ S T D A i n ) XS'^a i ^ '               p^^^^^i^^^^Si^
" K O H O t D W DEED BOOK 3 0 « . P » a 47,                    '   ,_   „   1.2 IVfc,^
                                                                                2 Hidilnrortliene



      STREAM HEW lOCAWJII

®     MONITORWC m U . lOCAHOM ( W A U

      MOMIOWtC « 0 1 LOCATION ( O E I P J I I

      TEST Bonmc LOCATION

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 48 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====



===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 49 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                APPENDIX II


                   TABLES



Table 4   Identification

     1    Ground Water Data (Phase I and II RI):
               2 Tables
     2    Surface Soil Data (Phase I and II RI)
     3    Subsurface Soil Data (Phase I and II RI)
     4    Sediment Data (Phase I and II RI)
     5    Surface Water Data (Phase I and II RI)
     6    Federal/State Maximum Contaminant Levels
     7    Contaminants-of-Concern
     8    Toxicity Data (RfDs, Slope Factors, etc.)
     9    Summary of Risks
     10   Exposure Parameters/Assumptions: 3 Tables
     11   Calculation of Chronic Daily Intakes
     12   Derivation of Arsenic Cleanup Level
     13   Capital and Operation/Maintenance Costs of
               Selected Remedy: 2 Tables
     14   Treatment Plant Discharge Requirements




                                                   50004t

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 50 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    Table 1-1
                                              FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                 SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (SHALLOW) ANALYSES
                                                PHASE I AND II


                                           MAX. DETECTED         MIN. DETECTED       AVERAGE
                                          CONCENTRATION         CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRATION
    VOLATILE COMPOUNDS                    IN THE SAMPLES        IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                ug/L                   ug/L            ogA.

    1,1,1-Trichloroethane                       15.00                0.30               5.18
    1,1,2-Trichloroethane                       0.70                 0.70               4.64
    1,1-DichlorDethane                        670.00                 0.10              68.17
    1,1-Dichloroethene                          6.00                 6.00               5.08
    1,1- DichloFopropene                        16.00                14.00             6.67
    1,2,3-Trichloropropane                     35.00                30.00              9.58
    1,2,4-Trimelhylbenrene                   55000.00               21.00            4684.42
    1,2-Dichloroethane                         26.00                 0.60              5.52
    1.2-Dichloroethene (total)                260.00                 6.00              13.75
    1,2-DlchlorDpropane                        170.00                2.00              16.75
    1,3,5-Trime(hylbenzene                    570.00                 5.00             99.42
    1,3-Dlchloropropane                        51.00                46.00             12.25
    2-Butanone                                300.00                 0.50             47.27
    2-Hexanone                                  2.00                 0.30              4.56
    4-Methyl-2-pcintanone                      130.00                1.00             13.42
    Acetone                                   1000.00               16.00             97.55
    Benzene                                  6400.00                 1.00            249.83
    Carbon disutfide                            5.00                 0.10              4.47
    Carbon tetrachloride                        0.20                 0.20              4.80
    Chloroethane                              1400.00                9.00             93.11
    Chloroform                                  0.80                 0.40              4.51
    cis-1,2-Dichloroethene                   11000.00                2.00            973.50
    Ethylbenzene                             12000.00                1.00            376.39
    Isopropyibenzene                           77.00                69.00             16.33
    Methylene chloride                       2000.00                 1.00            115.39
    n-Propylbenzene                            83.00                4.00              16.92
o   Naphthalene                                93.00                70.00             30.17
o   p-lsopropyltoluene                         39.00                36.00             10.42



o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 51 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table 1-1 (continuod)
                                                 FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                    SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (SHALLOW) ANALYSES
                                                   PHASE I AND II


                                             MAX DETECTED       MIN DETECTED         AVERAGE
                                             CONCENTRATION      CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRAnON
      VOLATILE COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)            IN THE SAMPLES     IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                   ug/L               uq/L             ug/L


      sec-Butylt)enzene                            5 00              5.00             5.00
      Styrene                                   20000 00              1.00           641.36
      Toluene                                   280000.00            0.20           18412.92
      trans-1,2-Dichloroethene                    29.00              2.00             621
      Trichloroethene                            4200 00             0.50            131.18
      Vinyl chloride                              550 00             11.00           20.72
      Xylenes (total)                           49000 00             0.10           2760.56



      SEMIVOLAnLE COMPOUNDS



      2,4-Dimettiylphenol                       3700 00              17.00           391.31
      2-Methylnaphthalene                        44.00              34.00             9.81
      2-Methylphenol                            6500 00              5.00            353.22
      4MBthylphenol                             8200 00              9.00            562.08
      Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phlhalate                  7 00               4.00             5.00
      Butylbenzy^thalate                          2.00               2.00             488
      Di-n-butylphthalate                          100               060              4.29
      Di-n-octylphlhalate                         300                3.00             492
      Dibenzofuran                                 1.00               1.00            4.83
      Diethylphthalate                            15.00              3,00             5.58
      Isophorone                                 90.00               20.00            12.00
      Naphthalene                                 70.00              4.00             18.08
      PentachlorophenoJ                           3.00               3.00             12.10
      Phenol                                    30000 00            740.00           1810.69


Clt

o
CM

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 52 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          Table 1-1 (continued)
                                            FRIED INDUSTRIES
                               SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (SHALLOW) ANALYSES
                                              PHASE I AND II


                                        MAX DETECTED         MIN DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                        CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRATION
     PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS            IN TH^ SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                              ug/L                uq/L             ug/L

     beta-BHC                                0.67                  0.67           0.05
     delta-BHC                               0.04                  004            0.03
     gamma-BHC (Lindane)                     0.04                  0.03           0.03
     Heptachlor                              0.29                  0 29           0.04
     Dieldrin                                029                   029            0.49
     Endosulfan II                           0.35                  035            0.49
     4,4'-DDD                                0.42                  042            050
     4,4'-DDT                                1000                  200            108
     Methoxychlor                            2.30                  2.30           037
     alpha-Chlordane                         0.28                  028            0.25



     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS



     Aluminum                              5140000                516.00         9405.08
     Arsenic                                 50 60                 050             1074
     Barium                                 387.00                  7.80          106.64
     Beryllium                                5.30                 0.30             1.65
     Cadmium                                  2.90                  230            2.50
     Calcium                               66900.00               2330.00       13740.28
     Chromium                               262.00                  290           65.38
     Cobalt                                  37 00                 360             18.20
     Copper                                  77.00                 360            30.64
     Iron                                  140000.00              827 00        47638.23
     Lead                                    46 40                  1.30           13.35
     Magnesium                             38500.00               846 00         4466.56
CH
ee   Manganese
     Mercury
                                            990 00
                                              0.87
                                                                   1720
                                                                   0.20
                                                                                  245.69
                                                                                   0.13


s
     Nickel                                  162.00                 7.20          35,58

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 53 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    Table 1-1 (continued)
                                                                      FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                         SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (SHALLOW) ANALYSES
                                                                        PHASE I AND II


                                                                          MAX. DETECTED                       MIN DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                          CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION
     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)                                         IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                                ug/L                               ug/L                               ug/L

     Potassium                                                                 9980 00                             91800                              4120.84
     Selenium                                                                    290                                 1.00                               2.34
     Sodium                                                                   467000.00                            161000                            70222.50
     Thallium                                                                    2.70                               2.60                                4.87
     Vanadium                                                                  485 00                               250                                129.53
     Zinc                                                                       215.00                              17.00                              71.96




     • Average concentrations include all detected concentrations, as well as half the Contract Required Quantitation Limit (CRQL) value for non-detect samples, whenever a compound
     was detected in any sample of the same environmental medium. This may result in an average concentration value that is greater than the maximum or lower than the minimum
     detected value, as certain chemicals were detected at concentrations lower than their respective CRQL and there were different CRQLs for tfie Phase I and II analyses.




c

Id

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 54 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Table 1-2
                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                               SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (DEEP) ANALYSES
                                             PHASE I AND II

                                       MAX DETECTED       MIN DETECTED         AVERAGE
                                      CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRAnON     CONCENTRATION
    VOLATILE COMPOUNDS                IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                            uq/L                ug/L             uq/L

     1,1,1-Trichloroethane               22000.00             8200 00          4616.67
     1,1,2-Trichloroethane                  18.00               400              6.90
     1,1-Dichloroethane                  6400 00                300            1214.00
     1,1-Dichloroethene                   530.00               160 00           146.50
     1,2,4-Trimethyft)enzene               20 00               20 00             10.00
     1,2-Dichloroethane                    50 00                400              8.07
     1,3.5-Trimethylbenzene                 7,00                700              5.67
    2-Butanone                            320,00              320.00            33.64
    Acetone                               1200,00              20 00           206.67
    Benzene                                160,00               0 70            23,73
    Carbon disulfide                        1,00                0 10             3,78
    Chloroelhane                          310,00               25 00            87.88
    Chloroform                             21,00                090              5.24
    Chtoromethane                           1,00                020              4.27
    cis-1,2- Dichloroethene                 0,30                030              4.61
    Ethylbenzene                           12 00                0 10             5.19
    Isopropylbenzene                        300                 300              4.33
    Methylene chloride                    660.00                050            180.34
    n-Propylbenzene                         1.00                100              3.67
    p-lsopropyltoluene                      0.20                020              3.40
    sec-Butylbenzene                        030                 030              3.43
    Tetrachloroelhene                       200                 100              4,30
    Toluene                               200.00               73.00            35,44
    trans-1,2-Oichloroethene              990 00              190.00            95,00
    Trichloroethene                        11.00                600              5,81
    Vmyl chloride                          55.00                020             8,35
    Xylenes (total)                        22.00                0.50            6,91


o
o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 55 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           Table 1-2 (continued)
                                              FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (DEEP) ANALYSES
                                                PHASE I AND II

                                         MAX DETECTED         MIN DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                         CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRATION
     SEMIVOLATILE COMPOUNDS              IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                              "ug/L                ug/L             ug/L

     2,4-Dimethylphenol                      40 00               34.00             10.39
     2-Methylphenol                          43 00               33.00             10.50
     4-Methylphenol                          25 00               1000              7.89
     Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate              1000                0.90              5.06
     Di-n-butylphthalate                     22 00               5.00              7.62
     Phenol                                  10.00               2.00              5.33




     PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS



     4,4'-DDE                                 0 10                006              0.06




     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS



     Aluminum                               57100 00             106 00           6193.80
     Arsenic                                  820                 090               3.88
     Barium                                  1030 00             4150              231.13
     Beryllium                                490                 0.30              2,37
     Calcium                                64900 00            11800 00         32633,33
     Chromium                                 79.20               280               19.64
     Cobalt                                   26 50               360              20,94
     Copper                                   5180                360               14,42
     Iron                                   132000 00           5170.00          22421,00
     Lead                                     24.20               1.50              5,76
OV



s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 56 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     Table 1-2 (continued)
                                                                        FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                            SUMMARY OF GROUNDWATER (DEEP) ANALYSES
                                                                          PHASE I AND II

                                                                           MAX, DETECTED                      MIN, DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                          CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                       CONCENTRAnON
     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)                                         IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                      IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                                ug/L                                ug/L                               ug/L

     Magnesium                                                                 36400,00                            2410,00                             8547.33
     Manganese                                                                  2390,00                             97,30                               482.29
     Nickel                                                                      52,00                               7,10                                17.85
     Potassium                                                                 36300,00                            3590,00                             7669.29
     Selenium                                                                     2,50                               1,00                                241
     Sodium                                                                    136000 00                          25300,00                            59606.67
     Vanadium                                                                    96,00                              250                                 25.35
     Zinc                                                                       1630 00                             10,00                              341.78




     * Average corwentrations Include all detected concentrations, as well as half the Contract Required Quantitatkm Limit (CROL) value for non-detect samples, wfienever a compound
     was delected in any sample of the same environmental medium. This may result in an average concentratkm value that is greater than the maximum or lower than the minimum
     detected value, as certain chemicals were detected at concentrations kjwer than their respective CRQL and there were different CRQLs lor the Phase I and II analyses.




cn

m

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 57 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                               Table    2
                                          FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF SURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                            PHASE I AND II


                                      MAX DETECTED           MIN. DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                      CONCENTRATION         CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRATION
     VOLATILE COMPOUNDS                IN THE SAMPLES        IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                            ug/kg                  ug/kq            ug/kg

     1.1,1-Trlchloroethane                  710.00                300                6.50
     1,1-Dichloroethane                     260.00                500                4.21
     1,2 Dichloroethene (total)             240.00                400                3.80
     2-Butanone                              23 00                7.00               6.05
     4-Methyl-2-pentanone                   250 00                2.00               6.27
     Acetone                               2800.00                15.00             74.24
     Benzene                                 1800                 4.00               2.63
     Carbon disulfide                     23000.00                100              11420
     Carbon letrachlorkle                440000.00              3100.00           10368.24
     Chlorobenzene                          110.00               110.00              4.94
     Chloroethane                            25 00               25 00               5.83
     Chloroform                          140000 00                100              733.69
     Ethylbenzene                         8800.00                 200               56.05
     Methylene chlorWe                     240 00                 1.00              6.94
     Tetrachloroelhene                    7600.00                 1.00             43 36
     Toluene                             100000 00                1.00             481.23
     Total xylenes                       14450000                 1.00             891.66
     Trichloroethene                        21.00                21.00              2.89
     Vinyl acetate                          190.00               38 00              7.17




     SEMIVOLATILE COMPOUNDS



     1,2-DichlOTobenzene                 110000.00               30.00            2625.45
     1,3-Dichk)robenzene                  9300,00               340 00             380.98
     1,4-Dichk}robenzene                 29000 00               1300.00           867.28
     2,4-Dichlorophenol                    130,00                130.00            163.25
     2,4-Dime(hylphenol                    340,00                49 00             165.31
ot   2-Chlorophenol                        380.00                93 00             170.50
     2-Methylnaphttialene                 12000 00               48 00            230 63

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 58 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Table 2 (continued)
                                          FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF SURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                            PHASE I AND II


                                      MAX DETECTED          MIN, DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                      CONCENTRATION        CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRATION
SEMIVOLATILE COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)        IN THE SAMPLES       IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                             uq"/kg              ug/kg             ug/kg

 2-Methylphenol                            2200.00             480 00            208,73
4 Methylphenol                              760.00              55,00            169,30
Acenaphtherra                              1000 00             450 00            173,76
Acenaphthylene                              320 00              34,00            164,45
Anthracene                                 2300 00              39 00            180,50
 Benzo(a)anthracene                        4300 00              28,00            203,83
Benzo(a)pyrene                            3300 00               1000             205,88
Benzo(a,h)anthracene                         77.00              77,00            164,37
Benzo(b+k)fluorantherte                    7000 00              1600             283,66
Benzo(g,h,i)perylene                       91000                42,00            169,20
Benzoic ackf                                730 00             150 00            791,88
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                61000 00             38 00             629,47
Butylbenzylphthalate                      2100 00              87 00             188 02
Chrysene                                  4200 00               1300             233,89
Di-n-butylphthalate                        2000 00             41,00             180,19
Di-n-octylphthalate                        1000 00              10,00            177.13
Dibenz(a.h)anthracene                      370 00              69 00             165.12
Dibenzofuran                               61000               290 00            170.45
DiethylphthalalB                            130.00              76 00            164.23
Fluoranthene                              10000 00             23,00             310.22
Ruorene                                    1400 00             53,00             17287
Hexachtoroethane                            750 00             750,00            177.72
lndeno( 1,2.3-cd)pyrene                    1200 00             57 00             17617
Isopfwrone                                  750.00             86 00             201,27
N-Nitrosodiphenylamlne                      44 00               44 00            161,10
Naphthalene                               18000 00             38 00             288,62
Nitrot)enzene                              530.00              530 00            181,59
Pentachlofophenol                           4300               43,00             389.18
Phenanthrene                              8500 00               16 00            265,90
Phenol                                    11000 00              51,00            732,31
Pyrene                                    15000 00              900              344,68

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 59 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     Table 2 (continued)
                                        FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                SUMMARY OF SURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                          PHASE I AND II


                                    MAX    DETECTED     MIN    DETECTED      AVERAGE
                                    CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRATION
      PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS       IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES    IN THE SAMPLES*
                                           "ug/kg              ug/kg           ug/kg


      4,4'-DDD                             180 00               0.40           9,87
      4,4--DDE                            34000 0 0             0.19           182,71
      4,4'-DDT                            1200 00               0.26           18,86
      Aldrin                               67 00                0,40           5,07
      alpha-BHC                            42 00                1,00           4,44
      alpha-Chlordane                     6700.00               0,03           96,29
      beta-BHC                             12,00               10.00           4.12
      DieMrin                              30 00                0.29           7,94
      Endosulfan II                        110 00              110,00          10,37
      Endosulfan sulfate                    0,34                0,34           7,68
      ErMJrin                             21000 0 0            0.20           403.81
      Endrin ketone                       12000 00            12000.00        234.26
      gamma-BHC (Lindane)                  99 0 0              0,63            449
      gamma-Chlordane                     2200 00               1,30          54.14
      Heptachky                            12,00               0,20            3.95
      Heplachfor epoxkte                  2200,00              0,33            16,61
      Methoxychtor                         510,00              0,46           44,98
      AroclOf-1254                         310,00             310,00          91.50
      Aroclor-1260                         100.00             100,00          80.45




<JI


%JI

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 60 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      Table 2 (continued)
                                                                          FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                                  SUMMARY OF SURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                                                            PHASE I AND II

                                                                          MAX DETECTED                        MIN DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                          CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION
     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS                                                  IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                               mq/kg                              mg/kq                               mg/kg

     Aluminum                                                                  25100,00                             35,00                            498705
     Antimony                                                                   141100                              0,77                              12,42
     Arsenic                                                                    557 00                              0,33                               6,60
     Barium                                                                     21000                               0,90                              20 75
     Beryllium                                                                   280                                0,20                               0,59
     Cadmium                                                                     5,80                               0,64                               0.75
     Cateium                                                                   19500,00                             8,60                             1154.03
     Chromium                                                                    79 00                              2,90                              20.44
     Cobalt                                                                      33,00                              0.69                               4.99
     Copper                                                                     29100                               060                               21.85
     Iron                                                                      118000,00                           977,00                           2145741
     Lead                                                                       465,00                               1,10                             25,92
     Magnesium                                                                 15500,00                             7,80                             968.31
     Manganese                                                                  767,00                              0,76                              57.55
     Mercury                                                                     2,50                               0 10                              0.08
     Nickel                                                                     670,00                              1 10                              11.89
     Potassium                                                                 10600,00                            2890                              525.88
     Selenium                                                                    2,10                               030                               0,52
     Silver                                                                      6,70                               1,00                               1.20
     Sodium                                                                     1370,00                             4,30                             310.97
     Thallium                                                                    064                                0.32                              0.98
     Vanadium                                                                   52200                               5,30                              71,74
     Zinc                                                                       946 00                              2,20                              42.00




     * Average concentrations hKlude all detected concentrations, as well as half the Contract Required Quantitation Limit (CRQL) value for non-detect samples, whenever a compound
     was detected in any sample of the same environmental medium. This may result in an average concentratfon value that is greater tian tfie maximum or lower than the minimum
O    detected value, as certain chemicals were detected at concentrations tower than their respective CRQL and there were different CRQLs for the Phase I and 11 analyses.

o
a*

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 61 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Table 3
                                          FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                 SUMMARY OF SUBSURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                             PHASE I AND II


                                      MAX DETECTED         MIN DETECTED         AVERAGE
                                      CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRAnON
      VOLATILE COMPOUNDS               IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                            ug/kg               ug/kg             uq/kq


      1,1,1 -Trichloroethane                 12 00               3,00              2,67
      l.l-Dichkjroethane                     21,00               1.00              3.21
      1,2-OKWoroethene (total)             1000,00               2,00             23.76
      1,2-Oichk3ropropane                    8,00                4,00              269
      2-Bufanone                           1100 00              10,00             66.56
      2-Hexanone                             3,00                3,00              495
      4 Methyl-2-pentanone                  62,00                2,00             6.67
      Acetone                              2700,00              51,00            109.00
      Benzene                               27 00                100              3.49
      Carbon disulfkle                       6,00                200              258
      Chforobenzene                          4,00               200               2.53
      Chloroelhane                          290 00              1200              12.13
      Chhxotorm                              3.00                100              2.49
      Ethylbenzene                        16000 00               1,00            215.51
      Methylene clitoride                   40,00                1,00             3.88
      Styrene                              290 00              290 00             721
      Tetrachloroelhene                     32,00               200               3.22
      Toluene                            660000 00              2,00            8825.41
      Total Xylenes                       94000,00              300             1275.33
      Trictiloroethene                       3,00               200               2.51
      Vinyl chloride                         9,00               9 00              5.11




Cll


a»

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 62 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                          Table 3 (continued)
                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF SUBSURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                              PHASE I AND II


                                       MAX DETECTED         MIN DETECTED         AVERAGE
                                       CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRATION
     SEMIVOLATILE COMPOUNDS             IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                             ug/kg                ug/kq            ug/kg

     1,2,4-Trichkjrobenzene                  140.00             140 00            164,60
     1,2-Dfchkjrobenzene                    470.00              150,00            170,27
     1,4-Dfchlorobenzene                     160.00             160.00            164.87
     2,4,5-Trichtorophenol                  310.00              110,00           374.00
     2.4-Dtehlorophenol                     380.00               7100             171.46
     2,4-Dhnethylphenol                     580.00             580 00             172.16
     2- Methylnaphthalene                  15000 00              15,00           452.08
     2-Methylphenol                         200000              4700             210.57
     4-Chk>ro-3-methylphenol                870.00             870,00            17716
     4-Methylphenol                         1000 00             110,00            198.18
     4-Nitrophenol                          1500 00            1500 00           418.97
     Acenaphthene                           700.00              35,00            175.81
     Acenaphthylene                         520 00              37,00            168.42
     Anttiracene                            1100.00             39,00            186.08
     Benzo(a)an1hracene                    4300.00              120 00           253.97
     Benzo(a)pyrBne                        3800.00               900             238.01
     Benzo(b+k)fluoranlhene                9200 00               11,00           324.15
     Benzo(g,h,l)perylene                   1500 00             38,00            189.49
     Benzoic acM                           2100 00              95,00            822.24
     Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate            24000 00             21,00            725.19
     Butylbenzylphthalate                   260.00              53,00            162.99
     Chrysene                              3900 00              4100             248.46
     Di-n-butylphthalate                   3900 00              58 00            280.19
     Dl-n-octylphthalate                     87.00              23 00            159.97
     Dibenz(a,h)anttwacene                  200.00              36,00            162.33
     Dibenzofuran                           550.00              74,00            173 32
     Diethylphthalate                        45.00              41,00            158.74
     Dimethylphthalate                       100,00             100 00           163.33
     Fluoranthene                          7300,00               5,00            335.91



fO

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 63 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              Table 3 (continued)
                                                FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                       SUMMARY OF SUBSURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                                   PHASE I AND II


                                            MAX. DETECTED       MIN DETECTED          AVEFtAGE
                                            CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRATION
     SEMIVOLATILE COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)         IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                  uq/kq               ug/kg             ug/kg


     Fluorene                                   660.00               2200             181.94
     lndeno( 1,2,3-cd)pyrene                    1800.00              38,00            195.78
     N-nitrosodiphenylamine                     3200.00             3200 00           213.95
     Naphthalene                                5000.00              19,00            260.87
     Pentachlorophenol                          7900.00             540,00            515.76
     Phenanthrene                               3900.00              28.00            275.60
     Phenol                                     3600.00              35,00            320.89
     Pyrene                                     6400,00              6.00             310.45




     PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS



     4,4'-DDD                                    34 00               0.42               8.63
     4,4'-DDE                                     1300               590                8.06
     4,4'-DDT                                    150 00              0.73               9.85
     AWrin                                        90 00             90.00               5.39
     alpha-Chtordane                              18,00              0.16              3600
     delta-BHC                                    16.00              16.00              4.19
     DieMrin                                     140 00              0.36               980
     Endosulfan II                                035                0.26               7.60
     Endosulfan sulfate                          250 00             250.00             1315
     Endrin                                      170,00             170.00             10.66
     Endrin ketone                                0,70               0.70               7.88
     gamma-BHC.(Lindane)                          35.00             35.00               4.50
     gamma-Chlordane                              30 00              0.83              36.76
CH   Heptacfifor                                  77,00              2.00               5.04
O    Heptachlor EpoxkJe                           5,40               0.90               3.96
     Aroclor-1260                                270 00             270.00             84.87
%
C4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 64 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        Table 3 (continued)
                                                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                                  SUMMARY OF SUBSURFACE SOIL ANALYSES
                                                                              PHASE I AND II


                                                                             MAX DETECTED                        MIN DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                             CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRAnON
        INORGANIC COMPOUNDS                                                  IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                                  riig/kg                            mg/kg                               mg/kg

        Aluminum                                                                  54500 00                            21900                             10674,91
        Antimony                                                                     17.70                              0,77                               6,19
        Arsenic                                                                     9120                                040                                7,69
        Barium                                                                     533 00                               1,20                              76,80
        Beryllium                                                                    540                               0 26                                1.10
        Cadmium                                                                     15.70                              062                                 1,20
        Calcium                                                                   43100 00                             13 90                            1743,37
        Chromium                                                                    119 00                              1,20                              28,62
        Cobalt                                                                      98.70                               1,20                              16,58
        Copper                                                                     443 00                               150                               3060
        Iron                                                                      94400 00                            476,00                           21197 32
        Lead                                                                       699 00                              0,40                              23,73
        Magnesium                                                                 39300 00                             1600                            6175,28
        Manganese                                                                  1590 00                             069                               198.33
        Mercury                                                                      0 16                              Oil                                0.03
        Nickel                                                                     2940 00                             2,00                              65,59
        Potassium                                                                 40300.00                             1700                            4946,82
        Selenium                                                                     1.70                              0,27                               0,52
        Silver                                                                       044                               0,44                               0.99
        Sodium                                                                     2400 00                             960                              336,37
        Thallium                                                                     3 40                              028                                1.03
        Vanadium                                                                    280 00                             3,20                              52.93
        Zinc                                                                       1060 00                             230                               96 46




.5|t    * Average corKentraBons Include all detected concentrations, as well as half the Contract Required QuantitatkHi Limit (CRQL) value for non-detect samples, whenever a compound
 iSmf   was detected In any sample of the same environmental medium. This may result in an average corKentratkm value that is greater than tfie maximum or lower than the minimum

 o
 <»
        detected value, as certain chemicals were detected at concentrations lower than their respective CRQL and there were different CRQLs for the Phase I and II analyses.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 65 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                            Table 4
                                         FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                   SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT ANALYSES
                                           PHASE I AND II


                                     MAX DETECTED         MIN DETECTED         AVERAGE
                                     CONCENTRATION       CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRAnON
     VOLATILE COMPOUNDS               IN THE SAMPLES      IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                           ug/kg                ug/kq            ug/kg


     1,1-Dfchtoroethane                    1.00                1.00             2.46
     1,2-Dk^loroethene (total)            400                  4.00             2.54
     2-Butanone                           44.00                9.00             9.84
     Acetone                              79.00               67.00             13.00
     Carbon disulfide                      800                 4.00             2.75
     Chloroethane                         38.00               38.00             6.94
     Chtoroform                            500                 1.00             2.53
     Methylene chloride                    4.00                2.00             2.55
     Toluene                              36.00                2.00             3.18
     Total xylenes                         4.00               4.00              2.55




     SEMIVOLAnLE COMPOUNDS



      2-Melhylnaphlhalene                 35 00               35,00              _
      4-l^tethylphenol                   1300.00              240,00           199,61
      Acenaphthene                        100.00              38,00            154,84
      Acenaphthylene                      92 00               49,00            15758
      Anthracene                         540.00                81,00           17739
      Benzo(a)anthracene                 1100.00              42,00            228,05
      Benzo(a)pyrene                      960.00              53,00            209 45
      Benzo(b+k)fluoranthene             2140,00              99 00            358,13
      Benzo(g,h,i)perylene                530,00              100,00           178,95
      Benzoic acid                        500,00              120,00           71778
CI   .Bis{2-ethylhexyl)phthalate         2900,00              60,00            34418
      Butylbenzylphthalate                 68,00              68,00            162.45
      Carbazole                           110,00              35,00            154.12


s

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 66 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                        Table 4 (continued)
                                          FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                    SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT ANALYSES
                                            PHASE I AND II


                                      MAX. DETECTED       MIN. DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                      CONCENTRATION      CONCENTRATION     CONCENTRAnON
    SEMIVOLAnLE COMPOUNDS (Conrd)      IN THE-SAMPLES     IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                             ug/kg              ug/kg           ug/kg

    Chrysene                              1200.00              46.00           234.45
    Dibenz(a,h)anthracen0                  240.00              50.00           160.68
    Dibenzofuran                           110.00              23.00           156.79
    Fluoranthene                          2500.00             52.00            312.10
    Ruorene                               260.00               68.00           165.21
    lndeno( 1,2,3-od)pyrene               480.00              91.00            177.53
    Isophorone                             27.00              22.00            148.47
    Naphthalene                            93.00              58.00            160.29
    Nitrobenzene                          530.00              530.00           186.47
    Phenanthrene                          1700.00             40.00            258.12
    Pyrene                                1900.00             43.00            306.18




    PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS



    4.4'-DDD                                13.00              6.10              8.07
    4,4'-DDE                                7.60               3.90              7.75
    4,4'-DDT                                7.00               7.00              7.94
    AMrin                                   5.10               5.10              4.04
    alpha-BHC                               2.90               2.90              3.94
    alpha-Chlordane                        21.00              10.00             35.59
    beta-BHC                               28.00              28.00              4.63
    Dieldrin                                9.70               9.70              8.10
o   Endosulfan sulfate                      7.20               720               7.95
Q   gamma-Chlordane                        21.00               5.50             35.62
    Mettioxychlof                          110.00             110.00            42.50

m

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 67 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         Table 4 (continued)
                                                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                                     SUMMARY OF SEDIMENT ANALYSES
                                                                             PHASE I AND II


                                                                          MAX DETECTED                        MIN, DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                          CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                       CONCENTRATION
     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS                                                   IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                                mq/kq                              mq/kg                               mg/kg

     Aluminum                                                                   26400 00                            247.00                            6311,29
     Antimony                                                                     118 00                             7.00                               20,11
     Arsenic                                                                      199 00                             0.54                               15,30
     Barium                                                                       188.00                             420                                49.23
     Beryllium                                                                     1400                              0.32                                1.65
     Cadmium                                                                       9.10                              1.40                                1.27
     Calcium                                                                    6550.00                             67.00                              1032,41
     Chromium                                                                    1520.00                             270                                49 11
     Cobalt                                                                        2800                              0 78                                680
     Copper                                                                       208 00                             2.60                               39,01
     Iron                                                                       84400.00                            142 00                            1409776
     Lead                                                                         22100                              4 30                               52 58
     Magnesium                                                                  6130 00                             71.90                             1200,98
     Manganese                                                                    273 00                             3 20                               59,10
     Mercury                                                                       2.00                              200                                 0,06
     Nickel                                                                       49.40                              100                                13,03
     Potassium                                                                   4700 00                            7240                               708,15
     Selenium                                                                      300                               1.00                               0,63
     Silver                                                                        16,00                             140                                 2,63
     Sodium                                                                      1180 00                            2480                               162,36
     Thallium                                                                      000                               000                                 1,00
     Vanadium                                                                     9900                               2.00                               34,94
     Zinc                                                                         525,00                             4.10                               78,50




ot
     * Average concentratfons include all detected concentratfons, as well as half the Contract Required Quantitation Limit (CRQL) value for non-detect samples, wfienever a compound
     was detected in any sample of the same environmental medium. This may result in an average concentration value that is greater than the maximum or lower than the minimum
     detected value, as certain chemk:als were detected at concentrattons tower than their respective CRQL and there were different CRQLs for the Phase I and II analyses.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 68 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                Table   5
                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF SURFACE WATER ANALYSES
                                             PHASE I AND II


                                       MAX DETECTED          MIN DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                       CONCENTRATION        CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRAnON
      VOLATILE COMPOUNDS               IN THE SAMPLES       IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                             ug/L                 ug/L             ug4.

      1,1,1 -Trichloroethane                89 00                0,10             11.36
      1,1-Dfchtoroethane                    42 00                0,50             5,95
      1.1-Dfchloroethene                     1,60                0.20             4.07
      1,2-Dibromoethane                      0 10                0.10             4.15
      1,2-Dfchloroethane                     4,00                 2.00            4.84
      1,3-Dichlorobenzene                    0 10                0.10             4.79
      2-Butanon6                             350                 3,00             4.42
      4-Methyl-2-pentanone                   030                 0,30             4.80
      Acetone                               30 00                2,60             6.11
      Benzene                               24 00                0 10             4.81
      Chtoroethane                          1600                 0,50             4.81
      Chtoroform                             030                 0,10             3.95
      Chtoromethane                         4 00                 4,00             4.95
      cis-1,2-Dfchtoroethene                050                  040              4.41
      Ethylbenzene                           700                 0.20             4.36
      fi4ethylene chlorkle                   660                  1.00            4.78
      Tetrachloroelhene                     020                  010              4.37
      Toluene                               13,00                1.00             5.52
      Total xylenes                         52 00                0,10             6.24
      trans-1,2- Dichtoroethene             1700                 17 00            5.52
      Trichloroethene                       0,20                 0,10             415
      Vinyl acetate                          1,80                 1,80            4.85




CH
o
iS3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 69 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                         Table 5 (continued)
                                           FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                  SUMMARY OF SURFACE WATER ANALYSES
                                             PHASE I AND II


                                       MAX, DETECTED       MIN DETECTED        AVERAGE
                                       CONCENTRATION      CONCENTRATION    CONCENTRAnON
     SEMIVOLAnLE COMPOUNDS             IN THE SAMPLES     IN THE SAMPLES   IN THE SAMPLES*
                                             ug/L               ug/L             ug/L

     2-Methylphenol                         6,00               6,00             5.05
     Bis(2-Ethylhexyl)phthalate             500                200              4,57
     Pentachlorophenol                      200                200              12,00




     PESTICIDE/PCB COMPOUNDS



     4,4-DDE                               0.130              0130              0.48
     4,4'-DDT                               032                0.06             0.47
     gamma-BHC (Lindane)                   0.210              0.026             0.04




     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS



     Aluminum                             17700.00            108.00          388415
     Antimony                              196.00             28 00            3474
     Arsenic                               38 70               230              5,76
     Barium                                42100              30 00            70,78
     Beryllium                              4.50               2.10             2,55
     Cadmium                                930                5.00             3,41
     Catoium                              35800.00           2570.00          13773,21
     Chromium                               78 00              9 20            10,77
     Cobalt                                 76 00              420             28,10
CH   Copper                                83 00               650             38,84

o    Iron
     Lead
                                          32600.00
                                           62.00
                                                             595.00
                                                               1,10
                                                                              4671,40
                                                                               13,40

o    Magnesium                            8640.00            855,00           359875

€0

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 70 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      Table 5 (continued)
                                                                         FRIED INDUSTRIES
                                                                SUMMARY OF SURFACE WATER ANALYSES
                                                                           PHASE I AND II


                                                                          MAX DETECTED                        MIN DETECTED                          AVERAGE
                                                                          CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION                      CONCENTRATION
     INORGANIC COMPOUNDS (Cont'd)                                         IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES                     IN THE SAMPLES*
                                                                                ug/L                               ug/L                               ug/L

     Manganese                                                                  312 00                              30 00                             143.42
     Mercury                                                                     28,40                               3,70                              086
     Nickel                                                                     94 00                                890                               27.11
     Potassium                                                                 9400 00                             1200,00                           3715.00
     Selenium                                                                    220                                 2.20                              2.49
     Sodium                                                                    60800 00                            3880.00                           26928.53
     Vanadium                                                                    25,00                               4.90                             23.43
     Zinc                                                                       489 00                              23 00                             116.59




     * Average concentrations Include all detected concentrations, as well as half the Contract Required Quantitation Limit (CRQL) value for non-detect samples, whenever a compound
     was detected in any sample of the same environmental medium This may result in an average concentration value that is greater than the maximum or lower than the minimum
     detected value, as certain chemicals were detected at concentrations lower than their respective CROL and there were different CRQLs for ttie Phase I and II analyses.




at

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 71 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              TABLE         6                                                     ^



                                      FEDERAL      AND          STATE
                             MAXIMUM         CONTAMINANT LEVELS (MCLs)




                             Maximum                                                                Most
                             Observed           SDWA <"           NJSDWA '^    NJ Groundwater       Stringent
Contaminants of Concern      Concentration       MCLs               MCLs       Quality Standards^   Requirement

Volatile (UR/L)

Chtoromethane                        1                                                  30                30
Vinyl Chloride                     550            2.0                   2.0           0.08             5.0<"
Chloroethane                      1400              .                     .              -                 -
Methylene Chloride                2000            5.0                   2.0            2.0               2.0
Carbon Disulfide                     1
1,1 -Dichloroethene                530            7.0                   2.0            1.0             2.0<*>
1,1 -Dichloroethane               6400              .                     -            70                70
1.2-Dichloroethane                  50            5.0                   2.0            03                03
2-Butanone                         320              -                     -               -                -
Chtoroform                          21           100*               100*                 6                 6
1,1,1-Trichloroethane           22,000            200                   26              30               26
1.2-DichloroprDpane                165             5.0                    .            03                03
Trichloroethene                   4200             5.0                  1.0            1.0               1.0
1,1,2-Trichloroethane               18             5.0                    .            3.0               3.0
Benzene                           6400             5.0                  1.0            0.2              1.0<*'
Tetrachloroelhene                     2            5.0                  1.0            0.4              1.0<"
Toluene                         280000           1000                      -          1000              1000
4-Methyl-2-Pentanone               130              _                      -           400               400
Ethylbenzene                     12000            700                      -           700               700
Styrene                          20000            100                      -           100               100
Xylenes                          49000          10,000                   44             40                40
Cis-1,2-Dichloroethene           11000             70                    10             10                10
Trans-l,2-Dichloroethene           990            100                    10            100                10
                                   1200             -                      -           700               700
Acetone

Semivolatile (ug/L)
                                 27500                                                4000              4000
Phenol                            4700                  -                                 -                 -
2-Methylphenol                    7350                  .                                 -                 -
4-Methylphenol                       65                 ^                               100               100
Isophorone                         3550                 -                               100               100
2,4-DimethylphenoI                  64                                                    -                 -
N^>hthalene                        433                                                    -                 -
2-Methylnaphthalene                 15                                                 5000             5000
Diethylphthalate                    22                                                  900               900
Di-n-butylphthalate                 10             6."0                                   3              SC*'
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate
Metals (ug/L)
                                                                                                           g(4)
 Arsoiic                           50.6             50                   50            0.02
 Barium                            1030          2000                2000             2000               2000
 Beiyllium                           53            4.0                    .           0.008               20'*>
 Chromium                         226.5            100                  100             100               100
 Lead                              46.4             15                   15               5               lO"**
 Nickel                           118.5            100                    -             100               100

                                                                                                     500071

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 72 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  TABLE 6 (continued)




                                     Maximum                                                                Most
                                     Observed            SDWA <">       NJSDWA«      NJ Groundwater         Stringent
Contaminants of Concern              Concentrarion        MCLs           MCLs        Quality Standards"*    Requirement

Pesticide Contaminants (ug/L)

DelU-BHC                                  0.670              -                   .               .
Gamma-BHC                                 0.040            0.2                 0.2            0.2                0.2
4.4'-DDE                                   0.10              -                   -            0.1                0.1




NOTES:

t CompUed from Phase II RI R^wrt, Tables 3-19, 3-20 and 5-1 (Ebasco, 1993)
- None Available
<" Safe Drinking Water Act - 40 CFR 141.11-16.
™ New Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act
<" New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards
**^ Practical (Quantitation Limit - New Jersey Groundwater Quality Standards
 • Total Trihalomethanes




                                                                                                           500072

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 73 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                TABLE     7




                             FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                  CONTAMINANTS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN BY MEDIA

                     Groundwater                                Soils

1,1-DichloTDetfiane                cis-1 ^-Dichloroethene       1,1-DichIoroetfiane
Vinyl Chloride                     Methylene chloride           Tetrachloroethene
1,1.1-Trichloroethane              trans-1 ^-Dichloroethene     Chloroform
Trichloroethene                    Phenol                       Benzene
Benzene                            2-MethyIphenol               Toluene
Toluene                            4-Methylphenol               Isophorone
Total xylenes                      2.4-Dimeihylphenol           2-Butanone
Ethylbenzene                       Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate   Phenol
Isophorone                         Di-n-butyl phdtalate         Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phdialate
2-Butanone                         Naphthalene                  Di-n-butylphthalate
1,2-Dichloropropane                Diethylphthalate             Arsenic
4-Methyl-2-Pentanone               Nickel                       Nickel
1 ^-Dichloroethane                 Arsenic
1,1-Dichloroethene                 Barium
Carbon Disulfide                   Chromium
Chloroform                         Boyllium
Tetrachloroethene                  4,4'-DDE
1,1^-Trichloroethane               Gamma-BHC
Ethylbenzene
Styrene

Surface Water                                                   Sediments

1,1-Dichloroethane                                              Chloroform
1,1-Dichloroethene                                              2-Butanone
lj2-Dich]oroethane                                              Bis(2-«thylhexyl)phthalate
Trichloroethene                                                 Beiyllium
Tetrachloroethene                                               Cadmium
Benzene                                                         Lead
Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate                                      Silver
Nickel

At

1,1-Dichlaroethene
Trichloroethene
Tetrachloroethene
Chloroform
Benzene
Toluene
Total Xylenes
Ethylbenzene
2-Butanone




                                                                                500073

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 74 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                          TA^ ^       8


                                                                                 FRIED INDUSTRIES J I T E
                                                                         TOXICITY DATA FOR NONCARCINOGENIC
                                                                         AND POTEIMTIAL CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
                                                                              DOSE RESPONSE EVALUATION

                                  Noncareinogen Reference Dose              Subchronic Noncarcinogen Reference Dose (I)                        Carcinogen Slope Factor
Chemical                   Rfd             RfC            RfD            RfD            RfC                    RfD              SF            Weight   Unit Risk       SF              Weight
                           (oral)          (inhalation)   (inhalation)   (oral sub)     (inhalation, sub)   (inhalation, sub)   (Oral)                 (Inhalation)    (Inhalation)
                           (mg/Kg-day)     (mg/Cu.m)      (mg/Kg-day)    (mg/Kg-day)    (mg/Cu.m)               (mg/Kg-day)     (mg/Kg-day)-1          (ug/Cu.m)-I     (mg/Kg-day)-l

Vdaliles:
1,1-Dictiloroethane         I.OOE-01*      5.00E-01*      t.43E^01»      I.OOE+00       5.00E+00              I.43E+00           ND              C        ND               ND          ND
1,1-Dichloroethene          9.00E-03        ND              ND           9.00E-03         ND                    ND              6.00E-0I         C       5.00E-05       I.75E-OI        C
t,l,l-TricMon]ethane        9.00E-02*       UN              UN           9.00E-01         ND                    ND               ND             ND        ND               ND          ND
1,1,2-TricMoroelhane        4.00E-03        UN              UN           4.00E-02         ND                    ND              5.70E-02         C       I.60E-05       5.60E-02        C
t,2-DichloiDethane           ND             ND              ND             ND             ND                    ND              9.I0E-02        82       2.60&05        9.I0E-02       B2
1,2-Dichlaropropane          ND            4.00E-03       I.I4E-03         ND           I.30E-02              3.7IE-03            ND            ND        ND              ND           ND
Ci8-l,2-DichlatDethene      I.OOE-02*       ND              ND           I.OOE-Ol         ND                    ND               ND             ND        ND              ND           ND
ChloiDfonn                  I.OOE-02        UN              UN           I.OOB-02         ND                    ND              6.10E-03        B2       130E-05        8.05E-02       B2
ChloiDfncthane               ND            I.OO+Ol        Z86B400          NA             NA                    ND               ND             ND        ND               ND          ND
Methylene Chloride          6.00E-02       3.00E+00*      8.57E-01       6.00E-02       3.00E400              8.57E-0I          7.50E-03        B2       4.70E-07       I.65E-03       B2
Tetrachloroethane           I.OOE-02        ND              ND           l.OOE-OI         ND                    ND               ND             ND        ND              ND           ND
Tians-1,2-DichloiDethene    100E.02         ND              ND           lOOE-OI          ND                    ND               ND             ND        ND              ND           ND
Trichloroethane              UN             UN              UN             ND             ND                    ND              I.IOE-02(2)     B2       l.70E-06(2)   5.95E-03(2)     B2
Vinyl Chloride               ND             ND              ND             ND             ND                    ND              1.90E+00*        A       8.40E-05*      2.94E-0I        A
2-Buianone                  5.00E-02*      I.00E4O0       186E-0I        5.00E-OI       3.00E+00              8.57B.01          ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
Carbon Disulfide            I.OOE-01       l.OOE-02*      286E-03*       l.OOE-OI       l.OOE-02              2.86E-03          ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
4-Methyl-2-Pentanone        5.00E-02       8.00E-02       Z29E-02        5.00E-0I       8.00E-0I              2.29E-0I          ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
Acetone                     l.OOE-OI        ND              ND           I.OOB+00         ND                    ND              ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
Benzene                      UN             UN              UN             ND             ND                    ND              190E-02         A        8.30E-06       2.91 E-02      A
Eihylbenzene                I.OOE-Ol       I.0OE4O0       2.86B-0I       I.00E4O0       I.OOE+00              2.86E-0I          ND              ND        ND              ND           N
Styrene                     lOOE-OI         ND              ND           lOOE+00          ND                    ND              ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
Toluene                     lOOE-OI        4.00B-0I       1.I4&0I        2.00E+00       lOOE+00               5.7IE-0I          ND              ND        ND              ND           ND
Total Xylenes               2.00E+00        UN              UN           4.00E+00         NA                    NA              ND              ND        ND              ND           ND




     CH
     o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 75 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                  TABLE 8     (continued)


                                                                               FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                                                                       TOXICITY DATA FOR NONCARCINOGENIC
                                                                       AND POTEf^IAL CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
                                                                            DOSE RESPONSE EVALUATION

                               Noncareinogen Reference Dose               Subchronic Noncareinogen Reference Dose (I)                      Carcinogen Slope Factor
Chetrical               Rfd              RfC            RfD            RfD            RfC                   RfD             SF            Weight   Unit Risk       SF             Weight
                        (oral)           (inhalation)   (inhalation)   (oral sub)     (inhalation, sub) (inhalation, sub)   (Oral)                 (Inhalation)    (Inhalation)
                        (mg/Kg-day)      (mg/Cu.m)       (mg/Kg-day)   (mg/Kg-day)    (mg/Cu.m)             (mg/Kg-day)     (mg/Kg-day)-l          (ug/Cu.mVI     (mg/Kg-day)-l

Semi-Volatiles:
Z4-Dinieihylphenol       ZOOE-02           ND               ND         lOOE-01           ND                  ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
Pentachlorophenol        3.00B-02          UN               UN         3.00E-02          ND                  ND             I.20E-01        B2         ND            ND           ND
Phend                    6.00B4)1          NA               NA         6.00&0I           ND                  ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
2-Methylnaphthalene         ND             ND               ND            ND             ND                  ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
Dibenzofuran                ND             UN               UN            ND             ND                  ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
Naphthalene              4.00B-02*         ND               ND         4.00E-02          ND                  ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
sophorine                ZOOE-01           ND               ND         100E400           ND                  ND             9.50E-04        C          ND            ND           ND
Bi$(2-eihylhexyl)
  phthalate              1.90E-02          ND               ND         Z00&02            ND                  ND             1.40E-02       B2          ND            ND           ND
Di-n-bttiyI phthalate    1.00E4)I          ND               ND         I.OOE+00          ND                  ND              ND            ND          ND            ND           ND
Diethylphthalate         8.00E-01          ND               ND         8.00E400          ND                  ND              ND            ND          ND            ND           ND
2-Melhylphenol           5.00E-02          ND               ND         5.00E-01          ND                  ND              ND            ND          ND            ND           ND
4-Me(hyl phenol          S.OOE-02          ND               ND         5.00&01           ND                  ND              ND            ND          ND            ND           ND



PCBs and Pesticides:
4,4-DDE                    ND             ND              ND            ND              ND                   ND             3.40E-01        B2         ND            ND           ND
Delta-BHC                  ND             ND              ND            ND              ND                   ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND
Gamma-BHC                3.00E-04         UN              UN           3.00E-03         ND                   ND              ND             ND         ND            ND           ND




     01
     o
     o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 76 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    TABLE 8 ( c o n t i n u e d )


                                                                    FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                                                            TOXICITY DATA FOR NONCARCINOGENIC
                                                            AND POTEI^IAL CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
                                                                 DOSE RESPONSE EVALUATION

                    Noncareinogen Reference Dose                Subchronic Noncareinogen Reference Dose (I)                      Carcinogen Slope Factor
Chemical     Rfd              RfC            RfD            RfD             RfC                   RfD             SF            Weight   Unit Risk       SF              Weight
             (oral)           (inhalation)   (inhalation)   (oral sub)      (inhalation, sub) (inhalation, sub)   (Oral)                 (Inhalation)    (Inhalation)
             (mg/Kg-day)      (mg/Cu.m)      (mg/Kg-day)    (mg/Kg-day)     (mg/Cu.m)             (mg/Kg-day)     (mg/Kg-day)-l          (ug/Cu.m)-I     (mg/Kg-day)-1

Inotgamcsi
Arsenic       3.00E-04        ND                ND          3.00E-04          ND                  ND              I.75E+00         A        4.30E-03     1.51E+0I        A
Barium        7.00E-02        UN                UN          7.00E-02          ND                  ND               ND             ND         ND             ND           ND
Beryllinm     5.00E-03        ND                ND          5.00E-02          ND                  ND              4.30E+00        B2        2.40E-03     8.40E+00        B2
Chromium      I.OOE+00        UN                UN          l.OOE+00          UN                  UN               ND             ND         ND             ND           ND
Lead             NA           ND                ND             ND             ND                  ND               ND             ND         ND             ND           ND
Nickel        2.00E-02        UN                UN          lOOE-02           ND                  ND               ND             ND         ND             ND           ND




     o
     o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 77 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                                        TABLE   9


                                                                     FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                                  SUMMARY OF CALCULATED POTENTIAL CARCINOGENIC RISKS AND NONCARCINOGENIC HAZARD INDEX VALUES
                                                         FOR EXPOSURE SCENARIOS OF POTENTIAL CONCERN

                                                   EXCESS CANCER RISKS                                         HAZARD INDEX
EXPOSURE PATHWAYS                               Average Case     Worst Case              RME             Average Case       Worst Case                 RM
Groundwater
Ingestion of groundwater                       3.23 X IO''(S)(A)   1.60 X 10'(S)(A)      NE              2.I(S)(A)                98(S), 12(D) (A)     NE
dtiring residental future use                  5.66 X IO^(D)(A)    4.83 X IO'(D)(A)                      4.2(S) (C)               197(S). 24(D) (C)
Direct contact with                            4.84 X 10''(S)(A)   1.98 X 10'(S)(A)      NE              1.08(S). 0.0193(D) (A)   19(S). 0.24(D) (A)   NE
groundwater during showering                   5.95 X 10'(D)(A)    5.63 X 10'(D)(A)                      1.4(S). 0.025(D) (C)     25(S), 0.32(D) (C)
(future use)

Inhalation of volatiles in                     4.99 X la'(SKA)     1.29 X 10HS)(A)       NE                                       225(S), 3.8(D) (A)   NE
groundwater while showering                    9.24 X 10''(D)(A)   3.90 X 10 '(D)(A)                     2 m S ) (C)              450(S), 7.6(D) (C)
(future use)
Soib and Sediments
Ingestion of site surface n i l
  - current recreational use                                                             1.45x10^ (A)
    by residents and children                                                                                                                          2.64xia'(C)
  - current on-site worker                                                               2.90x10^                                                      4.28x10-'
  • future residential use                                                               3.76x10^ (A)                                                  l.72xl0'(A)
                                                                                         3.01x10^ (C)                                                  6.86xl0'(C)

Inhalation of site surface soil
  - current recreatioiuil use                                                            9.88xW' (A)                                                   1.27xia"(A)
  - current on-site worker                                                               9.46x10*                                                      4.09x10'
  - fiiture residential use                                                              2.57xlO'» (A)                                                 3.3lxlO"(A)
                                                                                         1.03x10"' (C)                                                 6.61xia"(C)
Inhalation of volatiles from
subsurface soil in the basement                                                          1.58x10* (A)                                                  2.60xia'(A)
air by future resident                                                                   6.34x10* (C)                                                  5.21xlO'{C)
Residential consumption of fish                                                          7.54x10* (A)                                                  1.64xlC'(A)
from the pond, swamp and brooks                                                          3.02x10* (C)                                                  3.28xl0'(C)
Recreational use of the pond, swamp                                                      1.55x10* (A)                                                  1.50xlO'(A)
and Brooks - sediment (current and fiittire)                                             1.51x10* (C)                                                  7.31xlO»(C)
Inhalation of volatiles in Site Air
- to local residents downwind of the                                                     1.41xia^ (A)                                                  2.25xlO*(A)
  site                                                             1.8 X ia» (Worker)    5.65x10* (C)                                                  4.49xlO*(C)
- fiiture residential use                                          7.5 X 1 0 '
- current on-site worker                                                                 1.41x10'                                                      2.25xia'
(S) Shallow (overburden) aquifer; (D) Deep (bedrock) aquifer
{M Adults; (C) Children
NE - Not Evaluated for RME Scenario



               500077

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 78 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              TABLE 10-1


                                                                     FRIED INDUSTRIES RISK ASSESSMENT
                                                                           EXPOSURE PARAMETERS
                                                                  REASONABLE MAXIMUM EXPOSURE SCENARIO


     PATHWAY             INHALATION/INTAKE RATE                 LENGTH OF             BIOAVAILABILITY    DAYS EXPOSED/        YEARS EXPOSED/
                                                                 EXPOSURE                 FACTOR           DAYS/YEAR           YEARS LIFETIME

     Surface Soil            lOOmg/day -Adults*                       NA                                    7.40E-01 *        4.29E-01 - Adults •
      Ingestion             200mg/day -Children                                                            2.85E-01 (1)       8.5/t-02 - Children

     Surface Soil                1.25 m3/hr •                  0.44 hrs/day       "                         7.40E-01 *        4.29E-01 - AduHs •
      Inhalation                                                                                                              8.57E-02 - Children

      Sediment                   200mg/day *                          NA                                2.14E-01 - AduHs •    4.29E-01 - Adults*
      Ingestion                                                                                         2.60E-01 - Children   8.57E-02 - Children

        Rsh                       54g/day    "                        NA                                    2.14E-01 *        4.29E-01 - Aduhs*
      Ingestion                                                                                                               8.57E-02 - Children

  Outdoor Air                     3m3/hr **                    0.44 hrs/day **                              7.40E-01 •        4.29E-01 - Adults*
 VOC Inhalation                                                                                                               8.57E-02 - Children

 Subsurface Soil                 0.9m3/hr     "                   1 hr/day    "                             7.40E-01 *        4.29E-01 - Adults*
 VOC Inhalation                                                                                                               8.57E-02 - Children

         (1)        Cun-ent residential use (adult and chikiren) Phase I RI
           *        Risk Assessment Guidance for Superfund
          **        Exposure Factors Handtx)ok



cn
o
o

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 79 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         TABLE 10-2


                                         FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                            PARAMETERS AND ASSUMPTIONS USED TO CALCULATE
            POTENTIAL RISK FROM CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER VIA THE INHALATION PATHWAY
                                        FUTURE-USE SCENARIOS


                                    Children: 0-17 Years                       Adults
    Case Estimate:                 Average Case Worst Case            Average Case    Worst Case

    Frequency of Exposure (days/year)
     Bathroom Air (Shower)            365         365                 365              365

    Hours Per Day Exposed
     Bathroom Air (Shower)           .17          .25                 .17              .25

    Duration of Exposure
    (years/lifetime)                 NA           NA                  9                30

     Lifetime = 75 years

    Respiratory Volume (m*/hour)     1.5          3.0                 1.4              3.0

    Bathroom Volume (m^)             12           12                  12                12

    Bioavailability Factor,
    Volatile Inhalation              1.0          1.0                 1.0              1.0

O   Body Weight (kg)                 35.0         35.0                70.0             70.0

9


    NA: Not Applicable

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 80 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            TABLE 1 0 - 3

                                               FRIED INDUSTRIES SITE
                                PARAMETERS AND ASSUMPTIONS USED TO CALCULATE
                          POTENTIAL RISK FROM CONTAMINANTS IN GROUNDWATER PATHWAYS
                                          INGESTION AND DIRECT CONTACT
                                              FUTURE-USE SCENARIOS


                                                  Children: 0-17 Years                 Adults
     Case Estimate:                          Average Case     Worst Case    Average Case      Worst Case

     Frequency of Exposure (days/year)
      Groundwater (Ingestion, Showering)      365            365             365               365

     Hours Per Day Exposed
      Shower Pathway                          0.17           0.25            0.17             0.25

     Duration of Exposure (years/lifetime)    NA             NA              9                30
      Lifetime = 75 years

     Groundwater Ingestion Rate (I/day)

     Skin Surface Area Exposed (cm^)
       Shower Pathway                         11,900          11,900         18,150           18,150

     Ingestion Absorption Factors             1.0            1.0             1.0              1.0

     Body Weight (kg)                         35.0           35.0            70.0             70.0




CA
O
^    * Present and Future-use assumptions are identical.

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 81 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                           TABLE 11
                           CALCULATIONS USED TO DERIVE
                           CHRONIC DAILY INTAKES (GDIs)
                              INGESTION OF GROUNDWATER
Carcinogens:
GDI = WG(ing/l)       x DI(L/day) x % Bioavail. x # Events x Years Exp.
                                                 BW (kg)       365 days       75 years
Noncarcinogens:
GDI = WC(mg/L)        X DI(L/day) x Bioavail. x #Events
                                      BW (kg)    365 days
                    INHALATION OF VOLATILES IN GROUNDWATER
Carcinogens:
GDI = AG (mg/m^) x          Bioavail. (100%) x IRfmVevent) x lEvents
                                                BW (kg)      365 days
                      X     Years Exp.
                             75 years
Noncarcinogens:
GDI = AC (mg/m^) x Bioavail. x IR (mVevent)                    x   # Events
                                                   BW (kg)          365 days
                          DIRECT CONTACT WITH GROUNDWATER
Carcinogens:
GDI = WG (mg/L) X SSA (cin2) x DP (cm/hr) x 1 Liter x     Hours
                   BW (kg)                            1000 cm^Event
               X #Events x Years Exp.
                  3 65 days 75 years
Noncarcinogens:
GDI = WG (mg/L) x SSA (cm-) x DP (cm/hr) x    1 Liter   x                      Hours
                  BW (kg)                  1000 cm^ Event
                X # Events
                  365 days
DEFINITIONS:
        CDI          = Chronic Daily Intake (mg/kg-day)
        UC           = Water Concentration (mg/L)
        BU           = Body Weight (kg)
        75           = Years in Average Adult Lifetime
        DP           = Dermal Permeability constant (cm/hr)
        SSA          = Skin Surface Area (cm^)
        DJ           = Daily Ingestion Rate (L/day)
         IR          = Inhalation Rate (m^/event)
        Bioavail.    = Bioavailability Factor
        AC           = Air Concentration (volatiles) (mg/m )



                                                                                500081

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 82 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 TABLE 12

    CALCULATION OF ARSENIC CLEANUP LEVEL
      AT FRIED INDUSTRIES SUPERFUND SITE

     A statistical analysis of the data from twenty-three (2 3)
samples, obtained during the background data survey by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy
(NJDEPE), was performed by EPA. The results were as follows:
            _                                              n
     (1) XA (arithmetic mean)         =   (1/n)           2 J x^         =   172.33
                                                          i=l                   23


                   XA (arithmetic mean)           =            7.49



                                                                 n                  _
      (2)       O (standard deviation)    =       (1/n)          2 X; *       -    ( xM
                                                                i=l




                   O (standard deviation)         =           9.60


     (3) We will use the arsenic concentration corresponding to
         the arithmetic mean plus two times the standard
         deviation:
                   ARSENIG                                _
                   GLEANUP (A.G.L.)       =               X          +       2 O
                   LEVEL
                   A.G.L.   =     7.49        +           (2 X       9.60)
                   A.G.L.   =     7.49        +           19.20
                   A.C.L.   =    26.69

                   ARSENIC CLEANUP LEVEL              =        27 PPM


                                                                                   500012

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 83 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 13-1

               CAPITAL COST ESTIMATES (1993 Dollars^


ALTERNATIVE SC-4: Excavation/Off-site Treatment/Off-Site Disposal
     I.     Site Preparation                                $    56,400
     II.    Support Facilities                                   71,500
     III.   Clearing and Grubbing                                 1,500
     IV.    Contaminated Soil Excavation                         10,400
     V.     Sheet Piling                                         30,000
     VI.    Transportation                  (included in Item VIII)
     VII.   Pretreatment                    (included in Item VIII)
     VIII. Off-Site Stabilization                               273,000
     IX.    Stabilized Soil Disposa         (included in Item VIII)
     X.     Glean Fill                                           36,400
     XI.    Restoration of Wetlands                               4,100
     Total Direct Construction Costs (TDGG)         =   $       483,300
     Contingency @ 20% of TDGG                      =            96,700
     Engineering @ 10% of TDGG                      =            48,300
     Legal and Administrative @ 5% of TDGG          =            24,200
     TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                        =   $       652,500


ALTERNATIVE GW-3: Pvuaping and Treating of Groundwater/Limited
                   source Extraction (Option 1)
     I.     Site Preparation          (included in Source Control)
     II.    Support Facilities        (included in Source Control)
     III.   Groundwater Monitoring Wells                $        36,000
     IV.    Groundwater Interception Trench                      35,000
     V.     Groundwater Extraction                              226,000
     VI.    Collection                                           21,500
                                                                     5000«3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 84 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                    TABLE 13-1 (continued)

VII.   Chemical Precipitation System                 71,600
VIII. Filtration System                               64,300
IX.    Sludge Handling System                        31,000
X.     Air Stripper/Carbon                           32,600
XI.    Treated Water Disposal                        82,000
XII.   Source Control                              2,292,800
         (includes $ 2,160,000 for incineration)
XIII. Office and Control Building                    52,500
XIV.   Electrical                                   100,000
XV.    Instrumentation and Controls                  60,000
XVI.   Process Water Supply                           3,000
XVII. Foundation and Pads                            12,500
XVIII.Health and Safety                              50,000
XIX.   Mobilization/Demobilization                   50,000
Total Direct Construction Cost (TDGG)        = $   3,220,800
Contingency @ 20% of TDGG                    =       644,200
Engineering @ 10% of TDGG                    =       322,000
Legal and Administrative @ 5% of TDGG        =       161,000
TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST                      = $   4,348,000




                                                         500084

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 85 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                              TABLE 13-2
 ANNUAL OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COST ESTIMATES (1993 Dollars)



ALTERNATIVE SC-4: Excavation/Off-site Treatment/Off-site Disposal
     This Alternative does not recjuire Operation and Maintenance



ALTERNATIVE GW-3: Pumping and Treating of Groundwater/Limited
                    Source Extraction (Option 1)
     I.     Extraction                                     $       1,000
     II.    Collection                                             1,300
     III.   Chemical Precipitation System                          1,000
     IV.    Sludge Handling System                                1,7 00
     V.     Filtration System                                    23,500
     VI.    Activated Carbon Treatment System                   200,700
     VII.   Labor                                               116,800
     VIII. Maintenance Cost                                      74,200
     IX.    Monitoring                                           33,600
     X.     Contingency                                          22,700
     Total Annual 0 & M Cost                       =   $        476,500
     PRESENT WORTH OF O & M (7% discount rate)     =   $       5,956,400




                                                                 5000M

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 86 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               TABLE 14

                       DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS

               MAXIMUM VALUE IN         NJDEPE EFFLUENT LIMITS
PARAMETER        GROUNDWATER'^'   (monthly average) (daily maxim\im)

CONVENTIONAL/NON-CONVENTIONAL POLLUTANTS
Flow (mgd)            0.014             0.014             Report
                   (10 gal/min)     (10 gal/min)
BOD, (mg/1)           330              Report"'             25

Chloride (mg/1)        207                Report           250

Dissolved Oxygen
(mg/1)                               5.0 minimum

pH (std, units)                      6.0 minimum           9.0
Petroleum Hydro-
 carbons (mg/1)        ^_^                  10              15

Total Dissolved
 Solids (mg/1)         925                Report           500

Total Organic
 Carbon (mg/1)         323                Report            50

Total Suspended
 Solids (mg/1)         666                Report            40

Chronic Toxicity
(% effluent)                        NOEG > 100%"'     NOEG > 100%'"


VOIATILE COMPOUNDS fin uq/1^

Acetone               1200                   50            100

Benzene               6400                  1.2            2.4

2-Butanone             320                   16             32

Chloroethane          1400        Controlled with         iloro€

Chloroform              21                  5.7             11

1,1-Dichloroethane    6400                   16             32

1,2-Dichloroethane      50                 0.38           0.76

1,1-Dichloro-          530                 0.57            1.1
 ethylene

                                                              50O0S6

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 87 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                         TABLE 14 (continued)

               MAXIMUM VALUE IN         NJDEPE EFFLUENT LIMITS
PARAMETER        GROUNDWATER       (monthly average) (daily maximum)


trans-1,2-Dichloro-
 ethylene               990                 21               54
1,2-Dichloro-           165       Controlled with 1,1-Dichloroethane
 propane

Ethylbenzene          12000                 32              108
Methylene Chloride    2000                 4.7              9.4
4-Methyl-               130                 13               26
 2-Pentanone

Styrene               20000       Controlled with Benzene

Toluene              280000                 26               80

1,1,1-Trichloro-
 ethane               22000                 11               22

1,1,2-Trichloro-
                                           6.0               12
 ethane                  18
                                           2.7              5.4
Trichloroethylene      4200
                                           2.0              4,0
Vinyl Chloride          550
                                  Controlled with Benzene
Xylenes, Total        49000

ACID AND BASE/NEUTRAL COMPOUNDS fin u a / 1 )

Di-n-Butylphthalate      22              Report              10

2,4-Dimethylphenol     3550       Controlled with Phenol

bis(2-Ethylhexyl)-
 Phthalate               10              Report              10

2-Methylnaphthalene      44       Controlled with Naphthalene

2-Methylphenol         4700       Controlled with Phenol

4-Methylphenol         7350       Controlled with Phenol

Napthalene               64                 10               20

Phenol                27500                 15               26




                                                                500097

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 88 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                       TABLE 14 (continued)


                      MAXIMUM VALUE IN                           NJDEPE EFFLUENT LIMITS
PARAMETER               GROUNDWATER                     ( m o n t h l y a v e r a g e ) ( d a i l y maximum)

PESTICIDES f i n u a / 1 )

gamma-BHC                          0.04                           0.19                          0.38
4,4'-DDE                           0.10                         Report                       0.0012
                                                                                     [ 0 . 0 0 4 (MDL)"']
METALS f i n u a / 1 )

Aluminum                         51400                          Report                           250
Arsenic                               51                        Report                      0,.036
                                                                                         [0.5 (MDL)'"']

Barium                             1030                             250                          500

Beryllium                           5.3                             0.5                          1.0

Chromium                            227                             8.0                            16

Cobalt                                33                             10                            20

Copper                                72                            4.6                          9.2

Iron                           115000                               250                          500

Lead                                  47                            1.1                          2.1

Manganese                           990                             100                          200

Mercury                            0.87                         Report                      0 .020
                                                                                         [0.2 (MDL)""]

Nickel                               119                              30                           60

Sodium                               200                        Report                           100

Vanadium                             421                        Report                             20

Zinc                               9220                               32                           65


       *''   Maximum concentration of t h i s parameter observed i n the data obtained during the Phase I and
                  Phase I I Remedial I n v e s t i g a t i o n (RI)

       (2) The monthly average must be reported to the NJDEPE'


             NOEC is the No Observable Effect Concentration

       '** Ground-water treatment will result in arsenic concentrations below the Practical Concentration
            Limit (POL)


                                                                                                       500088

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 89 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       APPENDIX III




ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD INDEX




                              500089

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 90 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                            FRIED INDUSTRIES
                       ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD FILE
                           INDEX OF DOCUMENTS



1.0   SITE IDENTIFICATION
1.1   Background    - RCRA and other information
p.    100001-      Report: Fried Industries Site. Report on Forward
      100022       Planning Activity, prepared by Roy F. Weston,
                   Inc., June 1985.
p.    100023-      Report: RCRA Sampling Inspection Enforcement
      100033       Recmest. Fried Industries^ 11 Fresh Ponds Road.
                   East Brunswick. New Jersey, prepared by Mr. Joseph
                   V. Cosentino, Environmental Scientist, Source
                   Monitoring Section, U.S. EPA Region II, May 17,
                   1985.
      100034-      Application #76-65, Unichem Corporation -
      100035       Resolution Recommending FavoraQsle Action By the
                   Township of East Brunswick Zoning Board of
                   Adjustment, December 21, 1965.
      100036-      Report: Fried Industries. East Brunswick.
      100036       Middlesex County. New Jersey, (no author cited),
                   (undated).
1.2   Notification/Site Inspection Reports
P.    100037-      Report: Potential Hazardous Waste Site. Site
      100050       Inspection Report.prepared by Chief Inspector,
                   Mr. Joseph V. Cosentino, Environmental Scientist,
                   U.S. EPA Region II, December 1, 1983.
1.3 Preliminary Assessment Reports
P.    100051-      Report: Preliminary Site Assessment. Fried
      100079       Industries. Inc.. East Brunswick. New Jersey.
                   prepared by Mr. Christopher S.E. Marlowe, Region
                   II, Technical Assistance Team, Weston/SPER
                   Division, August 1984.




                                                                500090

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 91 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1.4   Site Investigation Reports
      100080-   Fax Cover Sheet from Mr. Richard J. Spilatore,
      100106    Water Pollution Control Unit, Department of
                Health, County of Middlesex, New Jersey, to Mr.
                Tom Porucznik, Remedial Project Manager, Central
                New Jersey Remedial Action Section, U.S. EPA
                Region II, re: Chemical samples from 1989-1992,
                Fresh Ponds Road and Dutch Road, East Brunswick,
                May 5, 1993. Attached are: Report: Report of
                Volatile Organic Analysis, prepared by Garden
                State Laboratories and Seunple Summaries and
                Analysis Reports.
      100107-   Letter to the Martin Residence, from Mr. Richard
      100112    J. Spilatore, Water Pollution Control Unit,
                Department of Health, County of Middlesex, New
                Jersey, re: results of testing performed on the
                Martin's water supply, October 26, 1988. Attached
                are Sample Summaries and Analysis Reports,
                November 25, 1988.
      100113-   Memorandum to Mr. John S. Frisco, Chief, New
      100120    Jersey Remedial Action Branch, from Mr. Douglas W.
                Johnson, Project Manager, Northern New Jersey
                Remedial Action Section, through Mr. John V.
                Czapor, Chief, Northern New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, re: attached document concerning the
                recent activities at the Fried Industries Site,
                December 17, 1985. Site Investigation and
                Determination of Imminent Risk Report attached.
      100121-   Transmittal Slip to Janet from Mr. John E. La
      100123    Padula, On-Scene Coordinator, Response and
                Prevention Branch, U.S. EPA Region II, re: the
                attached report, November 28, 1984. Report:
                Report of Analysis, prepared by Princeton Testing
                Laboratory, November 5, 1984.

      100124-   Report: Site Analysis. Fried Industries. East
      100146    Brunswick. New Jersey, performed by Mr. Peter M.
                Stokely, Imagery Analyst, The Bionetics
                Corporation, July 1984.




                                                             500091

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 92 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   100147-   Memorandum to Mr. Robert N. Ogg, Chief, Hazardous
     100175    Waste Site Branch, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr.
               Walter E. Mugdan, Chief, Waste and Toxic
               Substances Branch, Office of Regional Counsel,
               U.S. EPA Region II, re: Fried Industries - site
               Inspection by EPA, April, 23, 1984. Report:
               Enforcement Reauested Sampling Investigation.
               Fried Industries, pecember 1-2. 1983. prepared by
               Mr. Joseph V. Consentino, Environmental Scientist,
               Source Monitoring Section, U.S. EPA Region II,
               April 10, 1984.

P.   100176-   Letter to Mr. Philip Fried, President, Fried
     100179    Industries Inc., from Ms. Harriet Zivin, Sanitary
               Inspector, Solid Waste and Noise, Department of
               Health, County of Middlesex, New Jersey, re:
               results of a meeting with Middlesex County
               Utilities Authority, March 14, 1984. Report:
               Report of Analysis^ prepared by Princeton Aqua
               Science, March 5, 1984, attached.
P.   100180-   Letter to Mr. Walter Mugdan, Chief, Waste and
     100181    Toxic Sxibstances Branch, Office of Regional
               Counsel, U.S. EPA Region II, from Ms. Susan
               Schneck, Sanitary Inspector, Township of East
               Brunswick, Department of Health, Environment and
               Welfare, re: enclosed laboratory results from a
               sample of septic sludge taken from Fried
               Industries, November 1, 1983. Report: Report
               of Analysis, prepared by Princeton Testing
               Laboratory, October 13, 1983, attached.
P.   100182-   Report: Report of Analysis, prepared by Princeton
     100190    Testing Laboratory, October 13, 1983.
P.   100191-   Letter to Mr. John Runyon, Business Administrator,
     100201    from Mr. Laszlo Szabo, Director, Department of
               Health, County of Middlesex, New Jersey, re:
               Ground Water Contamination at Dutch Rd. & Fresh
               Pond Rd., August 3, 1983. Report: Report on Water
               Samples, prepared by New Jersey laboratories, July
               29, 1983, attached.
1.6 Correspondence
P.   100202-   Memorandum from Mr. Douglas W. Johnson, Project
     1002 02   Manager, Northern New Jersey Remedial Action
               Section, U.S. EPA Region II, to Pile, re:
               Telephone Conversation with Captian Louis Ruotolo,
               East Brxinswick Police Department concerning the
               Fried Industries Site, March 6, 1986.




                                                         500092

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 93 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

P.   100203-   Letter to Mr. Bertram E. Busch, East Brunswick
     100203    Municipal Attorney, of Busch & Busch, from Ms.
               Janet c. Feldstein, Environmental Engineer, Site
               Investigation and Compliance Branch, U.S. EPA
               Region II, re: National Priorities List - Status
               of Fried Industries, April 30, 1985.
p.   100204-   Memorandum to Mr. Richard Walka, Chief, Solid
     100204    Waste Branch, AWM, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr.
               Walter E. Mugdan, Chief, Waste and Toxic
               Substances Branch, Office of Regional Counsel,
               U.S. EPA, Region II, re: request for another RCRA
               Inspection (including Sampling) at Fried
               Industries, Inc., April 9, 1985.
p.   100205-   Memorandum to Mr. David Weill, Administrator, from
     100205    Mr. L. Mason Neely, Finance Director, re:
               discussion which took place on March 27, 1985
               concerning Fried Industries and the Task Force
               recommendations, March 28, 1985.
P.   100206-   Memorandum of Record from Mr. David P. Weill,
     100206    Administrator, re: EPA's announcement that Fried
               has been selected for the Interim Superfund
               National Priorities List, October 2, 1984.
P.   100207-   Letter to Mr. John H. Runyon, Business
     100218    Administrator, Office of the Administrator, from
               Mr. William K. Beckman, P.E., Senior Hydrologist,
               Leggette, Brashears & Greiham, Inc., re:
               Elaboration on the Threat of Contamination to East
               Brunswick Water Supply Wells from Fried
               Industries, Inc., March 8, 1984.
     100219-   Letter to Captain Louis Ruotolo, Special
     100221    Enforcement Section, Department of Public
               Saftey, Division of Police , from Mr. Sidney Fox,
               CPG, Vice President, Leggette, Brashears & Graham,
               Inc., re: Threat of Contamination to East
               Brunswick Water Supply Wells from Fried
               Industries, Inc., January 16, 1984.
     100222-   Letter to Ms. Susan Schneck, Sanitary Inspector,
     100222    Township of East Brunswick, Department of Health,
               Environment and Welfare, from Mr. Alexander A.
               Lach, P.E., Chief Engineer, Middlesex County
               Utilities Authority, re: disposal of lic[uid
               industrial wastes from Fried Industries, November
               14, 1983.




                                                           500093

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 94 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      100223-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      100224    Industries, Inc., from Mr. Laszlo Szabo, Director,
                Department of Health, County of Middlesex, New
                Jersey, re: Septic System Located on Block:308.19
                Lot:20.03 in East Brunswick Township, September 2,
                1983.
      100225-   Letter to Resident, from Mr. Laszlo Szabo,
      100225    Director, Department of Health, County of
                Middlesex, New Jersey, re: participation in the
                sampling program, September 1, 1983.
      100226-   Memorandum to Mr. Bernard G. Mihalko, Deputy
      100226    Director, from Ms. Susan Schneck, Sanitary
                Inspector, Township of East Brunswick, Department
                of Health, Environment and Welfare, re:
                Groundwater Monitoring, Fried Industries, August
                11, 1983.

2.0   REMOVAL RESPONSE
2.1   Sampling and Analysis Plans
P.    200001-   Report: U.S. Environmental Protection Aoencv.
      200003    Region II. Pollution Report PQLREP No. 2.
                prepared by Mr. Robert L. Harris, OSC, Response
                and Prevention Branch, U.S. EPA Region II, January
                21, 1986.
2.2   Sampling and Analysis Data/Chain of Custody Forms
P.    200004-   Letter to Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial Project
      200020    Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Mark D.
                Moese, Ph.D., Site Manager, Ebasco Services
                Incorporated, re: Results of Drum Sampling Effort
                and Need for Response Action at the Fried
                Industries Site, July 27, 1989. Results of the
                Drum Seunpling investigation are attached.
P.    200021-   Memorandum to Addressees listed from Mr. Robert L.
      200021    Harris, On-Scene Coordinator, Response and
                Prevention Branch, re: On-Scene Coordinator's
                Final Report, Emergency Removal Action, Aqueous
                Wastes Contaminated with Toluene and Chlorinated
                Hydrocarbons, Fried Industries, Inc., May 12,
                1987.




                                                             500094

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 95 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      200022-   Report: OSC RenoT-t. Disposal of Aqueous Waste,
      200065    Fried Industries. Inc.. prepared by Ms. Laura
                Amend, Technical Assistance Team, Weston/SPER
                Division, May 11, 1987.
      200066-   Report: Fried Industries - NPL Superfund Site.
      200083    Sample Collection for Hazardous Classification
                ObservatiorfSr prepared by U.S. EPA Region II
                Technical Assistance Team, (undated).

3.0   REMEDIAL INVESTIGATION
3.2   Sampling and Analysis Data/Chain of custody Forms
      300001"   Memorandum to Mr. Tom Porucznik, Remedial
      300024    Project Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial
                Action Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr.
                Richard Spear, Chief, Surveillance and Monitoring
                Branch, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Fried Industries
                Site Stream Bioassessment, August 17, 1993.
                Report: Stream Bioassessment. Bog Brook. New
                Jersey. Fried Industries Site. August 2, 1993.
      300025-   Letter to Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial Project
      300025    Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Mark D.
                Moese, Ph.D., Site Manager, Ebasco Services
                Incorporated, re: Fried Industries Site - Results
                of Residential Well Saoapling conducted in
                November, 1988, June 14, 1989.
P.    300026-   Letter to Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial Project
      300027    Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Mark D.
                Moese, Ph.D., Site Manager, Ebasco Services
                Incorporated, re: Fried Industries Site - List of
                Residential Wells to be Sampled, October 7, 1988.
                List of properties attached.
3.3   Work Plans
P.    300028-   Report: Final Work Plan. Phase II Remedial
      300144    Investigation/Feasibility Study. Fried Industries
                Site. East Brunswick. New Jersey, prepared by
                Ebasco Services Incorporated, September 1991.




                                                             500095

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 96 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.    300145-   Letter to Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial Project
      3 00154   Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Frank
                Messina, Remedial Investigation Leader, Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, re: Fried Industries Site -
                Phase II Remedial Investigation/Feasibility
                Study - Summary of Analytical Program, April 26,
                1991. Tables re: Draft Work Plan attached.
P.    300155-   Report: Draft Work Plan. Remedial Investigation/
      300293    Feasibility Study. Fried Industries Site. East
                Brunswick. New Jersey, prepared by Ebasco Services
                Incorporated, June 1988.
3.4   Remedial Investigation Reports
P.    300294-   Report: Final Phase II Remedial Investigation
      300795    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume I of ii. prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, ARCS II Program, September
                1993.
P.    300796-   Report: Final Phase II Remedial Investigation
      301236    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume II of II. prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, ARCS II Progreun, September,
                1993.
P.    301237-   Report: Final Phase I Remedial Investigation
      301494    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume I of IV, prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, REM III Program, August
                1990.
P.    301495-   Report: Final Phase I Remedial Investigation
      301706    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume II of IV. prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, REM III Prograun, August
                1990.
P.    301707-   Report: Final Phase I Remedial Investigation
      302126    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume III of TV. prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, REM III Progreun, August
                1990.
P.    302127-   Report: Final Phase I Remedial Investigation
      302139    Report. Fried Industries Site. East Brunswick. New
                Jersey. Volume IV of IV. prepared by Ebasco
                Services Incorporated, REM III Program, August
                1990.




                                                             500096

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 97 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

3.5   Correspondence
P.    30214 0-   Letter to Honorable Frank R. Lautenberg, United
      302140     States Senate, from Mr. Constantine Sidamon-
                 Eristoff, Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region
                 II, re: The East Brunswick Council Resolution
                 (19223), asking EPA to secure an existing fence
                 and/or retain a 24hr. guard for the Fried
                 Industries site. May 7, 1992.
P.    3 02141-   Letter to Honorable Bill Bradley, United States
      302141     Senate, from Mr. Constantine Sidamon-Eristoff,
                 Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region II, re:
                 The East Brunswick Council Resolution (#9223) -
                 Response to Township's letter dated March 25,
                 1992, May 7, 1992.
P.    302142-    Letter to Ms. Elizabeth H. Kiss, Municipal
      302149     Clerk, Township of East Brxinswick, from Mr. John
                 S. Frisco, Deputy Director for New Jersey
                 Programs, Emergency and Remedial Response
                 Division, re: Response to letter dated March 2,
                 1992 concerning an East Brunswick Township Council
                 Resolution (#9223) requesting EPA to secure the
                 existing fence and/or retain a guard for the
                 Fried Industries site, April 22, 1992. Attached
                 are: 1. Letters and a Memorandvim concerning this
                 matter and 2. The Resolution Requesting EPA to
                 Secure Fried Industries site, March 23, 1992.

4.0   FEASIBILITY STUDY
4.2   Feasibility study Work Flans
P.    400001-    Fried Industries Site, List of Technologies for
      4 00022    Preliminary Screening, (undated).
P.    400023-    Fried Industries Site, List of Alternatives for
      400028     Preliminary Screening, (xindated).
4.3   Feasibility Study Reports
P.    400029-    Report: Final Feasibility Study Report. Fried
      400248     Industries Site. East Brunswick. New Jersey.
                 prepared by Ebasco Services Incorporated, ARCS II
                 Program, September 1993.




                                  8

                                                              500097

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 98 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

4.4   Proposed Plan (SOP, FOP)
P.    400249-   Pian: Final Field Operations Plan for Phase II
      400498    Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Fried
                Industries Site. East Brunswick. New Jersey,
                prepared by Ebasco Services Incorporated,
                September 1991.
P.    400499-   Plan: Draft Field Operations Plan fFOP^ for
      400683    Remedial Investioation/Feasibilitv Study Fried
                Industries Site. East Brunswick. New Jersey,
                prepared by Ebasco Services Incorporated, June
                1988.
4.6   Correspondence
P.    400684-   Letter to Mr. Keith Moncino, Project Officer, U.S.
      400685    EPA Region II and Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial
                Project Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial
                Action Section, U.S. EPA Region II, -from Mr. Dev
                R. Sachdev, PhD, PE, ARCS II Program Manager,
                Ebasco Services Incorporated, re: Fried
                Industries site. East Brunswick, New Jersey, Final
                Feasibility Study Report, September 9, 1993.
                Acknowledgement of Receipt, attached.
P.    400686-   Letter to Mr. Mark D. Moese, Ph.D., Site Manager,
      400686    Ebasco Services Incorporated, from Mr. Thomas J.
                Porucznik, Remedial Project Manager, Central New
                Jersey Remedial Action Section, U.S. EPA Region
                II, re: confirmation to delay the submission of
                the draft Feasibility Study (FS) Report, Feb. 13,
                1990.                   -   -
P.    400687-   Letter to Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Remedial Project
      400689    Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Mark
                D. Moese, Ph.D., Site Manager, Ebasco Services
                Incorporated, re: Fried Industries site - Major
                Issues Raised at Alternatives Screening Meeting,
                February 12, 1993

7.0   ENFORCEMENT
7.4   Consent Decrees
P.    700001-   Consent Decree, Civil Action No. 86 - 1207 May 26,
      700010    1987.




                                                           500098

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 99 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

7.7   Notice Letters and Responses - I04e's
P.    700011-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      700021    Industries, from Mr. George Pavlou, Acting
                Director, Emergency and Remedial Response
                Division, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Supplemental
                Request for Information for the Fried Industries
                Superfund site, August 23, 1993. Attached are: 1.
                Instructions for Supplemental Request for
                Information, 2. Supplemental Rec[uest for
                Information, 3. A signed Certification of Answers
                for Supplemental Request for Information, and 4.
                Response to Supplemental Request for Information.
P.    700022-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      700039    Industries, from Mr. George Pavlou, Acting
                Director, Emergency and Remedial Response
                Division, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Supplemental
                Request for Information for the Fried Industries
                Superfund site, March 3, 1993, with attachments.
P.    700040-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      700051    Industries, Inc., from U.S. EPA, re: Notice to
                Responsible Party under the Comprehensive
                Environmental Response, Compensation and LiaO^ility
                Act of 1980, Dec. 26, 1985. Several letters
                attached.
      700052-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      700054    Industries, from Mr. William J. Librizzi,
                Director, Emergency and Remedial Response
                Division, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Notice Letter
                regarding potential liability for the Fried
                Industries Superfund Site, April 30, 1985.
      700055-   Letter to Mr. William J. Librizzi, Director,
      700055    Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, U.S.
                EPA Region II, from Mr. John Gatarz, re: Response
                to June 4, 1984 Request for Information letter,
                June 25, 1984.
      700056-   Letter to Mr. David Rogers, Hazardous Waste Site
      700056    Branch, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Samuel V.
                Convery, Jr., of Samuel V. Convery, Jr., P.A.,
                Attorneys at Law, re: Response of Fried
                Industries, Inc., to Request for Information, Jione
                14, 1984.




                                 10


                                                            500099

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 100 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      700057-    Letter to Mr. William J. Librizzi, Director,
      700057     Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, U.S.
                 EPA Region II, from Mr. Samuel V. Convery, Jr., of
                 Samuel V. Convery, Jr., P.A., Attorneys at Law,
                 re: Request for Information - Fried Industries,
                 June 11, 1984.
P.    700057A-   Letter to Mr. & Mrs. John Gatarz, from Mr. William
      700057B    J. Librizzi, Director, Office of Emergency and
                 Remedial Response, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Request
                 for Information, June 4, 1984.
P.    700058-    Letter to Fried Industries, from Mr. William J.
      700086     Librizzi, Director, Office of Emergency and
                 Remedial Response, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Request
                 for Information for Fried Industries, (undated).
                 Attached are: Response to the Request for
                 Information for Fried Industries, Inc., and
                 Company Invoices.
7.8   correspondence
P.    700087-    Memorandxim to File, from Mr. Robert Carr, re:
      700087     Fried Industries Superfund Site, Consent Decree in
                 U.S. V. Philip Fried, President, November 30,
                 1989.
P.    700088-    Handwritten Letter to Mr. Saunuel V. Convery, Jr.,
      700089     of Samuel V. Convery, Jr., P.A., Attorneys at Law,
                 from Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
                 Industries, Inc., re: Mr. Fried's vacating the
                 Premises, November 2, 1989.
P.    700090-    Letter to Mr. Samuel V. Convery, Jr., of Seunuel V.
      700091     Convery, Jr., P.A., Attorneys at Law, from Mr.
                 Robert G. Carr, Assistant Regional Counsel, Office
                 of Regional Counsel, U.S. EPA Region II, re:
                 Credibility of Client's Statement - Fried
                 Industries, circa November 2, 1989.
P.    700092-    Letter to Mr. Robert G. Carr, Assistant Regional
      700093     Counsel, Office of Regional Cotmsel, U.S. EPA
                 Region II, from Mr. Philip S. Fried, President,
                 Fried Industries, Inc., re: Update on Mr. Fried's
                 activity at Fried Industries, Inc., October 5,
                 1989. Newspaper article attached.




                                  11
                                                           500100

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 101 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.    700094-   Memorandum to Mr. Robert G. Carr, Assistant
      700098    Regional Counsel, Office of Regional Counsel, U.S.
                EPA Region II, from Ms. Lisa Peterson, Office of
                External Programs, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Fried
                Industries Mailing List, September 2, 1988.
                Agreement Concerning On-site RI/FS Activities at
                Fried Industries, Sept. 2, 1988, attached.
P.    700099-   Letter to Mr. Phillip Fried, President, Fried
      700101    Industries, Inc., from Mr. Willizun J. Librizzi,
                Director, Emergency and Remedial Response
                Division, U.S. EPA Region II, re: Section 107
                Notice of Fried Industries Remedial Investigation/
                Feasibility Study, April 30, 1985.

8.0   HEALTH ASSESSMENTS
8.1   ATSDR Health Assessments
P.    800001-   Report: Health Assessment for Fried Industries.
      800013    East Brunswick. Middlesex County. New Jersey.
                prepared by the Agency for Toxic S\ibstances and
                Disease Registry, U.S. Public Health Service,
                August 3, 1990.
8.2   Tozicogieal Profiles
P.    800014-   Memorandum to Mr. Tom Porucznik, Remedial Project
      800077    Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
                Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Ms. Joan S.
                Dollarhide, Associate Director, Superfund Health
                Risk Technical Support Center, Chemical Mixtures
                Assessment Branch, re: Toxicity Information for
                Multiple Chemicals (Fried Industries/East
                Brunswick, New Jersey), May, 27, 1993. Risk
                Assessment Issue Papers attached.
8.3   Correspondence
P.    800078-   Letter to Mr. David R. Ross, from Mr. Tom
      800079    Porucznik, Remedial Project Manager, Central New
                Jersey Remedial Action Section, U.S. EPA Region
                II, re: Response to request for a copy of the
                final version of the ATSDR Health Assessment,
                April 16, 1992. Appendix attached.




                                 12


                                                           500101

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 102 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   800080-   Memorandum to Mr. Tom Porucznik, Remedial Project
     8 00080   Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
               Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Arthur
               Block, Senior Regional Representative, Agency for
               Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, U.S. Public
               Health Service, re: transmittal of Fried
               Industries - Final Health Assessment, March 11,
               1992.

10.0 PUBLIC INFORMATION
10.1 Comments and Responses
P.   10.00001- Letter to the Honorable Jim Courter, House of
     10.00006 Representatives, Congress of the United States,
               from Mr. Christopher J. Daggett, Commissioner,
               State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
               Protection, re: response letter concerning the
               Fried Industries Site, November 17, 1989. Letters
               attached.

P.   10.00007- Letter to Honorable James Courter, House of
     10.00010 Representatives, Congress of the United States,
               from Mr. William J. Muszynski, P.E., Acting
               Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA Region II, re:
               response concerning the proposed cleanup of the
               Fried Industries, Inc., Superfund Site, November
               9, 1989. Letter attached.
10.2 Community Relations Plan
P.   10.00011- Plan: Final Community Relations Plan Fried
     10.00032 Industries Site, Middlesex County. New Jersey,
               prepared by Camp Dresser & McKee, Inc., Federal
               Programs Corporation, February 12, 1988.
10.3 Public Notices
P.   10.00033- Public Notice: "Representatives from the U.S.
     10.00033 EPA Invite you to attend a Public Meeting to
               Discuss the Proposed Clean Up of the Fried
               Industries Superfund Site in East Brunswick, New
               Jersey", prepared by U. S. EPA Region II,
               September 21, 1993.
P.   10.00034- Public Notice: "Fried Industries Superf\ind Site
     10.00034 Public Meeting, Tuesday, September 21, 1993 - 7:00
               P.M., East Bmnswick, New Jersey" prepared by
               U.S. EPA Region II, September 21, 1993.

                                13

                                                           500192

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 103 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   10.00035- Public Notice: "U.S. EPA announces Proposed
     10.00035 Remedial Alternatives for the Fried Industries
               Superfund Site, East Brunswick, New Jersey",
               prepared by U.S. EPA Region II, September 21,
               1993.
10.6 Fact Sheets and Press Releases
P.   10.00036- Fact Sheet: Fried Industries Site. Superfund
     10.00037 Update. October 1992.
P.   10.00038- Fact Sheet: Fried Industries Site. Superfund
     10.00039 Update. March 1992.
P.   10.00040- Fact Sheet: Fried Industries Site. Superfund
     10.00043 Update. December 1989.
P.   10.00044- Press Release: "EPA To Hold Public Meeting on
     10.00044 Fried Industries Superfund Site," for release
               August 9, 1988.
P.   10.00045- Fact Sheet: Fried Industries Site. Superfund
     10.00048 Update. EPA to Conduct Lona-Term Investigation of
               the Fried Industries Site. August 1988.
10.9 Proposed Plan
P.   10.00049- Plan: Superfund Proposed Plan. Friedlndustries.
     10.00060 Township of East Brunswick. New Jersey.Middlesex
               County. New Jersey^ prepared by U.S. EPA Region
               II, September 9, 1993.
10.10 Correspondence
P.   10.00061- Letter to Mr. Robert Soboleski, Bureau Chief,
     10.00061 Bureau of Site Management, State of New Jersey,
               Department of Environmental Protection and Energy,
               from Mr. Doug Garbarini, Chief, New Jersey
               Superfund Branch I, re: Revised Draft Proposed
               Plan for Fried Industries, August 20, 1993.
P.   10.00062- Letter to Mr. Tom Porucznik, Remedial Project
     10.00067 Manager, Central New Jersey Remedial Action
               Section, U.S. EPA Region II, from Mr. Marcedius T.
               Jameson, Site Manager, Bureau of Site
               Management, State of New Jersey, Department of
               Environmental Protection and Energy, re: Fried
               Industries site. Draft Proposed Plan, August 16,
               1993. NJDEPE Comments on Fried Industries Site
               Draft Proposed Plan, attached.

                               14


                                                          500103

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 104 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

p.   10.00068- Memorandum to Addresses Listed, from Mr. Doug
     10.00080 Garbarini, Chief, New Jersey Superfund Branch I,
               re: Draft Proposed Plan for the Fried Industries
               Site, Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex
               County, New Jersey, July 19, 1993. Plan:
               Superfund Proposed Plan. Fried Industries.
               Townsl^ip of East Brunswicl^. Middlesex County. New
               Jersey, prepared by U.S. EPA Region II, August
               1993, attached.
P.   10.00081- Letter to Mr. Edward Putnam, Assistant Director,
     10.00081 Division of Publicly Funded Site Remediation,
               State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental
               Protection and Energy, from Mr. Doug Garbarini,
               Chief, New Jersey Superfund Branch I, re: Draft
               Proposed Plan for the Fried Industries Superfund
               Site, July 19, 1993.




                                 15


                                                          SOOlOf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 105 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

       APPENDIX IV




STATE LETTER OF CONCURRENCE




                              800185

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 106 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

5L\i B Y : S H E mEDI.4TI0N            ; 6-23-94 ; 2:10PM ;          FAX # 609 633 2360^212 2641 9331                 ;# 2 / 3




                                               ^ i a t t of^tia 3ft9t^
                                              DEPARTMENH- O F E N V I R O N M E N T A L
                                                 PROTECTION A N D ENERGY

CHRISTINE TODD WHITMAN
       Cmitrnor                                                June     23,     1994                           ROBERTC.SHINN,JR.
                                                                                                                  Commissioner

         Hs. Jeanne K. Fox
         Regional Administrator
         U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
         Region II
         Jacob K. Javits Federal Building
         New York, New Yor)c 10278-0012
         Dear Hs* Fox:
         Subject:          Fried Industries Superfund Site
         The Department of Environmental Protection and Energy has evaluated
         and concurs with the selected remedy for the Fried Industries
         Superfund site as stated below:
                  "The selected remedy represents the firet and only planned
                  operable unit for the Pried Industries site. It addresses
                  contaminated surface soils on the site and ground water
                  contaminated in the underlying shallow deep aquifers".
         The major components of the.selected remedy include the following:
                  .        excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of
                           approximately   900 cubic yards of surface soil
                           contaminated with arsenic;
                           excavation and off-site treatment and disposal of
                           approximately 2,700 cubic yards of soil contaminated with
                           volatile organics;
                           extraction of ground water contaminated with volatile
                           organics from the bedrock aquifer and shallow aquifers,
                           with on-site treatment and discharge to surface water;
                           and
                           appropriate environmental monitoring                                 to ensure the
                           effectiveness of the remedy.
          Should it be necessary to discharge to Lawrence Brook, EPA would
          need to submit an appropriate permit application in order for the
          Department to determine the limitations for Lawrence Brook.


                                                                                                              500106
                      New Jersey h An Equal Opporl unity Employer • Printed on Recyded and Recyclable Paper

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 107 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

SENT BY:SITE REMEDIATION   ; 6-23-94 ; 2:11PM ; FAX # 609 633 2360-^212 2641 9331     ;# 3/ 3




         The State of New Jersey appreciates the opportunity to participate
         in this decision-making process-s^nd looks forward to future
         cooperation with the USEPA.




                                            o b e r t ,jd. sninn^
                                           Department             of      Environmental

        MTJ/dfh
                                L,           P r o t e c t i o n & Energy




                                                                             soon?

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 108 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                   RECORD OF DECISION
                 RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY


                 Fried Industries Site
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey




     United States Environmental Protection Agency
                       Region II
                  New York, New York




                                                     300148

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 109 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY
                         FRIED INDUSTRIES
                    EAST BRUNSWICK, NEW JERSEY



This Responsiveness Summary is organized into four sections and
an Appendix as described below:

     I.    RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY OVERVIEW; This section briefly
           describes the objectives and the format of the
           Responsiveness Summary for the Site.
     II.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS: This
           section provides the history of community concerns and
           interests regarding the Site.

     III. SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS. COMMENTS AND CONCERNS:
          This section summarizes the oral comments presented to
          EPA at the September 21, 1993 Public Information
          Meeting, and provides EPA's responses to these
          comments.

     IV.   WRITTEN COMMENTS AND RESPONSES: This section contains
           written comments received by EPA during the public
           comment period, as well as EPA's written responses to
           those comments.

           APPENDICES: The Appendices Section contains one
           comment letter received from the public during the
           comment period, the attendance sheet from the public
           information meeting, and the transcript of the public
           information meeting.


I.   RESPONSIVENESS SUMMARY OVERVIEW

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) established a
public comment period, from September 9, 1993 through
October 8, 1993, to provide interested parties with the
opportunity to comment on the remedial investigation and
feasibility study (RI/FS) reports, and on the Proposed Plan, for
the Fried Industries Superfund Site (the Site) located in the
Township of East Brunswick, Middlesex County, New Jersey.

EPA held a Public Information Meeting at 7:00 P.M., on
September 21, 1993, in the East Brunswick Municipal Complex
Senior Center, to outline the remedial alternatives described in
the Proposed Plan (and in the FS), and to present the EPA and New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy (NJDEPE)

                                                         S00149

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 110 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

Preferred Alternatives for remediating the contaminated surface
soil and groundwater at the Site.

This Responsiveness Summary summarizes the oral comments
presented to EPA at the public information meeting, the written
comments submitted by citizens during the public comment period,
and EPA's responses to these oral and written comments. EPA, in
consultation with the NJDEPE, selected the final remedy for the
Site only after reviewing and considering all public comments
received during the public comment period.

The remedy to clean up the surface soil and groundwater at the
Site was selected by the EPA Region II Administrator and is
documented in this Record of Decision (ROD). EPA will issue a
press release to notify interested citizens that a remedial
decision has been made. The ROD, including this Responsiveness
Summary and the other Site-related documents that EPA used to
select the remedy, will be placed in the information repository
located in the Reference Section of the East Brunswick Township
Library for public review.


II.   BACKGROUND ON COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND CONCERNS
EPA community activities are designed to ensure that the local
public is provided with information about site activities, has
input to decisions about Superfund actions, and is kept well-
informed about the progress of these actions. EPA initiated
community relations activities for the Fried Industries Site via
community interviews, conducted in June 1987, with local
officials and interested residents of Middlesex County. These
interviews were conducted to aid EPA in developing a community
relations plan tailored to the needs of the community affected by
the Site.

In order to inform local residents and officials about Site
activities, a Public Information Meeting was held in the East
Brunswick Courthouse on August 18, 1988, to review the proposed
RI activities. In order to update residents and local officials
on Site activities, a public availability session was held in the
East Brunswick Public Library on March 4, 1992. In addition, the
Phase II RI report, FS report, and the Proposed Plan for the Site
were discussed at a public information meeting held on
September 21, 1993.

The major concerns expressed by the public during the remedial
investigation at the Site focused on groundwater contamination,
potential health effects from contaminated water, financial
responsibility for the cleanup costs, site security, and delays
in getting on to the actual cleanup. Major questions and
concerns that were raised during the September 21, 1993 public
meeting are summarized in the following Section (Section III).

                                                          500110

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 111 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

III. SUMMARY OF MAJOR QUESTIONS. COMMENTS AND CONCERNS;

Prior to the September 9, 1993 through October 8, 1993 public
comment period, several residents and local officials expressed
concern over the apparent lack of security at the Fried
Industries Site and also the amount of time that had elapsed
since the discovery of hazardous materials on the Fried
Industries property. However, the most significant concern
expressed by citizens and Township officials was the potential
threat to municipal wells, and to the Farrington Lake public
water supply, from migration of contaminants in the groundwater.
Furthermore, many Township residents believe that they should be
reimbursed by any Potentially Responsible Parties (PRPs) for the
costs they incurred in connecting to the Township's public water
supply.

Concerns raised during the public information meeting, held on
September 21, 1993 to discuss the selected remedy, are addressed
and summarized below.

1)   COMMENT: Several residents expressed concern that
     contaminants from the Fried Industries Site would be left in
     surface soils and could potentially migrate in the
     groundwater to the Milltown Reservoir or the Raritan River.
     They asked if volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are still
     found on-site, and if fish in the Milltown Reservoir or in
     ponds on the Fried Site have absorbed contaminants that
     could present a health hazard to someone eating the fish.

     RESPONSE: Based on the results of the RI/FS, it would take
     a number of years for the plume of VOCs-contaminated
     groundwater to reach surface waters if no remedial
     activities take place. Because of the relatively high
     volatility of some of the contaminants, much of the VOC
     contamination has dissipated from the surface soil.
     According to the Risk Assessment, the VOCs still remaining
     in the subsurface soil are present in concentrations that do
     not pose significant threats to human health and the
     environment. Similarly, concentrations of VOCs found in
     pond sediments and the pond surface water do not pose any
     significant threat to human health. As a result, eating
     fish taken from the large pond on the Fried property does
     not pose any appreciable health risks. It should be noted,
     that some soils which contain higher concentrations of VOCs
     will be excavated to accelerate the timeframe for
     remediating VOCs-contaminated groundwater.

2)   COMMENT: Several residents expressed concern that arsenic
     contamination in the soil doesn't dissipate over time, and
     wanted to know how EPA intends to dispose of this
     contaminant.

                                                          5001ti

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 112 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     RESPONSE: EPA intends to excavate and remove surface soils
     where high concentrations of arsenic contamination were
     discovered. After excavation and transportation to an EPA-
     approved off-site facility, the arsenic-contaminated soil
     would be stabilized. Stabilization is a process in which
     the excavated soil is mixed with chemicals and water,
     becomes bound within a solid matrix, and thereby immobilizes
     the arsenic. The stabilized soil would then be transported
     to an EPA-approved landfill for final disposal.

3)   COMMENT: A resident commented that since his well is
     115 feet deep, it seems logical that surface contamination
     from the Site would be present in his well and asked if his
     well would become clean after the arsenic-contaminated soil
     at the Site was removed.
     RESPONSE: EPA initially assumed that problems with area
     drinking water wells were the result of contamination from
     the Fried Industries Site. However, data obtained during
     the remedial investigation clearly shows that groundwater in
     the immediate vicinity of the Site flows in a direction away
     from these wells. The contamination in these wells does not
     come from the Fried Industries Site, but from some other, as
     yet unidentified, source. Therefore, the cleanup of the
     Fried Industries Site should not have any effect on the
     quality of water from these local deep bedrock wells. In
     addition, EPA has received data from the Middlesex County
     Department of Environmental Health (MCDEH) that indicates
     wells in the immediate vicinity of the Site that were
     formerly contaminated, currently exhibit very low, if any,
     levels of contamination.

4)   COMMENT: A resident wanted to know the origin of
     contaminants detected in his well, supposedly contaminated
     with detergents such as those manufactured by Fried
     Industries.
     A) EPA RESPONSE: The substances referred to were most
     likely not detergents, but solvents such as ethyl benzene
     and chloroform. EPA is not certain of the origin of these
     contaminants. However, recent information provided by
     NJDEPE suggests that the contamination may have originated
     from the nearby Middlesex County Parks Department facility
     where a leaking underground storage tank problem may have
     existed in the past. A suggestion was made that concerned
     residents call the MCDEH to have their wells re-tested.

     B) NJDEPE RESPONSE: During the investigation of the Fried
     Site, it was discovered that, in 1990, while removing
     underground storage tanks, a leak of 4,000 gallons of
     gasoline was recorded at the nearby Middlesex County Parks
     Department facility. It is unknown how long these tanks may

                                                           800112

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 113 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     have been leaking. The area has since been paved over.    The
     Middlesex County Parks Department recently developed a
     proposed clean-up plan.

     C) MCDEH RESPONSE: It has also been found that, on
     occasion, local septic systems, and substances that may have
     been dumped into them, can be the source of contamination in
     area wells. The MCDEH has not tested wells in the area for
     about a year, but will test anyone's well free of charge
     upon request.

5)   COMMENT: A resident asked if beryllium that was found at
     the bottom of the ponds on the Fried Industries Site, will
     be remediated.

     RESPONSE: EPA's investigation included a Risk Assessment
     to determine the potential risks to public health and the
     environment from each substance of significance. Beryllium
     was detected in the pond sediments, but it does not present
     a level of risk to public health or the environment that
     requires remedial action.

6)   COMMENT: Several residents expressed concern that EPA's
     investigations may not have been comprehensive enough to
     allow EPA to state the Fried Industries Site is not
     responsible for the residential well contamination found in
     the vicinity of the Site and that EPA did not install
     monitoring wells that are as deep as local wells.

     RESPONSE: Prior to the RI, general area hydrogeological
     information indicated that groundwater on the Fried property
     flowed toward Fresh Ponds Road. Based on this groundwater
     flow configuration, contamination was considered to be a
     result of Fried Industries activities. EPA completed a
     comprehensive, two-phase RI at the Site, and determined that
     contaminated residential wells in the area are upgradient,
     hydrogeologically, from the Fried Industries Site, meaning
     that the groundwater flow is not in the direction initially
     supposed, but rather is flowing away from these wells.
     Therefore, EPA is confident that contaminants from the Site
     do not flow towards these bedrock wells.

7)   COMMENT: A resident asked what contaminants were detected
     in the contaminated on-site groundwater and what the
     contaminant level was at the leading edge of the groundwater
     plume.

     RESPONSE: Several contaminants were detected, including
     benzene, toluene, 1,1,1-trichloroethane, and vinyl chloride.
     Vinyl chloride is most likely the chemical at the forward
     edge of the groundwater plume because it is a very fast
     moving compound in groundwater. The groundwater plume


                                                              500113

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 114 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      defined by vinyl chloride is presently confined to an area
      entirely within the Fried property boundaries. Vinyl
      chloride was detected at a concentration of less than one
      part per billion (ppb) at Well #10-D, located at the leading
      edge of the plume, which is below the EPA-established
      Maximum Contaminant Level (MCL).

8)    COMMENT: A resident asked about State of New Jersey
      standards for vinyl chloride in groundwater and whether the
      vinyl chloride will sink as it migrates with the
      groundwater.

      RESPONSE: The State of New Jersey's groundwater quality
      standard for vinyl chloride is 0.08 ppb, while the federal
      standard is 2.0 ppb. Vinyl chloride is present in
      concentrations that are too low to form a separate liquid
      phase, but will continue to migrate with the groundwater.

9)    COMMENT: A resident asked if the on-site drainage is
      surface or subsurface.

      RESPONSE: The drainage being addressed is primarily surface
      drainage. There are a number of marshes and swamp areas on
      the Site as well as a large pond. Two-thirds of the Site is
      considered wetlands, and the Site is drained by several
      streams that flow into Lawrence Brook, a tributary of the
      Raritan River.

10)   COMMENT: A resident asked if EPA was going to remove
      structures and storage tanks located on the Site.
      RESPONSE: EPA concluded that the structures comprising the
      building complex do not pose any significant threat to human
      health and the environment. However, during the remedial
      action, it will be necessary to demolish these structures in
      order to facilitate the use of heavy equipment, minimize
      impacts on wetlands areas, and enhance the safety of
      laborers working at the Site. The underground storage tanks
      and tank car still remaining on-site will be investigated
      during the design phase to determine if their contents,
      and/or any associated soil contamination, should be removed.

11)   COMMENT: Several residents commented about the potential
      volume of soil to be excavated at the Site and asked if EPA
      intends to restore the areas of contaminated soil that will
      be excavated and removed.

      RESPONSE: EPA intends to remove approximately 900 cubic
      yards (cy) of arsenic-contaminated surface soil from the
      Site. In addition, approximately 2,700 cy of VOC-
      contaminated soil will also be removed. After completing
      the excavation, clean fill material will be transported to


                                                         500114

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 115 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      the Site and used to fill-in the excavated areas. Enough
      clean fill will be used to restore the excavated areas to
      the existing topography.
12)   COMMENT: A resident expressed concern that the proposed
      cleanup may have some additional effects not considered by
      EPA, such as the creation of major truck traffic problems in
      the residential area in the vicinity of the Site.
      RESPONSE: EPA is aware of the limited access available to
      trucks and heavy equipment. During the specific engineering
      design of the remedy, EPA will discuss issues relating to
      potential traffic routes, safety, security, and contingency
      plans with the public and representatives of the Township.
      Through careful planning, the impact of remedial
      construction activities on the community will be minimized
      as much as possible.
13)   COMMENT: Several residents asked if EPA was influenced in
      its selection of remedial alternatives and the selected
      remedy by potential future uses of the Site. Questions were
      also raised about the Site's possible future uses. A
      resident stated that residential, park, or passive
      recreational uses may be desirable.
      RESPONSE: The area surrounding the Fried Industries Site is
      primarily residential, so there is a high potential for
      future residential use of at least part of the Site
      property. Therefore, future residential use of the property
      was considered in the Risk Assessment; remedial
      alternatives, including the preferred alternative, were
      developed which would allow residential use of the property
      in the future. Since most of the Site is considered to be
      wetlands, the number of potential future residences may be
      limited. The Site is still owned by Mr. Fried, and EPA does
      not intend to assume ownership of the property in the
      future. If ownership reverts to the Township, perhaps
      passive recreation may be a more appropriate use.
14)   COMMENT: A resident asked if it was possible to drill
      further through the bedrock and find another groundwater
      aquifer.
      RESPONSE: EPA's investigation of the Site geohydrology
      indicates there is no groundwater aquifer below the deep
      bedrock aquifer.
15)   COMMENT: Several residents expressed concern about the time
      needed to clean up the Site, that EPA may be wasting time,
      and that clean up actions may not be instituted.
      RESPONSE:   A No Action alternative is included in all of

                                                            500115

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 116 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                 8
      EPA's Proposed Plans, normally for comparative analysis
      only. In the case of Fried Industries, EPA will be
      undertaking remedial work based on the risks associated with
      potential future ingestion of groundwater volatile organics
      (VOCs), dermal contact with VOCs, and inhalation of VOCs, as
      well as ingestion of arsenic-contaminated surface soil. The
      preparation of a detailed engineering design and the
      completion of remedial work does take time.
16)   COMMENT: A resident asked when EPA would begin Site
      remediation.
      RESPONSE: For the Fried Industries Site, the estimated time
      required from the start of the remedial design, through
      design completion, to the beginning of the remedial action,
      is approximately two and one-half years.
17)   COMMENT: A resident asked about EPA's experience with
      groundwater pump and treat systems, the effectiveness of
      these systems on contaminants, and the rate of success using
      this technology.
      RESPONSE: EPA is using this remediation technology at
      numerous sites. Each system is specifically designed based
      on the hydrogeological conditions and contaminants
      encountered at the site. During the remedial design stage,
      the details of well locations, well depths, pumping rates,
      and the on-site water treatment process system will be
      determined. At other sites, the effectiveness of pump and
      treat systems vary, based on local site conditions and the
      cleanup levels required.
18)   COMMENT: A resident asked if EPA would have protective
      measures in place on the Site while excavating to prevent
      volatilization of on-site contaminants.
      RESPONSE: EPA selects a site remedy and formulates the
      design for cleanup of a site in coordination with NJDEPE to
      ensure that appropriate measures are taken to protect on-
      site workers and to prevent potential airborne migration of
      hazardous substances that might pose a threat to the health
      of nearby residents. These measures would be implemented to
      ensure compliance with various Federal and State
      regulations. The specific protective measures to be used at
      the Site during the remedial action will be determined
      during the remedial design.
19)   COMMENT: A resident asked if EPA considered the use of
      bioremediation as part of the Fried cleanup.
      RESPONSE: Bioremediation of the groundwater and/or surface
      soil were eliminated from further consideration as remedies

                                                            500116

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 117 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

      during the Feasibility Study screening process. The
      bioremediation process is only effective for certain types
      of organic compounds. Due to the variety of organics
      detected in the soil and groundwater at the Fried Industries
      Site, and the wide range of concentrations present,
      bioremediation would not be practical. Furthermore, some of
      the compounds found at the Site are not biodegradable, so
      additional treatment, such as air stripping or carbon
      adsorption, would be needed in addition to a bioremediation
      process.
20)   COMMENT: A resident expressed concern that air stripping
      may not be adequate to remove lower-level concentrations of
      volatile contaminants.
      RESPONSE: EPA and NJDEPE proposed carbon adsorption for the
      groundwater remedy at the Site, although air stripping would
      have served equally well in removing the volatile
      contaminants. EPA and NJDEPE proposed the carbon adsorption
      system based on costs.
21)   COMMENT: A resident asked about the potential problems with
      establishing who is responsible for the contamination at the
      Site.
      RESPONSE: Mr. Phillip Fried has been identified by EPA as
      the only PRP. Since Mr. Fried is financially unable to fund
      the cleanup, the remedial design and remedial action will be
      funded by the Superfund.
22)   COMMENT: Several residents asked about the total costs of
      cleaning up the Site, whether the Superfund program will
      have sufficient funds to complete the cleanup, and if local
      or state officials could aid in moving the cleanup along
      more expeditiously.
      RESPONSE: EPA's total expenditure to date, including the
      Removal Action, both phases of the remedial investigation,
      and the Feasibility Study, is approximately $4.5 million.
      It is estimated that it will cost approximately $11 million
      to implement the selected remedy and complete the Site
      cleanup. Local and State officials do not control the
      federal funding process. EPA has not had much of a problem
      funding remedial designs or remedial actions in the past.
      However, many Superfund sites nationwide are currently
      reaching the remedial design and remedial action stages.
      Although EPA does not currently foresee any problems with
      the funding of the remedial action at the Fried Site, EPA
      cannot guarantee that funds will be available since EPA's
      annual budget is contingent upon Congressional approval. In
      cases where the availability of funds is limited, EPA
      prioritizes the funding of sites based upon risk posed by


                                                            500117

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 118 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                  10
       the site, i.e., those sites which pose the greatest risk
       receive funding first ("worst sites first").
23)    COMMENT: A resident suggested that EPA spend less than the
       projected $11 million on cleanup of the Site to standards
       that would permit future residential use, and instead,
       conduct the cleanup of the Site to lesser standards and
       create a park in the area for neighborhood residents with
       excess funds.
       EPA Response: The Superfund law was not written by Congress
       to allow that kind of decision or expenditure. EPA's
       actions are based on risks to public or the environment, and
       site remediation activities must be designed to meet
       specific Federal and State standards for cleanups. Under
       the Superfund, funds are allocated for protecting the public
       health and the environment from contaminated Superfund
       sites, and cannot be made available for other expenditures.
24)    COMMENT: A resident expressed concern with the quality of
       the air on and near the Site.
       RESPONSE: Based on data obtained during the initial
       investigation (Phase I RI), there are no indications of any
       problems with air quality on, or in proximity to, the Site.
       Any potential air pollution problems were eliminated when
       the drums, containers, laboratory chemicals, and other
       above-ground sources of contamination were removed during
       the Removal Action completed in February 1992.
25)    COMMENT: A resident asked if the Site was accessible by
       area residents since soil contamination is a major concern.
       RESPONSE: The Site property is presently accessible to
       those who choose to trespass on the property. However, the
       entire building complex and immediate area, which present
       physical hazards, are enclosed by a security fence. During
       the Removal Action completed in 1992, a large number of
       drums and vessels containing concentrated chemicals were
       removed from the Site for off-site treatment and disposal.
       At that time, in addition to the fence that still remains,
       EPA placed guards on the Site to restrict access to areas
       posing significant risks to human health and the
       environment. Once the Removal Action was completed, there
       was no need to restrict access because the risk of exposure
       to significant levels of contamination was eliminated. The
       guards were consequently removed.
2 6)   COMMENT: A Resident asked what was the vertical profile of
       contaminants in the groundwater?
       RESPONSE:   The vertical profile of the groundwater

                                                               800118

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 119 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                11
      contamination was not investigated because the saturated
      thickness of the upper aquifer was limited. All the shallow
      aquifer wells were screened the full vertical depth of the
      aquifer, so the whole aquifer was sampled. Also, wells were
      dug into the bedrock aquifer to collect groundwater samples
      over the full vertical depth of bedrock. Thus, it was not
      possible to differentiate contaminant concentrations in the
      bedrock aquifer on the basis of depth.
27)   COMMENT: A resident asked what was the expected path of the
      contaminated water plume, and why does EPA expect that the
      plume will migrate as far as predicted?
      RESPONSE: The path of contaminated groundwater migration is
      to the north-northeast. EPA has not determined.how far the
      plume will ultimately migrate. At the present time, the
      data indicates that the contaminated groundwater plume still
      lies well within the boundaries of the Site property. Based
      on the potential risk of drinking contaminated groundwater
      under a future use scenario, EPA and NJDEPE selected a
      groundwater alternative to remediate the plume of
      contaminated groundwater.
28)   COMMENT: A resident asked whether the rubble pile
      contributed to the surface soil contamination found at the
      Site?
      RESPONSE: The rubble pile consists mostly of highway
      dividers, barriers, and other highway construction debris.
      The rubble pile does not contribute to the contamination
      problems at this Site.

IV.   WRITTEN COMMENTS AND RESPONSES:
A letter, dated September 28, 1993 (Appendix A), was submitted
during the public comment period. The following is a summary of
the written comments in this letter, and EPA's responses to those
comments.
1)    COMMENT: What is the risk if the Site were left as it is?
      If the risk is high, why can't the contaminated soil be
      excavated immediately?
      RESPONSE: The Risk Assessment evaluated the risk to
      residents for various exposure scenarios. The carcinogenic
      and non-carcinogenic risks caused by ingestion of, contact
      with, and inhalation of volatile organics from the
      groundwater exceeded acceptable health based levels. There
      were also localized areas at the Site which contained
      arsenic-contaminated surface soil at levels which were of"*
      significant concern to EPA and NJDEPE. Since the Risk

                                                            505'119

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 120 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                12
     Assessment indicated that health based levels, groundwater
     quality standards, and MCLs were exceeded, EPA and NJDEPE
     have determined that remedial action is necessary. The
     remedial action should commence in about two and a half
     years.

2)   COMMENT: Why can't EPA eliminate the fence and the
     hazardous substances warning signs?

     RESPONSE: Township officials requested as much security as
     EPA was able to provide under the Superfund law, and
     specifically requested the presence of warning signs to
     alert people to the presence of hazardous substances. The
     fence was installed around the central building complex to
     keep trespassers out of the structurally unsafe buildings
     and to provide an added measure of protection from exposure
     to any remaining hazardous substances.

3)   COMMENT:   How can EPA assure people they should not fear the
     Site?

     RESPONSE: Based on the information EPA has collected, and
     on the results of the Risk Assessment, it is evident that
     the type, amount, locations, and concentration of
     contaminants present at this Site do not currently present a
     significant threat to human health under existing uses of
     the Site. In addition, warning signs have been posted on
     and around the Site. However, there are public health and
     environmental risks which do need to be addressed,
     especially if the land is to be used for residential uses in
     the future. This is not an unlikely scenario, since the
     majority of the land surrounding the Site is used for such
     purposes.

4)   COMMENT: Groundwater cleanup, via the selected remedy, may
     take thirty years. The writer asked that EPA get off the
     Site as soon as possible so the neighborhood can return to
     normal.

     RESPONSE: As indicated previously, EPA must implement the
     selected remedy to prevent unacceptable risks from several
     exposure pathways caused by the contaminated groundwater.
     To clean up the groundwater to a level which meets all
     applicable EPA and NJDEPE standards may take up to thirty
     years. During the remedial design, additional data related
     to the bedrock aquifer may provide a better estimate of time
     required to complete the groundwater cleanup.




                                                            500130

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 121 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                      APPENDICES




APPENDIX A; Citizen Comment Letter




APPENDIX B: Attendance Sheet for Public Information Meeting




APPENDIX C: Transcript of Public Information Meeting




                                                        800131

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 122 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

     APPENDIX A



CITIZEN COMMENT LETTER




                         500122

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 123 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   105 Fern Road
                                                   East Brunswick, NJ 08816
                                                   September 28, 1993

Mr. Thomas Porucznik, Project Manager
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
26 Federal Plaza, Room 711
NewYork, NY 10278

Dear Mr. Porucznik:
      I am Sony I missed your meting on September 21, 1993.
      I have an Interest with others In the property adjoining Fried and have
been very familiar with the Fried Site.. We have examined the EPA reports and
understand the actual area of land affected Is a very small part of the entire
tract We were also Impressed with past statements by EPA officials that one
would have to eat dirt for days in order to become ill.
       The point Is what Is the risk from leaving the site alone? If great what Is
wrong with digging out the dirt promptly and either replacing it or extending
the existing pond? The neighborhood has had a pall cast over it and the ques-
tion is whether this should become permanent
       Why can't you take down the fence and horrid warning signs? If the site
is not a toxic avenger, what can you do to assure the neighborhood and the
world that the site is not a Love Canal but a place where there should be no
fear?
           So, we must strenuously object to the thirty (30) year program you
espouse. We implore you to get out of there as soon as possible~so-the neigh-
borhood can get on with life.                 .        _. „ . . ^ . _..       '^
      I would Like to know when you will be having another meeting so we can
get some answers.
                                            Very




                                                                         500123

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 124 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

          APPENDIX B



PUBLIC MEETING ATTENDANCE SHEET




                                  800134

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 125 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                     XJ.8. EPA, Region 2

                                6I6N-IN 6EEET
               PUBLIC MEETING, FRIED INDUSTRIES SUPERFUND SITE
                         TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 21, 1993
                         EAST BRUNSWICK, KEW JERSEY
Please print your full sa&e and address clearly, so that ve can
add you to our sailing list.

NAME                                                         ADDRESS                            -
                             i^^t'vK'''


                                                       // / I v ^ /^s*^ ^ ^ ^-«^ '^^ 'cX. A' r c/^i • ^


Do^A          n^^Occor*,-A                          1 "7 Dp.ca/LujL^ 7^d                                   £ • Brc •-. scw / r k
^'^ ti^A^ nh                                         / I Ujesfu7-rC{      f.f'                      £^
 /i-^bo            cr.eb^^                           c^M       r,^.ciC-     Po/-D~^                 f^ D

fi/./T-Z-r//i/^'     ^y.^y^y^                       ^ P /^£/;yjrr.A^:XT.^r^cP                         ^^ ,iP ,
             txcn^^'^'^vo


u-—^—4-^                           j:-'-";   vf.T, ^ • t f    Oif   - f^u. i'; ^C/g ^At  tT 1 CC\-.
                                                                                    Vi-t-T-1    £"r^^''


                                                                                 i' •   "   •




                                                                                                              500t?5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 126 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

        APPBKDIX C



TRANSCRIPT OF PUBLIC MEETING




                               500t?8

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 127 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                               STATE OF NEW JERSEY
                               COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX
                               TOWNSHIP OF EAST BRUNSWICK


IN THE MATTER    OF

                                                Transcript
FRIED INDUSTRIES SUPERFUND                          of
SITE PUBLIC MEETING                             Proceedings




                East Brunswick Municipal Complex
                Senior Center
                2 Jean Walling Civic Center Drive
                East Brunswick, New Jersey
                Tue;kday, September 2 1 , 1993


B E F O R E

                ANN R Y C H L E N S K I , Community Relations
                Coordinator, U.S. EPA, Region 2

                CHARLES TENERELLA, Section Chief,
                Superfund, U.S. EPA, Region 2

                TOM PORUCZiJIKj Project      Manager,
                U.S. EPA, Re(^ion 2

                MARK M O E S E ,   EBASCO

                PAUL MARSENISON, Superfund, U.S. EPA,
                Reg ion 2



                          RUTHANNE UNGERLEIDER,      C.S.R.
                          LICENSE NO. XI01634



          SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
           CERTIFIED SHORTHAND REPORTERS
            2 LINCOLN HIGHWAY, SUITE 405
             EDISON, NEW JERSEY   08820
                  (908) - 494 - 9100


              SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN           500137

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 128 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1
                               I N D E X
 2
     SPEAKER                                        PAGE
 3                                                    3
     Ann    Rychlenski
 4                                                    8
     Charles    Tenerella
 5                                                 12 , 26
     Tom    Porucznik
 6                                                    17
     Mark Moese
 7                                                    29
     David    Ross
 8                                                    30
     Joseph    Romero
 9                                                    36
     Aldo    Cresti
10                                                    41
     Anthony    Girinzo
11                                                    50
     Dan McGowan
12                                                    54
     Anthony    Riccobono
13                                                    60
     Sandy    Hobart
14                                                    67
     Marcelias       Jameson
15                                                    73
     Mr.    Spillatori
16                                                    75
     Larry Schrager
17   Charles Bruno                                    88

18   Robert    Chozick                                91

19

20

21

22

23

24

25


                     "SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI   &   WIEGMANN
                                                             500128

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 129 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1                MS. RYCHLENSKI:     Good evening.
2    I want to thank you all for coming out
 3   here tonight.     My name is Ann Rychlenski,
4    and I'm a Community Relations Coordinator

5    with the United States Environmental

 6   Protection Agency, Region 2.

 7                Tonight we are holding a

 8   meeting here to discuss EPA's proposed

 9   plan to clean up the Fried Industries

10   Superfund site right here in East

11   Brunswick.     Before we get into the meat

12   of the meeting I just want to tell you a

13   couple of things:      Back there is a table

14   with some sign-in sheets.        Please sign in

15   and please print your name and your full

16   address so that we can keep you on our

17   mailing list.

18                There are handouts out there

19   also.   We have handouts that will

20   chronicle all of the presentations that

21   are given here tonight so you can follow

22   along with the slides as they go on.

23                We also have copies of the

24   proposed plan so you can take a good look

25   at it in more detail, and we also have


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W l E G M A N N g Q Q | g j

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 130 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   meeting agendas so you can see what's
 2   coming up as we go along.
 3             Also, you probably noticed that
 4   we have a stenographer here tonight.

 5   This lady is here to take a transcript of

 6   this meeting.   We are taking public

7    comment, that's why we have a

 8   stenographer here.   So whatever guestions

 9   or comments that you ask tonight will be

10   going onto a formal record and those

11   questions or comments will be answered in

12   a document that we call the

13   responsiveness summary that EPA puts out

14   after receiving all of the comments

15   regarding this proposed plan.   So in

16   order to get a clear transcript and to

17   make certain that we answer all of your

18   questions properly, if you would please,

19   if you do have a question, hold them

20   until the end of the meeting and then

21   please stand and speak clearly and please

22   give your name so that our stenographer

23   can get everything down accurately.

24             We do,have a public comment

25   period on the proposed plan.    And as I


      "SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN   SOQIJA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 131 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   mentioned, we take comments here, but we
 2   also take written comment.   We have a

 3   public comment period that ends on

 4   October 8, 1993.   So if you want to write

 5   your comments regarding our proposed plan

 6   tonight, you can do so.   Make sure that

 7   everything is postmarked by the end of

 8   business on October 8th, and you can send

 9   your comments to Tom Porucznik, who is

10   the Project Manager, and Tom's name and

11   address appear in the proposed plan back

12   there.   So make certain that you do get a

13   copy .

14              In addition, we do have an

15   information repository here.    Now,

16   information repositories are established

17   for every Superfund site by EPA so that

18   you can examine all of the documents that

19   are pertinent to the site.     There are an

20   awful lot of documents that are involved

21   with every Superfund site, most of them

22   are highly technical and rather complex.

23   They cannot all be presented here,

24   however, we always have them available to

25   the public for the public's examination


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                        500131

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 132 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   if you want to copy pages and take a look

2    at it at information repositories.              And

 3   we do have one, in fact, right here at

4    the East Brunswick Library.          If you go to

5    the reference desk and ask for the

 6   documents on the Fried Superfund site,

 7   I'm sure the reference librarian will be

 8   happy to point you in the right

 9   direction.

10                I just want to go into what our

11   agenda is here tonight and I will

12   introduce everybody up here, along with

13   me, from EPA.

14                We're going to go into an

15   overview of the Superfund process, just a

16   little bit about how Superfund works and

17   what it's all about.       That's going to be

18   given by Charlie Tenerella.          Charlie is a

19   Section Chief with Superfund at Region 2.

20                Then we're going into the site

21   history, background, what's happened out

22   at Fried, how it got the way it is-

23   That's going to be given by Tom

24   Porucznik.     Tom .is the Project Manager

25   for the Fried site for EPA.


      SCHULMAN,    CICCARELLI   & WI E G M A N N « Q Q | ^ O

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 133 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1             Then we're going to talk about
2    the summary, exactly what it is that we
 3   found out there during the course of our
4    remedial investigation and the
 5   feasibility study that we do, and there
 6   will also be a description of the
 7   different alternatives for cleanup that
8    we looked at.    The person that's going to
 9   do that is Mark Moese, he's with EBASCO,
10   and EBASCO is EPA's contractor on this
11   site .
12             Then we're going to go back to
13   Tom and Tom will present EPA's proposed
14   plan or exactly how it is that we propose
15   to clean up the site and then we'll go
16   into questions and answers.    As I said,
17   please hold all your questions until the
18   end.
19             In addition, we have here Paul
20   Marsenison.     Paul is also with EPA.    He's
21   a Project Manager and he's been working
22   on Fried, as well, along with Tom.       So
23   you got two very well qualified folks
24   here to talk about the site and answer
25   your questions and let you know what we


      SCHULMAN,CICCARELLI     & WIEGMANN   500113

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 134 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

1    found out there.

2                 I would also just like to

 3   acknowledge some folks that are here.

4    There's a gentleman here, Stan Orcheski,

5    Middlesex County Planning Board; and then

6    Mr. Spillatori, he's with the Middlesex

7    County Department of Environmental

8    Health.

 9                Do we have anybody here from

10   New Jersey DEPE?

11                (No response.)

12                MS. RYCHLENSKI:     Anybody else

13   here from any state agencies or local

14   agencies?

15                MR. RICCOBONO:     Tony Riccobono,

16   town councilman.

17                MS. RYCHLENSKI:     Thank you for

18   attending.

19                So hold your questions until

20   the end and I'm going to turn this on

21   over to Charlie.

22                MR. TENERELLA:     I see a lot of

23   familiar faces here.       We had an

24   availability about a year ago I think.            I

25   think a lot of you were there, so we'll


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W I E G M A N N $ Q 0 l 3 4

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 135 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1   try to keep out presentation short

2    tonight and then we'll go into questions

 3   and answers and maybe get more done that

 4   way since the group is pretty small.

 5             I quickly wanted to run over

 6   the Superfund process and where we are in

 7   the process now for those of you who

 8   don't understand it.

 9             Way back when any site is

10   looked at for inclusion on the National

11   Priority List to be a Superfund site for

12   national attention by US EPA, sites are

13   discovered, there's an initial

14   investigation and evaluation of the site

15   aspects, and between that and the

16   placement on the NPL or soon afterwards,

17   if necessary, a removal action.     Anything

18   that has to get off the site pretty

19   quickly because we think it's a severe

20   hazard, an imminent hazard that has to be

21   removed quickly, will be done.

22              At Fried Industries, as many of

23   you know, that was done a couple of years

24   ago.   There was a rather intensive

25   removal action at Fried Industries to get


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         500135

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 136 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 10
1    most of the free-standing chemicals out

2    of the manufacturing operation there.

3    That's been completed.

4                After that, any site on the

 5   NPL goes through a remedial   investigation

6    phase.   At Fried Industries that's taken

7    quite a bit of time because of some

 8   differences in terms of groundwater flow

 9   in this area and additional   information

10   that we collected over the last couple of

11   years.

12              The remedial investigation has

13   been completed and, also, something we

14   call the feasibility study, which gives

15   us some ideas about how to clean up the

16   site.    From the feasibility study we

17   select an option that we feel is the best

18   one for cleaning up the site and we

19   present that in the proposed plan, which

20   you have copies of tonight, and have a

21   public meeting and public comment period,

22   which we're doing now, before EPA goes

23   ahead and issues its formal record of

24   decision for the site.    That will occur

25   in the next couple of months.


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN    500136

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 137 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 11
 1             Once we issue our record of

2    decision, that's our legal document and

 3   our formal government approval to, in

4    Fried's case, to spend government money

 5   to design the remedy and then actually

 6   implement the remedy.

 7             You can see from just the

 8   listing in this chart that a lot of the

 9   work in the Superfund program that gets

10   to a site cleanup has already been done.

11   From the record of decision, which is our

12   important document that says this is

13   exactly how we want to do the cleanup,

14   we'll go to a design, which is the

15   preparation of the plans and

16   speculations, do a bid package, and then

17   after go to construction and then there

18   may be a long-term operation and

19   maintenance phase.    In fact, there will

20   be here at Fried.    After that the site is

21   completed and delisted from the Superfund

22   program from the National Priorities

23   List.

24             It's a long process.     We have a

25   lot of complaints that it takes a long


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                        500137

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 138 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  12
1    time to clean up a Superfund site since

2    the program was initiated in 1980.     We

3    found it's very difficult, a lot of this

4    is very cutting-edge technology, the

5    kinds of risk decisions that we have to

 6   make are very difficult to make and

 7   sometimes just the contractual and legal

 8   problems that we get involved in on sites

 9   it takes a considerable amount of time.

10   That's the unfortunate aspect of the

11   program that's a reality.

12             Tom is now going to go into the

13   site history and the remedial

14   investigational briefly on what's

15   occurred there.

16             MR. PORUCZNIK:    My name is Tom

17   Porucznik, I work within the Superfund

18   program along with the other fellows here

19   except Mark.   You have maybe heard this

20   before, but let me, just like I said,

21   give you a very brief overview.

22             The site itself is roughly

23   rectangular in shape and occupies

24   approximately twenty-six acres located

25   along Fresh Ponds Road.     The address is


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN ^ y O l 3 A

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 139 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  13
 1   11 Fresh Ponds Road.              Of course, it's in

 2   Middlesex       County and East       Brunswick

 3   T o w n s h i p , New   Jersey.

 4                   There's an entrance over here

 5   to the site.            This is a dirt road     which

 6   you can access the site from Fresh                Ponds

 7   Road.      That's the primary         access and the

 8   only a c c e s s , actually.

 9                   The site itself       is comprised       of

10   a building        complex over h e r e , where        most

11   of the activity           at the site took place.

12   You also have a number of marshes               and

13   swamp a r e a s , such as this here and here.

14   You also have a large pond.              And,    in

15   fact, two-thirds of the site             is

16   considered        wetlands.

17                   There are three       principal

18   drainage areas at the site.              One is this

19   swamp area h e r e , which drains along               this

20   side and down           in this direction      toward

21   Lawrence Brook.            This large pond      also

22   drains -- in fact, all three drain                into

23   Lawrence Brook, but this one here drains

24   like so and joins in with this                previously

25   mentioned        one and then Bog Brook,         along


       SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI            & WiECMANN
                                                     50013d

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 140 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     14
1    this edge here.     They all drain into

2    Lawrence Brook, which ultimately leads to

3    the Raritan River.

4               The history of the site is as

5    follows:   Philip Fried operated for

 6   approximately twenty-four years before he

7    ceased operations, and that was about

8    1988.   He was involved in the manufacture

 9   of a number of products, including

10   industrial strength detergents, floor

11   finishing products, adhesives, algicides

12   and also antifreeze products.        When he

13   operated there were a number of

14   activities that resulted in contamination

15   at the site, one of them was discharging

16   processed waste onto the grounds in this

17   area.   Also, pumping material from the

18   warehouse that was often flooded right

19   onto the grounds.      Improper handling and

20   storage of drums.      Also, leaking drums

     and rinse water were discarded and
21
     laboratory equipment, chemicals, were not
22
     properly labeled and they were not, you
23
     know, the housekeeping practices were
24
     very poor, as well as several processing
25


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W I E G M A N N   500] JA

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 141 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     15
1    and septic tanks located in the immediate

2    vicinity of the buildings.

3               In 1983 along Fresh Ponds Road

4    a number of homes, apparently, had taste

 5   and odor problems in their residential

 6   wells.   The County and the Township took

7    some samples and, in fact, it was

 8   corroborated there was a problem.        Five

 9   of those homes, in fact, had chloroform

10   and up to two hundred fifty parts per

11   billion in the residential wells.

12              Since that time the Township

13   has placed them on public water supply.

14              In December 1983 ten agencies

15   in cooperation with the County and in

16   cooperation with the Township descended

17   upon Fried and did an extensive survey

18   and investigation of the site and

19   determined that, yes, there was

20   contamination of the site and that

21   ultimately lead to the site's listing on

22   the National Priority List.       It

23   ultimately was finalized on the Priority

24   List in June of 1986.

25              That brings us up to where EPA


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & Wl E G M A N N IJQ(J| i||

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 142 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 16
1    got involved with the remedial

2    investigation phase, and at this point

 3   I'd like to turn the talk over to Mark

 4   Moese.

 5             A VOICE:   Quick question.

 6             When you said drainage, all

 7   that drainage, how much of the drainage

 8   is surface drainage, how much of the

 9   drainage is subsurface?

10             MR. PORUCZNIK:   I'll answer
11   this question, but I'd like to refrain
12   from answering any further ones until the

13   end of our discussion.

14             All that I discussed just now

15   is all surface drainage.   Again, this is

16   a surface marsh and it drains along this

17   seam here, which at times runs dry.

18   There's also a pond which drains across

19   the site in this direction, leading up

20   somewhere in this area.    Then, of course,

21   here, Bog Brook, coming on this end of

22   the site, and that merges with the other

23   two, which ultimately flow into Lawrence

24   Brook and then to the Raritan River.

25             Again, those are all surface


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                        S00142

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 143 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   17
1    waters that I discussed.

2              MR. MOESE:    What I'd like to do

 3   is briefly go over the work which EBASCO

 4   has performed at the site as part of the

 5   remedial investigation and then go into

 6   the discussion on the feasibility study

 7   that was performed.

 8             Over the course of the work on

 9   the site during the remedial

10   investigation EBASCO has conducted many

11   and numerous types of tests and collected

12   many samples.   We started out doing a

13   geophysical survey of the site looking

14   for buried material, evidence of buried

15   drums and so forth.    We then ended up

16   going through a soil gas survey to try to

17   define hodge podge or areas of soil

18   contamination on the site.

19             Based on these first two tests

20   we ended up collecting two hundred and

21   ninety-eight soil samples on the site for

22   chemical analyses.     These were comprised

23   of surface soils, soils from test

24   borings, subsurface soils, as well as

25   monitoring well soils, soils from


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                        500143

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 144 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    18
 1   drilling the monitoring wells.

2              In addition, we collected ten

 3   samples from'the taps of homes along

 4   Fresh Ponds Road and Dutch Road during

 5   the course of this investigation.

 6             Based on the geophysical

 7   surveys we excavated nineteen test pits

 8   at various locations around the site

 9   looking to determine what the EBASCO

10   anomalies may have been that we

11   discovered.   We did a well inventory to

12   examine the usage of groundwater in a

13   five-mile radius from the site.     NJ DEPE

14   just this past summer did a brief

15   investigation, I believe it was in July,

16   of soil concentrations of contaminants or

17   other compounds in and around the Fried

18   site.   EPA's Edison branch came out and

19   did what is known as a stream rapid

20   bio-assessment to try to determine the

21   impact of the Fried Industries site on

22   Bog Brook and the other drainage areas in

23   and around the site.

24              Fron the monitoring wells which

25   we installed on the site we collected two


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN m n Q | ^ ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 145 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     19
 1   groundwater samples, we collected one

2    hundred air samples during the course of

 3   this investigation for chemical analyses,

 4   sixty-six surface water samples from the

 5   various brooks and streams and the pond,

 6   forty-nine sediment samples, seventeen

 7   wipe samples in the building where we

 8   would go in and collect contamination off

 9   the walls in the building.       We performed

10   an aquifer pump test, which was used to

11   try to characterize the groundwater

12   characteristics for the aquifer so that

13   EPA would try to choose an alternative

14   during the feasibility study.        We

15   examined and re-examined the impacts of

16   the contamination on the site flora and

17   fauna on the site.      In addition, part of

18   the remedial investigation is a risk

19   assessment, both the human health and an

20   ecological risk assessment.

21              The risk assessment evaluated

22   health risks to people from groundwater,

23   surface soils, subsurface soil, surface

24   water, sediment, the ingestion of fish

25   from the streams and ponds, anything that


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W I E G M A N N
                                               SOOl15

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 146 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  20
 1   was found in the air was looked at, as

2    well as if the town or a contractor was

 3   to build homes on the site, if any of the

4    subsurface contamination would leak into

 5   the basements of these buildings and

 6   cause a potential problem.

 7             Based on the risk assessment it

 8   was determined that there was an

 9   unacceptable risk to the levels of

10   contamination found in both the bedrock

11   groundwater and the shallow aquifer

12   groundwater at the site, and although the

13   soils indicated risks within EPA's risk

14   range, both EPA and NJ DEPE had concerns

15   about the elevated concentrations of

16   arsenic at some specific locations in the

17   surface soil and are proposing with DES

18   and the proposed plan to help remediate

19   those areas.

20             Based on this we're looking at

21   contaminants of interest for the site and

22   the site soils.    We have some volatile

23   organics at some locations and arsenic in

24   the groundwater.    The primary problem is

25   due to the volatile organic compounds.


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN     500146'

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 147 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                21
1    And the building and tanks and so forth,

2    there are some concerns as of this

3    moment
4                  Based on the levels of the

 5   contamination found in the site soils,

 6   these are the areas that during the

 7   feasibility study we're looking at for

 8   remediation purposes.          This one here,

 9   this location here, here, here, and part

10   of here are arsenic contamination areas.

11   Where this one, this one, and part of

12   this one, again, are volatile organic

13   contamination areas.

14                 Also, as a result of the

15   remedial investigation the areas within

16   here is the suspected or known area of

17   the surface water aquifer contamination

18   from the surficial aquifer with the

19   bedrock aquifer being assumed to be

20   somewhat similar, but not as well-defined

21   as of this time, with groundwater flow

22   going off to the northeast off of the

23   site.

24                The next part of the work that

25   was performed by EBASCO was to do the


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & Wl E G M A N N 5 ( ) ( ) J jj^Jf

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 148 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                 22
 1   feasibility study.

2              The first stage of the

 3   feasibility study is to screen and

4    examine technologies and process

 5   materials on how to clean up the

 6   contamination of interest at the site.

 7   This slide here is for soil, I'll show

 8   you another slide next for groundwater.

 9             EBASCO considered   everything

10   from no action, from not doing anything

11   further at the site.   Using limited

12   action, institutional controls, which is

13   to just post warning signs, maybe put a

14   fence up and have reviews of the

15   contamination levels every five years.

16   Containment of the soil contamination was

17   examined through use of several capping

18   methods, either soil, clay or synthetic

19   membranes, however, it was felt, at least

20   with the capping alternative, the capping

21   technologies, that it wouldn't have been

22   effective for this site because it would

     not have reduced the leachate of
23
     contamination to groundwater from the
24
     soils.   Removal of the soil is generally
25


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI i WIEGMANN 5 0 0 | 4g

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 149 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                23
1    one that would be to excavate it off out

2    of the areas.

3              Several ways of treating the

4    contaminated soils was looked at.

5    Incineration, oxidation, soil washing,

 6   using microbes for biodegradation

7    processes or vitrification of the soil.

 8             A lot of these were not

 9   considered any further after this because

10   they're just not technically feasible to

11   do it at this location.

12             With the groundwater, again, we

13   were required to look at no action,

14   limited action alternatives, and then

15   went into other site specific methods as

16   containment, using sheet piling or slurry

17   walls of some sort to try to contain the

18   upper aquifer groundwater or the bedrock

19   groundwater, how.ever, due to the fact

20   that there's, obviously, some sort of a

21   connection between the upper aquifer and

22   lower aquifer these would not be

23   technically feasible to try to contain

24   that at this point in time.

25             Extraction, dewatering and


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         500H9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 150 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  24
1    pumping of the aquifers, this would be

2    presumed acceptable for the bedrock

3    aquifer.   The results of the aquifer

4    pumping test, which was done during the

 5   remedial investigation, showed that it

 6   would not be an appropriate method to do

 7   for the surficial aquifer.

 8              Treatment of the groundwater,

 9   everything from air stripping, chemical

10   precipitation, carbon adsorption was

11   considered, source control.   This was to

12   look at specific areas of soil on the

13   site that may be high and then treatment

14   of that soil and then disposal of both

15   the water and/or the soil.    We looked at

16   either sending the water to a local waste

17   water treatment plant, which we called

18   the local facility, they would not accept

19   the treated or untreated water, or

20   sending it off to a TSD facility, or just

21   discharging the treated water to the

22   nearby surface water.

23               The alternatives which we

24   looked at in depth in the feasibility

25   study of the soils were no action,


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                        500150

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 151 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     25
     1    limited action, institutional controls.

('   2    We examined excavation of the arsenic

      3   contaminated soil on site, stabilization

     4    of that material on site, and then

      5   disposal of that material on site once

      6   we're finished.

      7             The cost range is anything

      8   from, you know, forty thousand dollars to

      9   about seven hundred thousand dollars.

     10             For groundwater we also

     11   examined no action, limited action

     12   alternatives, and then the other final

     13   alternative for groundwater was the

     14   pumping and treatment of the groundwater

     15   with limited source extraction of some of

     16   the highly contaminated volatile soils

     17   and then treating that groundwater with

     18   one of two options, either just using

     19   activated carbon or air stripping the

     20   groundwater.

     21             Again, the cost estimates range

     22   from forty thousand to about twelve

     23   million dollars for these alternatives.

     24             What I'd like to do is turn

     25   this back over to Tom to discuss the


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                             900191

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 152 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  26
 1   EPA's alternatives.
 2             MR. PORUCZNIK:    Starting with
 3   the list of the summary of remedial

 4   alternatives that Mark just indicated to

 5   you, you can see that there are four for

 6   soil and three basic alternatives for the

 7   groundwater.

 8             In the proposed plan that we

 9   handed out tonight, on Page 9 you'll

10   notice that there are a number of

11   evaluation criteria.    These evaluation

12   criteria are the criteria used to assess

13   these remedial alternatives.     And after

14   we complete the assessment, which can be

15   found in the feasibility study, by the

16   way, which is located in the repository

17   in the East Brunswick Library, this is

18   what we came up with.    It's actually a

19   combination of two, as you saw from the

20   previous list, one involving surface soil

21   and the other for groundwater.     That

22   involves the excavation of nine hundred

23   cubic yards from areas of elevated

24   arsenic contamination.     We would take

25   that material off site and stabilize it


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         900152

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 153 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                              27
 1   off site with ultimate off-site disposal.

 2             That is alternative SC-4.

 3   That's what we designated it as in your

 4   proposed plan.

 5             Similarly, for the groundwater

 6   we chose alternative GW-3.    That involves

 7   extraction of groundwater from the

 8   bedrock aquifer and collection of

 9   groundwater from the shallow aquifer.

10   The combined stream would be treated via

11   metal precipitation, followed by organic

12   treatment using activated carbon.     The

13   treated water would then be discharged to

14   surface water and that surface water

15   would be the Lawrence Brook River system.

16             Included in this alternative we

17   also decided to excavate approximately

18   twenty-seven hundred cubic yards of

19   material, of soil that is, from areas

20   where there's very high concentrations of

21   volatile organic contamination.     That

22   also would be treated off site and

23   disposed of.     That would be, most likely,

24   through incineration.

25             That's, basically, the


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         900153

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 154 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

 1    preferred alternative that EPA has come
 2    up with in conjunction with New Jersey
 3    DEPE.   That's what we bring before you
 4    today for comment.

 5               MR. TENERELLA:   Well, that
 6    summary is the selected alternative t
 7    we have in our proposed plan.    Before
 8    make our record of decision on that t i .

 9    is a comment period and we are now

10    available for questions on the remedy c.

11    the remedial investigation or any other

12    questions you might have on the site.

13    We'd like to take them one at a time a^

14    remind you that we have a stenographer

15    So please identify yourself.

16               There will be a transcript

17    this record in the official

18    administrative record of the site,

19    needs to have your name and any otht

20    identifying criteria, like a public

21    official or whatever you might be, th

22    we'll answer the questions one at a ti

23    We'll also stay as long as we need to

2^t   answer any ques-tions.   So don't fear a:;

25    lack of time
                                       500154
       SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 155 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      29
 1                MR, ROSS:   David Ross, East
 2   Brunswick.     The address is on the sign-in
 3   sheet.

4                 In the SC-4, does that include

 5   the removal of those buildings back there

6    and the underground tanks?

7                 MR. PORUCZNIK:    It will

 8   include -- first of all, we have to take

 9   a look at those tanks.        The buildings

10   themselves will probably not be removed

11   based on risk.     We may remove them

12   because they may be a threat to the

13   actual remedy.     In other words, when

14   bulldozers and heavy equipment get in

15   there we may have to move the buildings

16   and obstructions out of the way.

17                MR. TENERELLA:    As we go on in

18   our cleanup a reminder is, we don't own

19   the Fried Industries site, Phil Fried

20   still does own the property.        So we will

21   go in on the site and clean up

22   environmental hazards, hazards to public

23   health.   Anything that is an eye sore,

24   for example, is-not something that we'd

25   be normally eligible to just clean up.

      SCHULMAN,    CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN      « n A » ^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 156 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                               30
 1                The structural          integrity    of

 2   some parts of the building             are a little

 3   bit q u e s t i o n a b l e , so when we have heavy

 4   equipment there we may have to take them

 5   down just for the safety of the w o r k e r s ,

 6   but that wouldn't be the intent of the

 7   cleanup.

 8                MR. ROMERO:       Joseph Romero,

 9   East Brunswick      resident and member of the

10   Environmental      Commission.

11                I have to leave in about             five

12   minutes for something         else.      That's my

13   problem, but I'm       sorry about that.           I

14   just have some q u e s t i o n s .     Some may be

15   relevant and some may not be.

16                Nine hundred      cubic     yards

17   doesn't sound      like a heck of a lot in

18   relation to what has been described                as

19   the problem.       And I was here at the

20   previous hearing, so I just would                like to

21   comment on t h a t .

22                MR. TENERELLA:           One of the

23   reasons    it took us so long to do our

24   remedial    investigation,       in fact, for

25   those of you who have some familiarity                   of


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI         & WIEGMANN
                                                      900156

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 157 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   31
 1   the site over time, it's been a couple of

 2   years and, actually, it's been put into

 3   two phases, there was some question as to

 4   what we might find on the site because of

 5   the erratic kinds of activities that

 6   might have been performed either in the

 7   buildings or surrounding the buildings.

 8   That's why the removal action for this

 9   site -- that's why we went in and took

10   out the tanks and concentrated chemicals,

11   vials and bottles of different chemicals

12   in the building.     It was such a concern

13   for us.     And that alone took over a year

14   or so to complete.

15                That's all been done.   We

16   wanted to make sure that we didn't have

17   any kinds of concentrated chemicals that

18   might have been spilled around the

19   building.     We thought we might have some

20   other problem areas, and it turned out,

21   based on our risk calculations for the

22   problems we had remaining after removal

23   took place, that the major problem was

24   from arsenic in the soil.     One single

25   very specific problem with one chemical.


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN     900157

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 158 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   32
 1   one metal, arsenic.     That's why you see

 2   just those small concentrated areas

 3   removing the arsenic in the soil.

 4             The VOCs, which show up in the

 5   soils, also didn't show up in the

 6   groundwater.   We want to protect the

 7   groundwater supply.

 8             The one slide that you did see

 9   that Mark put up had a big sort of blob

10   on it.   It didn't really have a real

11   clear sense of the groundwater flow.     It

12   didn't appear well on the projection, but

13   it's in the notes.

14              The groundwater flow is not

15   going, as I think some of you are aware

16   now, is not going toward Fresh Ponds Road

17   as we had originally assumed when we did

18   our early investigation, but, rather, --

19              MR. MOESE:    Northeast.

20              MR. TENERELLA:    So we're doing

21   a groundwater protection based on

22   probably industrial activity on the site

23   that caused those kinds of chemicals to

24   spill into the soil and then hit the

25   groundwater.   There is no risk in the


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                           900158

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 159 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   33
 1   soil from the VROs or the volatile

 2   organic chemicals that we found there,

 3   but it will be quicker in terms of a

 4   remedy and more efficient to take a

 5   certain amount of concentrated soil with

 6   VOS out before we start or concur with

 7   starting our groundwater pump and treat

 8   remedy, and that's why we're taking that

 9   additional soil.

10                The real thermal kinds of

11   activities are associated with the hot

12   spot, and that's what we see remaining on

13   the site.     That's after a quite extensive

14   study to make sure we don't have any

15   surprises on the site.

16                MR. ROMERO:   Just a couple more

17   questions.     I think you answered one of

18   them, which is who owns the site.        I take

19   that to be Fried.

20                MR. TENERELLA:   He owns it now.

21                MR. ROMERO:   I don't know how

22   he comes to deserve to continue to own

23   the site, but maybe that's off the point

24   of this meeting.     But the following

25   question which I want to ask is, to what


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN      9g0]^9

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 160 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   34
 1   extent are your alternatives    influenced

 2   by what kind of use this site might be

 3   put to in the future, that's a question;

 4   and then, are they influenced at all; and

 5   then the following question is, what uses

 6   would this site have in the future?

 7               MR. TENERELLA:   The assumptions

 8   we made based on the surrounding area is

 9   that it would be for residential use just

10   because the surrounding area is mostly

11   homes and not industrial, just because

12   it's zoned that way now.     So our

13   assumptions were for the most rigorous

14   cleanup, which for us would be a

15   residential criteria, and that's what

16   we ' re using.

17                Now, Phil Fried owns the site

18   right now.     Whether he would continue to

19   own it because of lack of payment of

20   taxes or something like that is another

21   question.     EPA would not take ownership

22   of the site at any time in the future.

23   It wouldn't be our site other than just

24   take responsibility for the cleanup of

25   the property.     The property would,


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                           900160

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 161 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    35
 1   theoretically, be able to revert back to

2    tax rolls if the Town took it over for

3    nonpayment of taxes in the future.

4                The reality in terms of it

 5   being a residential cleanup for our

 6   criteria purposes is different from the

 7   reality that it's sitting in a wetland.

 8   In fact, half of these buildings are

 9   sitting in water.    It made it a little

10   difficult for us to get around on the

11   site.   There's a very high water table on

12   the site and it probably wouldn't be easy

13   to construct houses on a large part of

14   the site.    In fact, that was the problem

15   we had in setting up our remedies.       One

16   of the reasons we're doing a lot of

17   off-site work is, we don't have a lot of

18   dry land, basically, to establish a set

19   of treatment systems on the site and

20   still be able to stage on the site.

21   There's not enough room that's dry, and I

22   think that's going to be a problem

23   realistically for land use on the site

24   too .

25               MR. ROMERO:   Could the site be


      ScHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         900161

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 162 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  36
 1   used   for passive       recreation?

 2                MR. TENERELLA:            Yeah.

 3                MR. ROMERO:          Like fishing        and

4    boating and      whatever?

 5                MR. TENERELLA:            Yeah.     With

 6   some assumption that Phil Fried                 is not

 7   continuing     for one legal reason or

 8   another to own the site I suspect                   that

 9   would make an excellent use of the site,

10   and the kind of remediations we're                   doing

11   will allow for that.

12                 MR. C R E S T I :   Aldo Cresti.          I

13   live on Fresh Ponds Road, Number 2 4 .

14                 You mentioned          the   product

15   industrial c l e a n e r s , like floor         cleaners

16   and kinds of d e t e r g e n t s .     Those    things

17   are all water soluble.               Now, these were

18   manufactured      less than thirteen years ago

19   on the site.

20                 MR. PORUCZNIK:           Up to '87.

21                 MR. C R E S T I :   It has     been

22   raining    since then, so none of the                stuff

23   has been washed        away.      Is there a

24   possibility      that so much of the stuff has

25   been left behind         in the      surface?


      SCHULMAN,•CICCARELLI             & WIEGMANN
                                                     500162

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 163 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            37
 1               MR. PORUCZNIK:        That was only

 2   some of the materials.         He also    produced

 3   algicides, also produced        adhesives      and

 4   other materials too.        A l s o , there was a

 5   lot of drums that were found on site,

 6   twelve hundred that were removed             during

 7   the removal action that contained a

 8   tremendous array of c h e m i c a l s .   There was

 9   a lot of different chemicals and             they

10   weren't all water soluble, believe m e .

11                MR. CRESTI:      Then you    mentioned

12   volatile organic compounds.           Typically,

13   if they're volatile, they'd be going                away

14   in the air.      You still find      them?

15                MR. PORUCZNIK:       Y e s , especially

16   when you go down deeper        into the      soil.

17   You're correct when you mention that a

18   lot of the volatiles have dissipated                from

19   the surface soil, maybe the top two,

20   three, four feet, but when you go deeper

21   it's still found there in         significant

22   amounts.

23                MR. CRESTI:      What I'm    driving

24   at is, as the p.ond exists now I see

25   people   fishing.     Evidently    the fish must


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI        & WIEGMANN
                                                  900163

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 164 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      38
 1   be living.     Also, the Raritan River, do

 2   we find traces of the chemical all the

 3   way down to those sites?

4                 MR. PORUCZNIK:    I think what

 5   you were referring to a second ago, this

 6   pond over here, remember that this pond

 7   is really upstream.        In other words, the

 8   pond flows in this direction, and all the

 9   drainage flows really away from the pond.

10   So you really don't have any significant

11   cross contaminations coming from here to

12   here.   There is a little bit flowing in

13   this direction here, but, really, this is

14   sort of like an isolated system almost

15   over here to a certain extent.

16                MR. CRESTI:     If you go down to

17   Milltown, this water drains into

18   Milltown.

19                MR. PORUCZNIK:     You mean down

20   here?

21                MR. CRESTI:     Right.

22                Again, people do fish.     Any

23   problem?

24                MR. PO*RUCZNIK:    Correct me if

25   I'm wrong, Mark, but based upon the


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN       500164

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 165 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  39
1    information that we found in the remedial

2    investigation, there's only very, very

3    small quantities of contamination,

4    especially organics, down here.     In the

 5   future, if we do not do anything, the

 6   groundwater -- do you remember the plume

7    that was shown up on the screen before,

 8   the blue plume?

 9             The blue plume is actually

10   groundwater contamination and it's the

11   extent of something like this.    That will

12   continue to drive in this direction and

13   the groundwater plume and groundwater

14   table are being pinched out and upwards.

15   It will eventually enter the surface

16   water, but at this point it hasn't yet in

17   significant quantities whatsoever.     I

18   don't know when, but maybe several years

19   from now, maybe ten years from now

20   contamination will reach there in very

21   significant quantities.

22             Am I correct?

23             MR. MOESE:    Yes.

24             MR. CRESTI:     Also, how about

25   the arsenic compounds which you

      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN      9001^5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 166 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    40
 1   mentioned?     Arsenic is a metal, it's not

 2   going to go away.     When you take it away

 3   where does it go?     Where do we put it?

 4                MR. PORUCZNIK:   In this

 5   particular case what we decided to do is

 6   to remove it off site and stabilize it.

 7   That's a process by which, in this case,

 8   arsenic is sort of put in some kind of a

 9   matrix and it's unable to move, it's

10   unable to be mobile, for that matter, or

11   to be in contact with anybody.      So it's

12   taken off site, also, and will be

13   disposed of appropriately so that it

14   can't be of any danger to anyone.

15                MR. TENERELLA:   There are

16   approved landfills, industrial landfills,

17   that will accept that kind of material

18   once it's stabilized, which is just to

19   fix the arsenic in place.      It's not like

20   we take it in someone else's backyard and

21   dump it there.

22                MR. CRESTI:   The arsenic

23   concentration is stable, it's not

24   changing over several years?      It's still

25   around the same concentration as it was


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN    *M*46^

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 167 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     41
 1   originally?

 2               MR. MARSENISON:     Right.   The
 3   arsenic will never go away.       The

 4   stabilization is really like a concrete

 5   block.   The soil is mixed in, and it

 6   looks like a concrete block, and then

 7   we'll dispose of it in that landfill and

 8   it just stays there.

 9               MR. CRESTI:    Once that gets

10   removed the earth around it is going to

11   be clean?

12               MR. MARSENISON:     Right.

13               MR. GIRINZO:     Anthony Girinzo,

14   12 Fresh Ponds Road.

15               My well is a hundred and

16   fifteen feet deep.     We found all this

17   stuff in my well.    I had originally

18   sampled and gave it to Mr. Sabo in

19   Middlesex County when all this started.

20               MR. PORUCZNIK:     That's back in

21   1983 you mean?

22               MR, GIRINZO:     Yeah, even before

23   that,

24               I can't understand why if it

25   got back into my well, which I live


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              900167

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 168 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                42
 1   across the street from Fried, a hundred

 2   and fifteen feet d o w n , why          it couldn't be

 3   in that pond because that pond                 is spring

 4   fed and all the water tables down there.

 5   It's got to b e , I would         imagine, getting

 6   into that pond because           if that pond

 7   cleared up, then my well should                 be

 8   cleared    up, no?

 9                 MR. TENERELLA:           Two comments on

10   that:     First, on a risk b a s i s , Mark, I

11   don't remember what the risk analysis was

12   on the s a m p l e s .

13                 MR. M O E S E :   Very    low.

14                 MR. TENERELLA:           The   samples

15   were very      low.

16                 MR. M O E S E :   Very    low.

17                 MR. PORUCZNIK:           There is some

18   contamination, but it's very, very small.

19                 MR. TENERELLA:           Unlike what you

20   would    drink.

21                  There's a difference            between

22   contaminants       in terms of edible fish and

23   drinking water.          I'm    not sure we

24   considered      the pond's water drinkable               for

25   that reason.


       SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI           & WIEGMANN
                                                          900166

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 169 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                   43
      1             Also, we were surprised because
      2   of the kinds of problems we saw in homes
      3   along Fresh Ponds like yours.    There was

      4   an assumption because of the activity at

      5   Fried that the groundwater flow and the

      6   general flow in this whole area is that

      7   way, from, say, Fried toward your house,

      8   that must have been the cause.     So our

      9   initial remedial investigations were

     10   directed to an assumption of groundwater

     11   flow towards Fresh Ponds Road.

     12             The initial    investigations

     13   proved us wrong and that in the general

     14   area the flow is that way, but

     15   specifically around Fried the flow is up

     16   away from you.

     17             MR. GIRINZO:     Yeah, but that

     18   has nothing to do with the underground
10
     19   waters.

     20             MR. MOESE:     Bedrock also.

     21             MR. PORUCZNIK:     Let me show you

     22   what Charlie just said.

     23             Again, originally the

     24   groundwater, based upon all the

     25   information we have from the USGS and


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                               900169

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 170 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                      44
10    1   also, I think, some local studies, I

      2   think    it was Leggett and S h e a r s , I forget

      3   the name, they        indicate that       groundwater

      4   flows in this direction, however, we

      5   found    in the small area of the            Fried

      6   Industries site that the groundwater                   does

      7   not flow in this d i r e c t i o n , it flows in

      8   this direction.          Roughly     paralleling

      9   almost the surface water drainage                 flows

     10   in this direction.

     11                 The bedrock       aquifer     also is a

     12   few degrees off, but they're              basically

     13   both flowing        in this d i r e c t i o n , away   from

     14   these h o m e s .

     15                 MR, GIRINZO:         Now, is there a

     16   chance    in the future of our           wells

     17   clearing up after we get this               arsenic

     18   out?

     19                 MR. TENERELLA:          Not from      Fried

     20   Industries.

     21                 Just     like in doing       our

     22   investigations, as we disprove even our

     23   assumptions that your problems               were

     24   caused    by Fried      Industries, the          cleanup

     25   at Fried     Industries       isn't going to solve


            SCHULMAN,CICCARELLI            & WIEGMANN
                                                           900170

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 171 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                            45
10    1   your problems now because, obviously,

      2   there's a source of contamination that's

      3   hitting your wells that's not Fried.

     4                MR. GIRINZO:     It's not?

      5               When I originally took my well

      6   for testing I had it done by New Jersey

     7    Dairy Labs.    They told me what was in the

      8   water before I knew what Fried was

      9   making, and it was the same thing, it was

     10   industrial detergent, all purpose

     11   cleaners, stuff like that.         That's what

     12   New Jersey Labs told me.       I didn't even

     13   know what Fried was making.         I knew what

     14   he was making before I went down to talk

     15   to him.

     16               MR, PORUCZNIK:     May I ask you a

     17   question?     Just out of curiosity, have

     18   you had your well sampled recently?

     19               MR. GIRINZO:     No.

     20               MR. PORUCZNIK:     The reason I'm

     21   asking that, we have some data from local

     22   sources that does indicate that there's

     23   far less contamination and a lot of wells

     24   that were contaminated don't even have

     25   any contamination anymore.         I would


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN         900171

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 172 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       46
10    1   suggest maybe contacting maybe the
      2   Township or the Middlesex County
      3   Department of Environmental Health maybe
      4   to look into that a little further.       That
      5   would be one possible alternative.

      6             MR. TENERELLA:    Some of the
      7   contaminants that were found are

      8   relatively common in industrial use or

      9   industrial debris or things like that.

     10   It could be coming from another kind of

     11   an operation.    You still get the same

     12   kind of chemicals.

     13             Very clearly, and, again, it

     14   took us a while to figure that out

     15   because the assumptions we made are the

     16   assumptions you're making. Fried

     17   Industries is not the source of

     18   contamination.

     19             MR. GIRINZO:     You're talking

     20   groundwater.     Now, you can stand in my

     21   front yard and you can tell that

     22   groundwater is not going to flow to my

     23   house because Fried is not directly above

     24   me,   I can look at it and --

     25             MR. PORUCZNIK:     Isn't your well


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                             500172

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 173 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         47
10    1   a hundred and twelve feet deep?

      2               MR. GIRINZO:     A hundred and

      3   fifteen.

      4               MR. PORUCZNIK:     I guess what

      5   you were referring to before is surface

      6   grade?

      7               MR. GIRINZO:     I'm not talking

      8   about surface.

      9               MR, PORUCZNIK:     What I'm

     10   saying, just because your house appears

     11   to be higher up than Fried, that doesn't

     12   mean that you couldn't have it flow.

     13   That's not the case.

     14               MR. GIRINZO:     I'm saying it

     15   could.     I'm saying once you get down a

     16   hundred and fifteen feet, like at the

     17   bottom of my well, my water table that

     18   I'm on and the water tables that he might

     19   be contaminating could be all level, on

     20   the same table.

     21                I'm not educated in this field,

     22   but I'm using just a little bit of common

     23   sense.     If he's dumping it, it's washing

     24   through and it's going down a hundred

     25   feet or washing into a table that may be


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                900173

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 174 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   48
10    1   streaming   into m i n e , I'm    going to get it.

      2               MR. TENERELLA:         That is what we

      3   analyzed.     In fact, Mark, do you          remember

      4   the exact well      locations and the kind of

      5   readings you were getting          to show the

      6   trend?

      7               MR. M O E S E :    We had   installed

      8   right h e r e , right at the corner, a

      9   shallow well and a deep w e l l .        The    deep

     10   well was drilled       at approximately        fifty

     11   to fifty-five      feet beneath the bedrock.

     12   Same thing with the well h e r e , which            is

     13   5D.    We have another one back h e r e , which

     14   is 14D; and another one over h e r e , which

     15   is lOD.     Well   ID has low concentrations,

     16   some benzene,       5D is clean.        Nothing.

     17                MR. GIRINZO:        How deep is that

     18   one?

     19                MR. M O E S E :   Same as the     other
11
     20   one.

     21                MR. GIRINZO:        Fifty-five     feet?

     22                MR. M O E S E :   Fifty-five    feet

     23   beneath the bedrock.

     24                So you're talking, probably, at

     25   that point along Fresh Ponds Road, I


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI          & WIEGMANN
                                                       900174

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 175 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                              49
11    1   think we had twenty            feet of sand       before

      2   we hit the clay, so you're               looking      at

      3   seventy-five to eighty-feet               deep.

      4                A VOICE:          Isn't it possible

      5   that if you drill ten feet more that you

      6   could have broke through the               so-called

      7   bedrock   into another groundwater                aquifer?

      8                MR. M O E S E :     Not with       the

      9   geology that you have on the site.

     10                This w e l l , 14D, which           is behind

     11   the building, is highly            contaminated.

     12   lOS or lOD, I should            say, has low          levels

     13   of   contamination.

     14                Again, 5 here has nothing.                        So

     15   it's basically, you know, based on the

     16   well water elevations of these w e l l s , it

     17   indicates the bedrock does flow -- it's a

     18   couple degrees off from the               surficial

     19   aquifer, but almost north, northeast.

     20                MR. GIRINZO:          You    can

     21   understand    where we're coming from.                     I

     22   had my well tested.             They told me there

     23   is an industrial detergent               in your water.

     24   I went down to .talk to Mr. Fried.                     He

     25   hands me a bottle of it.             "Here, try one


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI            & WIEGMANN
                                                            500175

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 176 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        50
11    1   of my p r o d u c t s . "   I said,   "I don't need

      2   it, I've      been drinking      it."

      3                  MR. PORUCZNIK:         I'd   just    like

      4   to mention one other           thing.

      5                   I know, again, I had some data

      6   given to me from Middlesex              County

      7   Department of Environmental             Health.

      8   Although      it may not involve         your

      9   particular health, it does indicate                    that

     10   in that general area that the homes                    that

     11   were contaminated           at one time do seem to

     12   have,    if any contamination           remaining,

     13   very    low levels.

     14                   So I was going to say           that

     15   maybe you should, you know,              contact

     16   Middlesex       County Department        of Health       and

     17   see -- I don't know what the scenario                    is

     18   to maybe have your well retested,                  if you

     19   have to do it yourself           or if they do it

     20   as part of a testing routine or procedure

     21   every     few y e a r s , but check with them and

     22   see.      I think the first step would be to

     23   retest the well first and see whether or

     24   not you still have           contamination.

     25                   MR. McGOWAN:      Dan McGowan.


            SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI          & WIEGMANN
                                                             500176

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 177 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        51
11    1                You told this gentleman that

      2   Fried Industries is not the reason why

      3   his well was polluted with the detergent.

      4   Now, if Fried Industries wasn't, then who

      5   was?   Where did he get these liquid

      6   detergents, like anti-freeze and the

      7   other chemicals you talked about?

      8                MR. PORUCZNIK:    First of all, I

      9   don't think it was detergent.       I think

     10   the contamination that was present was

     11   ethyl benzene, benzene.       Going back to

     12   1983 I think we're talking about

     13   chloroform in those five homes.

     14                Again, I know what you're

     15   trying to say.     If it's not Fried, then

     16   who is it?

     17                We're not sure, to be honest

     18   with you, right now because we have been

     19   primarily involved with Fried and Fried

     20   is a problem onto itself, however, there

     21   are other possibilities.       I'd like to

     22   name one.     It's just a possibility but

     23   it's been cleaned up.     That particular

     24   facility is the Middlesex County

     25   Department of Parks.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN         500177

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 178 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       52
11    1             It's a possibility.    We do

      2   understand that going back several years

      3   ago that there was a problem with their

      4   storage tanks and it's been fixed since

      5   then, but it is possible that at one time

      6   they could have been the source.    Again,

      7   I emphasize could have been the source.

      8   We don't know for sure because we're

      9   involved with Fried right now.     It's

     10   possible maybe it would be a good idea to

     11   talk to New Jersey Department of

     12   Environmental Protection & Energy about

     13   that when you get a chance.

     14             MR. McGOWAN:   You also talked

     15   about if you were going to clear the

     16   groundwater system; and if you were not,

     17   the contaminants were going to continue

     18   into the Milltown Reservoir where they

     19   fish and all that.

     20             What happens in five years

     21   when, say, that contamination goes into

     22   the Milltown Reservoir and where they

     23   drink and where they fish and what

     24   happens if the problem becomes worse

     25   instead of taking care of it now, instead


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              500178

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 179 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        53
11   1    of wasting another five years on

     2    research?

      3               MR. PORUCZNIK:     I'm not sure

      4   what you mean by "the Milltown

      5   Reservoir."

      6               MR. TENERELLA:    You mean if
12
      7   once we do our remedy if there's still a

      8   problem?

      9               MR. McGOWAN:     You said we might

     10   not clean it up.     You said if we clean

     11   this up.

     12               MR. TENERELLA:     I think what

     13   Tom was suggesting to you is that in our

     14   choices one of the choices we have is not

     15   to take an action.     And the problems that

     16   we have are potential problems for the

     17   future as the groundwater moves,

     18   therefore, we will take an action here as

     19   opposed to not taking an action.

     20               MR. McGOWAN:     Then you're still

     21   wasting another five or six years.

     22               MR. TENERELLA:     No, we are

     23   deciding now to take that action because

     24   of that potential.     In addition to that

     25   we have something called a five-year


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                               500179

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 180 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                   54
12    1   review at all our Superfund         sites once we

      2   take our action.      If something        is not

      3   working quite well,       if we're not      getting

      4   our chemicals out or there's still               risk,

      5   we'll go back and review the site again.

      6                MR. RICCOBONO:     Tony      Riccobono.

      7                How soon do you think you            could

      8   start remediation     at the   site?

      9                MR. TENERELLA:     What's      been

     10   happening    lately   is the design       turn

     11   around, I'd    say, is about two to

     12   two-and-a-half    years.     In terms of

     13   getting   all the plans and specs and

     14   everything    in order    in the design.          Fried

     15   Industries right now, because Phil               Fried

     16   is not a major company, we don't have any

     17   major costs    involved    to establish      their

     18   liability    for cleanup.

     19                MR. RICCOBONO:     You don't         have

     20   the litigation problems that you would

     21   normally.

     22                MR. TENERELLA:     Exactly.          And

     23   that's pretty    clear with us right now.

     24                So we'll go ahead      in funding          it

     25   under the Superfund       program   for    redesign


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI       & WIEGMANN
                                                       900180

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 181 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     55
1    and then remediation.     Because of the

2    scale of remedy here it will probably go

 3   to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for

 4   bidding for the design.      We're going to

 5   have to wait.     We're at the end of our

 6   fiscal year right now.       We're coming to

 7   our decision on Fried with the record of

 8   decision sometime in the fall, I guess,

 9   now.    The next concern would be

10   appropriations.

11               MR. RICCOBONO:     I was just

12   going to say, how is your funding at this

13   point in time?     That's another question.

14               MR. TENERELLA:     I'm not sure

15   what's going to happen in this next

16   fiscal year on funding.       In past years we

17   have not had a problem funding our

18   designs or our actions immediately when

19   we needed to.     We're not sure yet if

20   we're going to have a problem this coming

21   year.    So that's a little bit of an open

22   question right now.

23               MR. RICCOBONO:     How would this

24   site fit in with your other sites, the

25   fact that it can be remediated, you can


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN S Q Q ] 9 ]

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 182 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                  56
12    1   get a good remediation, you can stop               it

      2   from reaching the streams and            whatever?

      3   How would    it affect   it that    way?

      4                MR. TENERELLA:    Over the years

      5   it's taken a long time on a number of

      6   Superfund    sites to do the   remedial

      7   investigations to determine the cleanups.

      8   A lot of those sites, including            Fried,

      9   have now gone through that pipeline              and

     10   are backing up into design         and

     11   construction    and we're seeing a problem

     12   nationally    in terms of the amounts of

     13   money   available for design       and

     14   construction    for the first t i m e .      In past

     15   years there was plenty of money            in those

     16   pots available because a lot of            sites

     17   weren't hitting that area yet.             Now all

     18   of a sudden there's a glut of            sites

     19   hitting that area.

     20                MR. RICCOBONO:     Is there any

     21   possibility    of local officials or state

     22   officials to try and move things            along?

     23   I m e a n , we have an   environmental

     24   vice-president    now.

     25                MR. TENERELLA:     We're      hoping


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI      & WIEGMANN
                                                      9001S2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 183 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              57
    12   1    that we won't come to a point where we
r        2    have to make those kind of choices among

         3    sites in terms of on a risk basis which

         4    one is going to go into design first.

         5    Right now we're sort of at a wait-and-see

          6   attitude in the agency.       We never had a

         7    problem like this before.       We're just a

          8   little hesitant to promise that

          9   everything is going to be fine this year.

         10   We're hoping that it will pass through

         11   and we'll have a sufficient amount of

         12   money.    One advantage for Fried right now

         13   is we don't have litigation issues.       That

         14   will simplify the timing problem of

         15   getting it into design with the Corps.

         16   We'll at least get it into that process a

         17   little quickly.

         18                MR. RICCOBONO:    The nine

         19   hundred cubic yards, is that a fixed

         20   figure, is it an arbitrary figure, would
    13
         21   you go beyond that if necessary?

         22                MR. TENERELLA:    We'll probably

         23   lock into a tighter figure during design,

         24   but it won't vary too much from that

         25   figure.


               SCHULMAN,    CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                    900193

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 184 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                              58
13    1                MR. RICCOBONO:     The ponds and

      2   the fish, you said fish were tested, how

      3   did they show up?

      4                MR. MOESE:     No, we didn't do

      5   tests on the fish.        What we did was, we

      6   assumed bio-accumulation of the fish of

      7   the contaminants in the water and the

      8   sediments.     The chemicals that were found

      9   in the sediments were both naturally

     10   occurring metals and what-have-you and it

     11   didn't pose a problem to a person eating

     12   fish from the pond.

     13                MR. RICCOBONO:     You referred to

     14   beryllium at the bottom of the ponds, in

     15   the sediment of the ponds.        Did you do

     16   anything for the removal of that or not?

     17                MR. PORUCZNIK:     No.   I believe

     18   that the beryllium was a principal

     19   contaminant, but at the same time didn't

     20   present any risk that required remedy.

     21                MR. TENERELLA:     Our risk

     22   figures are pretty conservative.           I mean,

     23   for cancer risk, for example, it's one in

     24   a million, around that range, when we

     25   would consider taking an action.           And we


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W I E G M A N N
                                                     900194

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 185 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        59
13    1   have something called a hazard index for

      2   non-cancer risks and they're pretty low.

      3   That allows for those kinds of

      4   assumptions where the data might be a

      5   little imprecise to make sure if we're

      6   going to error at all, we're erroring to

      7   the side of public health or

      8   environmental protection as opposed to

      9   making a decision that's not protective

     10   enough.   If we tend to be guilty of

     11   anything in our risk management

     12   decisions, it's to be more careful than

     13   less careful in case there's some

     14   variance in the data.

     15              MR. RICCOBONO:     With your air

     16   sampling did you see any problems off

     17   site?

     18              MR. MOESE:   No.

     19              MR. RICCOBONO:     None at all?

     20              MR. MOESE:   Those were

     21   collected prior to the drums being

     22   removed from the site in 1989 and '88.

     23              MR. RICCOBONO:     Your

     24   disturbance of the site, you'll take all

     25   the proper precautions?


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                               5001S5

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 186 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                         60
13    1                MR. M O E S E :     We have to during

      2   our work

      3                MR. RICCOBONO:            Thank   you.

      4                MR. H O R B A T :    Sandy H o r b a t .     I

      5   teach environmental            science.     I'm

      6   Chairman of the Environmental               Commission

      7   in East    Brunswick.

      8                When you talk about            removing

      9   the cubic yardage at the bottom,                  the

     10   excavation       is twenty-seven hundred            cubic

     11   yards.     I'm   assuming        that's also      soil,

     12   but it's partly       groundwater.

     13   Twenty-seven hundred             cubic yards is a

     14   measurement       for solids       usually.

     15                MR. M O E S E :      Soil.

     16                M S . HORBAT:         But in this case

     17   that's one way to treat the               groundwater,

     18   by removing that        soil.

     19                MR. TENERELLA:            We're     removing

     20   the soil as a principal               source of

     21   groundwater.        Sometimes         it's easier to

     22   pump harder and get the groundwater                     and

     23   other times it's easier to take the soil

     24   out, it's more effective to treat.                      In

     25   our discussions with the New Jersey                     DEPE


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI             &   WIEGMANN
                                                            500166

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 187 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                      61
13    1   we came to a determination that in this

      2   case soil removal is the way to go for

      3   the parts of the VOCs and it will

      4   increase the efficiency and decrease the

      5   time available to do the pump and treat

      6   system in the groundwater after it.

      7              We didn't want to mislead you

      8   that it was a risk basis, unlike the

      9   arsenic.   The arsenic removal of soils is

     10   a risk basis.   We want to get those

     11   portions of soils out because of levels.

     12   In the VOC removal it's to effectuate the

     13   cleanup of the groundwater.    It doesn't

     14   mean if someone is out there touching the

     15   ground in that area where there's VOCs or

     16   something there's a problem.

     17              MR. HORBAT:   As you remove this

     18   stuff and I guess in most cases you're

     19   talking about taking it off site, it's

     20   going to remain off site, do you have any

     21   obligation to replace that amount of

     22   ground that you're removing?

     23              MR. TENERELLA:   It depends on

     24   the site, whether we bring in clean fill,

     25   whether that's needed or whether we just


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              500197

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 188 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     62
13    1   redevelop topography            that's there.

      2   Basically, reconfigure the site a little

      3   bit.

      4               It depends on the site.

      5               MR. M O E S E :     We included        fill.

      6               MR. H O R B A T :     The    contaminants

      7   that you talk about are also the

      8   contaminants that we hear mentioned                  in
14
      9   wells and so on and so forth.               What's the

     10   general density      of those       contaminants?

     11   Would you say they're greater than water

     12   or less than w a t e r ; and       if you drop       these

     13   contaminants     into w a t e r , will they tend

     14   to sink to the bottom or will               they

     15   continue to float on the top?

     16               Did you make          any

     17   generalization?        Would some of them be

     18   more dense, some of them            less dense?

     19               MR. RICCOBONO:              Most of them

     20   are more dense.

     21               MR. H O R B A T :     More    dense?

     22               MR. RICCOBONO:              Right.

     23               MR. H O R B A T :     You have to

     24   realize that there's a lot of people                  that

     25   hear you saying that Fried               is not the


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI            & WIEGMANN          -H-
                                                           500198

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 189 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          63
14    1   cause of this contamination in wells.       I

      2   don't know what the average depths of

      3   these wells are.     I mean, I hear one man

      4   saying a hundred and fifteen.     Do you

      5   know?

      6             A VOICE:     Two hundred.

      7             MR. HORBAT:     I don't know if

      8   anybody else has any data on wells, maybe

      9   you guys know, but to me there's a lot of

     10   people that may just never believe you

     11   unless you go down a hundred and fifteen

     12   feet or two hundred feet and check down

     13   there.

     14             I personally believe that maybe

     15   you're missing something.     You can sit

     16   here and say that the data that you

     17   collected does not indicate that Fried is

     18   contaminating, but you're also talking to

     19   me mainly about surface water, surface

     20   water that has become groundwater and

     21   maybe has gone down only to the eighty

     22   feet that you tested.

     23             You know, for you guys to sit

     24   there with fair assurances that Fried is

     25   not the contaminant site of these wells.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                500169

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 190 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        64
14    1   I just don't see how you can because                    you

      2   only have one well that's close to the

      3   road and it's only eighty-five                 feet deep

      4   according     to what you just          said.

      5                 MR. MARSENISON:           You have to

      6   remember, though, that even though                    they

      7   may be lighter or heavier than water, the

      8   groundwater gradient              is still away       from

      9   those w e l l s .   There's no way           those

     10   contaminants can move              upstream.

     11                 MR. H O R B A T :     There may    be

     12   breaks in the bedrock that link                 one

     13   aquifer    into another           aquifer.

     14                 MR. MARSENISON:           The bedrock          is

     15   all one aquifer until you              --

     16                 MR. GIRINZO:           But it's    all

     17   sugar sand out there.

     18                 MR. MARSENISON:           It's all

     19   fractured     bedrock.        It's    all

     20   interconnected.          There's no way you can

     21   move up gradient, it has to go down.

     22                 MR. GIRINZO:           Once you get down

     23   a hundred     and fifty       feet there is no up

     24   and down, right?

     25                 MR. MARSENISON:           Absolutely


            SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI             & WIEGMANN
                                                            900190

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 191 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        65
14    1   there is.   There always is.      If you think

     2    about a stream, if the stream is flowing

      3   in one direction, no matter how far down

     4    you go in the stream it's still flowing

     5    in the same direction.

      6               MR. GIRINZO:     I'm not

      7   criticizing what you're saying or saying

      8   you're wrong, but what's to say that a

      9   hundred and fifteen or two hundred feet

     10   down that stream is not running in the

     11   opposite direction across our wells?

     12   It's kind of obvious we all came up with

     13   the same results, the same contaminants.

     14               MR. TENERELLA:     If this area --

     15   for example, there are two aquifer

     16   systems in the area.       If this area had

     17   three aquifer systems, then your analogy

     18   would be correct, that we sampled the top

     19   one and the middle one and you're talking

     20   about a lower one which is going this

     21   way, where the middle one is going the

     22   opposite way.

     23               That^s possible if you had

     24   three, but in this case we only had two

     25   aquifer systems.    Once you hit a defined


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN       5QA|9|

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 192 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          66
14    1   aquifer the flow is stable in a

      2   direction.     Once you have a stream the

      3   water flows in a given direction.        Same

     4    thing in aquifer segments in discreet

      5   aquifers.     So here we know we have two.

      6                There's another site that I

      7   work on that I have four.     So I have four

      8   zones in the aquifer all operating

      9   different ways.     Very confusing and we

     10   see that kind of situation happening, but

     11   that's very unique.     Here it's two.

     12   That's how we're sure about the aquifer

     13   and the flow of that in the direction of

     14   that lower aquifer here going away from

     15   the site.

     16                When we first did our remedial

     17   investigations we made the same

     18   assumptions you did, that the general

     19   flow in the whole area is toward Fresh

     20   Ponds Road.     You got contaminated wells

     21   and we got Fried Industries, A plus B,

     22   sitting there.     Not a problem.   When we

     23   started looking at the area -- that's

     24   what took so long.     It was almost three

     25   million dollars, which is quite a lot of


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN 5 0 0 1 9 2

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 193 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         67
14    1   money for a remedial investigation for a

     2    site of this scale and size.      One of the
15
      3   reasons was, groundwater was assumed to

     4    flow one way and we provided that it was

      5   going the other way.     That's why we're

      6   very confident with it now, but it took

      7   us some time to make sure we were

      8   comfortable with that.      We didn't come to

      9   that decision very lightly because it

     10   took us a number of years.

     11              MR. RICCOBONO:     Tony Riccobono

     12   again, town councilman.

     13              I think what I'm hearing here,

     14   though, is you came down to solve our

     15   problem, you found the Fried site, you're

     16   fixing that.   That's nice, but what about

     17   my problem?

     18              I think that's what I'm

     19   hearing.   Nobody is using those wells,

     20   thank God, but what about my problem?

     21              MR. GIRINZO:     At our own

     22   expense
     23              MR. JAMESON:     Marcelias Jameson

     24   from New Jersey Department of

     25   Environmental Protection.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN SOOl 9 3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 194 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          68
15   1                When we were taking a look at

     2    the problem with Fried we found no

      3   connection between the home across the

     4    street and the Fried property.     As we

      5   walked along the street we saw there was

      6   another building besides there, that's

      7   the Department of Parks building.      County

      8   Parks Department.    And we were noticing

      9   that there was fairly new pavement and it

     10   looked like some work had been done

     11   there.   We started checking around.       We

     12   come to find out they have underground

     13   storage tanks.    It's gasoline.   So we did

     14   some additional checking with their

     15   underground storage tank program, which

     16   is called BUST.     We come to find out in

     17   '90 there was a recorded leak.     That was

     18   recorded by the Department of Parks.

     19               The Department then went out

     20   and did a leak test on the tanks, found

     21   that the tanks were not sufficiently

     22   sealed, pulled those out, and at the time

     23   they were pulling them out a leak did

     24   occur.   About four thousand gallons of

     25   gasoline.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              500194

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 195 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                          69
15   1              That may not be your current

     2    problem, but what we're saying is, I

     3    don't know how long those tanks were

     4    there.   I don't know how long those tanks

     5    were underground.       So it's a possibility

      6   that they leaked sometime in the past.

     7    But the situation now is that the

      8   underground storage tank program is

      9   handling it.    As a matter of fact, there

     10   is a plan put together by the County of

     11   Middlesex Department of Parks to

     12   remediate that problem.

     13                Now, if you say you're finding

     14   gasoline-type products in your wells --

     15                A VOICE:    Industrial detergent.

     16                MR. JAMESON:     -- I can't

     17   answer that, but what I can say is, that

     18   is one additional situation that could be

     19   occurring.     Now, there may be others.

     20                MR. RICCOBONO:    It could be

     21   occurring, but he'd like to find out

     22   where it came from in the first place.          I

     23   think he'd like to see that so he can

     24   feel comfortabl.e and I think he has the

     25   right to do that.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                 500195

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 196 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        70
15    1                     MR. JAMESON:     What we're       trying

      2   to do is give as much information                  as

      3   possible.

      4                     MR. RICCOBONO:     We're not going

      5   to stop at Fried.          We found that it's not

      6   Fried, let's see what's happening                  next.

      7                     MR. JAMESON:     The    health

      8   department         is probably your next option,

      9   and you might want to get your               wells

     10   checked     again.      Also, I'll       give you the

     11   number and name and you can contact                     the

     12   underground         storage tank    program.

     13                     MR. GIRINZO:     We received a

     14   letter last week from the County.                   They

     15   want to come and do tests on the wells in

     16   our y a r d s .     Is that you?

     17                     MR. JAMESON:     No, we're       with

     18   the state.          The health department          has

     19   their own.

     20                     MR. McGOWAN:     You talked       about

     21   how you disagree with this man's

     22   statement that it could be from               Fried's

     23   chemicals that's contaminating w e l l s , but

     24   then you're refusing to even go check                     it.

     25                     The other man's over there             is


            SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI           & WIEGMANN
                                                         900196

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 197 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           71
15    1   two hundred feet deep.        Why not dig a

      2   well two hundred feet deep or how deep

      3   the deepest well is across the street and

      4   then decide for yourselves and then you

      5   can tell these homes, "Okay, Fried

      6   Industries is not contaminating your

      7   wells, it's some other place"?        You go to

      8   the County Parks and check out the

      9   underground tanks then.

     10                It sounds like you spent so

     11   much money now, why not spend a little

     12   more to re-assure what these people were

     13   drinking before is not from Fried and not

     14   the chemicals that he was dumping?

     15                MR. TENERELLA:     We've done the

     16   tests we felt that are necessary.          I

     17   don't know if anybody here can give you a

     18   better analogy and explain to you why we

     19   think technically or why we're sure of

     20   ourselves.     We've done enough tests on

     21   the groundwater to be very comfortable --

     22                MR. McGOWAN:     Why not be

     23   positive?

     24                MR. TENERELLA:     As positive as

     25   one could be scientifically in terms of


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                  900197

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 198 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         72
16    1   the data we've taken.

     2                 I don't know how to answer your

     3    question any more than that.     There is

     4    nothing to point for us in terms of the

     5    scientific evidence that we've collected,

     6    and that's after two remedial

      7   investigation cycles because of our own

      8   questions along that line to say that

      9   there's a problem in the wells.       We tried

     10   to explain this aquifer system to you in

     11   terms of how groundwater flows and why

     12   you can make those scientific judgments.

     13   I'm not sure how else to convince you.

     14   We can't just go out and spend money

     15   because someone says, "I don't like what

     16   I heard scientifically, spend some more

     17   money."

     18                I don't understand the

     19   question, I guess, or the problem you're

     20   having with it.

     21                MR. McGOWAN:   These people are

     22   not sure whether their wells are being

     23   contaminated by Fried or not.      You say

     24   it's not, but then, again, your wells are

     25   only eighty-five feet deep; whereas.


           SCHULMAN,    CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                500198

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 199 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       73
16    1   their wells are two hundred, a hundred
      2   and fifteen feet.

      3             Why not go to that point and
      4   re-assure, spend a little more of the
      5   taxpayer's money, and then it would

      6   satisfy the homeowners.    It also would

      7   save you money in the long run.    If

      8   private testing is done and it was from

      9   Fried, then it might save you a lot more

     10   money in the end.

     11             MR. PORUCZNIK:    I'd like to

     12   mention one thing.   Maybe mention Dick

     13   Spillatori,   He sent me some data about a

     14   year or two -- about a year ago.

     15   Apparently, the County has tested a lot

     16   of the wells in this general vicinity and

     17   there may not even be a problem now.

     18             Maybe, Dick, do you mind if I

     19   refer that to you to maybe say a

     20   statement on that?

     21             MR. SPILLATORI:    Right now we

     22   haven't tested in that area at least for

     23   a year.   Anyone that would be interested

     24   in having their wells tested we'd be more

     25   than happy to send someone out to do the


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN        5Q0199

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 200 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                     74
 1   testing.

 2               What we found on several

 3   occasions is that a lot of times the

 4   cause of some of the contamination

 5   problems could be one septic system and

 6   what could have been dumped into it in

 7   terms of a cleaner.    Sometimes they have

 8   alter organics or volatile organics in

 9   those type cleaning agents which could

10   contribute to the problem.      I say could

11   because anything could contribute to a

12   problem.

13               MR. PORUCZNIK:    What I had in

14   mind, though, remember you sent me a

15   package on wells based on data in '90,

16   '91, '92?    I was trying to compare those

17   similar wells to the data we took in '89.

18               MR. SPILLATORI:    I don't know

19   the numbers in terms of the

20   concentration.    I could find those

21   figures out.

22               As I mentioned, anyone that has

23   a well that's not in use or used for

24   irrigation, we'd be happy to test it.

25   That's free of charge.       You just have to


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                            900200

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 201 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         75
16    1   call our office.

      2               MR. SCHRAGER:    Larry Schrager,

      3   40 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick.

      4               On the diagram where you showed

      5   the groundwater contamination plume --

      6               MR. PORUCZNIK:    The one that

      7   was blue?

      8               MR. SCHRAGER:    Yeah, the one

      9   with the blob overlying the site.

     10               What was the contaminant?

     11               MR. TENERELLA:    How did we

     12   define the plume by contaminant?

     13               MR. SCHRAGER:    What was the

     14   contaminant that you used to define the

     15   plume?   You have multiple contaminants.

     16               MR. PORUCZNIK:    There was a

     17   number of contaminants that we used to

     18   define the plume, benzene, toluene,

     19   soluene. 111 trichlorethane.

     20               MR. SCHRAGER:    What was the

     21   contaminant that defined the plume that

     22   you drew?

     23               MR. MOESE:   It's not a single

     24   contaminant.     I.t' s based on, basically,

     25   what we found.     Either the upper aquifer


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              500201

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 202 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                 76
16    1   would   intersect the surface water or it,

      2   basically, reduced to almost nothing             at

      3   that point.

      4              MR. SCHRAGER:          At the    leading

      5   edge of the plume then what is the

      6   contaminant?

      7              MR. M O E S E :    I believe it was

      8   most likely vinyl chloride that may             have

      9   already reached      lOS or lOD.       It's a very

     10   fast moving compound          in groundwater.

     11              MR. SCHRAGER:          lOD is a deep

     12   well?

     13              MR. M O E S E :     Yes.

     14               MR. SCHRAGER:         Was the

     15   concentration     higher      in the deep well

     16   than in the surficial          well?

     17               MR. M O E S E :    N o , lOD was

     18   probably   one or two parts per billion,

     19   which   is well below EPA's NCL level.

     20               MR. SCHRAGER:         Ten or two --

     21               MR. M O E S E :    One or two

     22   micrograms per      liter.
17
     23               MR. SCHRAGER:         So either    equal

     24   or twice the st.ate limit for that

     25   contaminant?


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI          & WIEGMANN
                                                      500202

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 203 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                       77
17    1               MR. MOESE:         The    Jersey

      2   groundwater quality           standards      for vinyl

      3   chloride   is point zero eight, the                 federal

     4    is two.    The maximum observed              in the

     5    surficial aquifer       is five hundred            parts

      6   per billion.

     7                MR. SCHRAGER:            So that's six or

      8   seven times the state           limit?

      9               MR. M O E S E :     Right, with        the

     10   quantitation     limit being         five.

     11               MR. SCHRAGER:            Being    five?

     12               MR. M O E S E :     Being five         parts

     13   per billion.

     14               MR. SCHRAGER:            You   mentioned

     15   you were surprised        that you         found

     16   groundwater     flow coming upward toward                  Bog

     17   Brook.     Now, that groundwater             flow is,

     18   presumably, not carrying vinyl                chloride.

     19   Is the vinyl chloride           sinking?

     20                MR. M O E S E :    N o , it would       still

     21   follow the groundwater           flow.

     22                MR. SCHRAGER:           What I'm       trying

     23   to get to is, what is the             vertical

     24   profile of the contaminants and do you

     25   have a breakdown?


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI           & WIEGMANN
                                                             900M3

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 204 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  78
 1               I imagine these reports are

 2   very voluminous and thorough, but of the

 3   different contaminant plumes because to

 4   show us an amalgam of the plumes really

 5   doesn't tell us about what's happening

 6   with the different chemicals and the

 7   chemistry of the area.

 8               This plume is a result,

 9   presumably, of maybe twenty or thirty or

10   more years of disposal on the site and

11   the extent of the plume is, basically,

12   within the site.    Now, of course, that's

13   rebutted by some people in the audience

14   and, certainly, I'm sure it will be

15   something that you look at later on.      But

16   if the plume has remained within the

17   confines of the site, what is the

18   tracking over time of where the plume

19   will be and why do you presume that the

20   plume will travel as far as it is if that

21   plume diagram that you're showing is

22   accurate?     ^

23               It seems either the plume

24   diagram should be much larger or the

25   assumptions about the remedial effort are


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN        500264

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 205 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                       79
17    1   overstated.

     2                MR. MOESE:   I think what's

      3   important to point out here is, what

      4   happens is, as you go north along the

      5   site you no longer have an upper aquifer.

      6   Well, lOD is out in almost the northern

      7   most corner of the site.     There is no

     8    surficial aquifer there.    When we

      9   drilled, we drilled through probably six

     10   feet of sand before we hit clay.      In that

     11   six feet of sand, at the surface of the

     12   clay there may have been a little

     13   moisture in the sand.

     14               MR. SCHRAGER:   When did you hit

     15   bedrock?

     16               MR. MOESE:   I'd have to check

     17   the logs.     I don't remember off the top

     18   of my head how deep bedrock was, but it's

     19   definitely closer than it is over this

     20   portion of the site.

     21               What happens is, bedrock rises

     22   as you get out in this area.     It's

     23   relatively deep here and it's shallow

     24   here.   The upper aquifer thickness at

     25   well 7S from surface to clay is six feet.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMAMK
                                                900265

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 206 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    80
17    1               MR. SCHRAGER:         So   it's

      2   presumable, actually, that there could be

      3   motion along the interface of the

      4   surficial system and the shale below, and

      5   that might explain why some of the people

      6   on the opposite side of Fresh             Ponds

      7   Road   --

      8               MR. M O E S E :    We have    bedrock

      9   wells on the site.

     10               MR. SCHRAGER:         Well,    you

     11   described   the contour, the upper             surface

     12   of the bedrock, to m e .

     13               MR, M O E S E :    But the    bedrock

     14   flow is still north, n o r t h e a s t .

     15               MR. SCHRAGER:         That's flow in

     16   the bedrock, not at the          interface.         And

     17   if he's picking up at a hundred               and

     18   fifteen feet --

     19               MR. M O E S E :    The interface of

     20   the sands and      --

     21                MR. SCHRAGER:        -- and the

     22   surficial    aquifer.

     23                MR, M O E S E :   You have up to

     24   thirty feet of clay in some areas here of

     25   thickness between the surficial               aquifer


           SCHULMAN", CICCARELLI         & WIEGMANN
                                                        900266

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 207 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                    81
17    1   and the    soil

      2               MR. SCHRAGER:          We also know

      3   that the bedrock aquifer            is contaminated.

      4               MR. M O E S E :     Well,     underneath

      5   the building area you do have a fairly

      6   thin level of clay, which either                was

      7   reached during the clay mining                operations

      8   or it could have traversed              the   clay

      9   somehow.

     10                MR. SCHRAGER:          Fractures        in the

     11   clay

     12                MR. M O E S E :    Fractures      in the

     13   clay .

     14                It's still not going to -- I

     15   mean, the wells here that were                 screened

     16   are screened      right on top of the clay at

     17   these    locations.

     18                MR. SCHRAGER:          Your      shallow

     19   wells.

     20                MR. M O E S E :     Yeah.

     21                We see no contamination              over

     22   here at all.       I m e a n , these wells        are

     23   perfectly drinkable            in the    surficial

     24   aquifer,

     25                MR. SCHRAGER:          Are    they


           SCHULMAN,     CICCARELLI        & WIEGMANN       50O^f}7

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 208 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        82
18    1   yielding good amounts of water?

     2              MR. MOESE:     Well, just during

     3    the purging I think we had up to

      4   twenty-five, thirty gallons a minute at

     5    well 4S, which is right here.

      6             MR. SCHRAGER:     A shallow well

     7              MR. MOESE:     Yeah, a shallow

      8   well

      9             MR. SCHRAGER:     I don't want to

     10   get involved in an involved discussion,

     11   and I certainly could.     There's a wealth

     12   of material that's been collected.     I am

     13   concerned that it's a very large

     14   undertaking that you're proposing and I

     15   think there may be some side effects that

     16   the full scale cleanup option does not

     17   take into account for the residents; and

     18   that is, there's a lot of traffic.     Four

     19   thousand cubic yards is not a lot of

     20   trucks, but could be between a hundred

     21   and two hundred trucks.     It could turn

     22   out, instead of four hundred yards you're

     23   going to take out eight thousand yards or

     24   ten thousand yards.

     25             It starts adding up to a lot of


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                              900298

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 209 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        83
18   1    traffic.   There's concerns about the

     2    roadway.

      3              One of my other questions is,

     4    who do you consider to be most egregious

     5    and why?

      6                I know that there were

      7   children --

      8              MR. TENERELLA:    Your questions

      9   are getting so long it's hard to give you

     10   definitive answers.     Can we take these

     11   one at a time and carefully?

     12                Let's start with the remedy and

     13   burden on truck traffic.

     14                We're well aware of that.

     15   We're well aware there's limited access

     16   in and out of this area and it's a

     17   relatively residential area.     That's a

     18   down side.

     19                No more than in terms of trucks

     20   coming in in residential and construction

     21   of building homes, but truck traffic,

     22   heavy equipment, that's going to happen.

     23                We recognize that in any

     24   residential area where we have to do a

     25   Superfund site and remediation.       What


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                900209

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 210 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                84
18    1   we'll do in design      is come back to the

      2   Town during the detailed       design

      3   activities to discuss things like            traffic

      4   route, safety, security,       contingency

      5   plans for the site and those kinds of

      6   things.    We're very aware of those          things

      7   even when we select those kinds of

      8   remedies and we're looking       for    other

      9   alternatives to get around that where we

     10   can, and where we have to do excavation,

     11   limit the area where we excavate,            limit

     12   truck traffic, reschedule.

     13               A lot of that detail we don't

     14   put into our record of decision            other

     15   than the conceptual      remedy, b u t ,

     16   certainly, the design a c t i v i t i e s , we'll

     17   be back again to discuss those.

     18               MR. SCHRAGER:      Is the      site

     19   still accessible to people        in the     area?

     20               MR. TENERELLA:      If they      really

     21   want to get on it, sure.

     22               MR. SCHRAGER:      Because it seems

     23   like if soil contamination        is one of your

     24   great concerns     --

     25               MR. TENERELLA:       We don't     have


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI       & WIEGMANN
                                                       900210

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 211 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        85
 1   an acute problem anymore.        We did at one

 2   point and that's why we did the          removal

 3   action.   That's why we had guards on the

4    site for a while.    Once the high

 5   concentrated   chemicals     in the    facility

 6   were removed, that burden was         removed,

 7   and all the problems now are          long-term

 8   chronic or chronic potential as opposed

 9   to some kind of acute problem when we had

10   the chemicals there.

11              MR. SCHRAGER:       It would be nice

12   if instead of spending eleven million

13   dollars in cleanup and getting a site

14   that someone will put a new residential

15   development on, spending a little less

16   and perhaps finding a park or creating a

17   park in the nearby area for all those

18   people that seem so fond of this area.

19                MR. TENERELLA:     The burden of

20   Superfund is not to remediate.

21                MR. RICCOBONO:     I don't think

22   that's their problem.

23                MR, SCHRAGER:     We all are

24   contributing our taxes to government,

25   obviously.     Not to make a social comment


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                               900211

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 212 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                  86
1    on government, but there are benefits

 2   being derived from changing our choices;

 3   and one of them is, if we see that the

4    route of contamination in this case seems

 5   to be centered so much around the soil

 6   and we know that the site is used by kids

7    and adults and fishermen, et cetera, that

 8   it seems that a more beneficial use might

 9   be to try to do a cleanup in the way that

10   preserves some funds to provide these

11   people with an alternative to the place

12   they have been going to now, which the

13   EPA has decided is hazardous to one's

14   health,

15             MR, TENERELLA:    The Superfund

16   law has not been formulated by Congress

17   to allow that kind of expenditure and we

18   operate under the law as it's structured

19   by Congress.    There's no allowance for

20   doing something like that in the law.       If

21   you want to suggest that to your

22   Congressman for modification to the law,

23   by all means.

24             You have to recognize that EPA

25   operates under a strict scripture of the


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                         900212

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 213 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                             87
19    1   Superfund laws passed by Congress and

      2   regulations that reflect that, and part

      3   of that is a very realistic concern by

     4    Congress that Superfund sites cost a lot

      5   of money to clean up and there has to be

      6   some reality in terms of the kinds of

      7   money that are spent with our biggest

      8   concerns being protection of public

      9   health and protection of the environment.

     10   And where we can get someone else to pay

     11   for it, the companies that are

     12   responsible, to make sure that happens,

     13   and where that doesn't happen, to be

     14   careful where we can in expending public

     15   funds.     Unfortunately, with this

     16   particular cleanup, especially, it's

     17   going to be funded by public funds.          The

     18   cleanup decision doesn't change.          Whether

     19   the public pays or EPA pays, the policies

     20   are set.

     21                It would be nice if we could

     22   take some money and do other options,

     23   that's true in all of government, but

     24   that's not how government works in any

     25   case, to shift money between programs


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & W I E G M A N N
                                                    500213

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 214 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           88
19    1   like that.

      2                MR. BRUNO:   Charles Bruno from

      3   East Brunswick.

     4                 What kinds of experience have

      5   you had in pump and treat systems like

      6   those pump and treat systems when you

      7   have volatile organics, heavier organics?

      8                Pump and treat you're going to

      9   be removing the water.        Are you going to

     10   come back and watch it later on and get

     11   what's still attached to the soil?

     12                MR. TENERELLA:     Pump and treats

     13   are relative technology.        Pump and treats

     14   are still going on in a lot of sites

     15   right now.

     16                MR. BRUNO:   What's the rate of

     17   success on it?     I followed some of it and

     18   some of it has not been very successful

     19   because you have materials that are not

     20   water soluble, they're floating on the

     21   top or bottom.     Who's to say when you're

     22   pumping the water out how much of these

     23   materials you're going to get?

     24                MR. TENERELLA:     Depending on

     25   the geology of the site and design, the


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                 500214

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 215 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     89
19    1   pump and treat system will be designed                    to

      2   compensate    for some of that site by site.

      3   The biggest question along that           line

     4    normally    is how effective will a pump and

      5   treat be over the long run in terms of

      6   getting down to groundwater        that's

      7   drinkable.

      8                MR. BRUNO:     I don't know how

      9   you evaluate    it.   I'm   not familiar      with

     10   exactly how you tested       it to find      out

     11   whether this process        is going to work.

     12   I'm   not privy to that information.             I

     13   just want to know, did you evaluate              it

     14   that way?

     15                MR, TENERELLA:      Conceptually.

     16   In design we'll have to get into           detail

     17   in terms of well      locations, pumping

     18   rates, where the wells will actually                 be

     19   located    in terms of depth, those kinds of

     20   things.     We'll be pumping and      then

     21   treating the water at a plant and then

     22   surface discharge      in the area.

     23                MR. BRUNO:      When you do the

     24   excavation of the volatile soil are you

     25   going to have something        to prevent


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI        & WIEGMANN
                                                       900215

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 216 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         90
19    1   volatilization to occur?
      2             MR. TENERELLA:      Yes,   Depending
      3   on the kinds of levels that we're seeing
      4   and, again, in design one of the things
      5   that we do when we are doing our site

      6   cleanups is, we have to coordinate all of

      7   our designs very close, not only the

      8   selection of the remedy, but the design,

      9   with the Department of Environmental

     10   Protection & Energy.      It might consist of

     11   protections for the workers who are right

     12   there working with their head in it, or

     13   if there's a potential for any kind of

     14   volatiles going off site at any kinds of

     15   levels that would create any kinds of

     16   difficulty to the public, then we'll

     17   start different containment procedures.

     18                MR. BRUNO:   The investigation,

     19   I know he mentioned aerobic and anaerobic

     20   biodegradation.     I don't know to what

     21   extent this was studied.      I wonder what

     22   the outcome was on tests along those

     23   terms?

     24                MR. TENERELLA:   In terms of the

     25   exact treatment we'll use?


           SCHULMAK,    CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN    900216

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 217 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                     91
19    1                MR, BRUNO:         Bioremediation        in

      2   regards to soil or groundwater               treatment.
20
      3                MR, TENERELLA:         In terms of

      4   treating those       alternatives?

      5                MR. M O E S E :    Generally,     it was

      6   ruled out from the feasibility               study at

      7   the time because it's evenly proven                  for

      8   certain types of organic c o m p o u n d s .          With

      9   the range of organics that we have in the

     10   soil or the groundwater at these

     11   locations we didn't feel it was going to

     12   be feasible for this site.

     13                MR, BRUNO:         Maybe when you did

     14   the original     feasibility       study, but at

     15   this time I know that the B-text               products

     16   and also your algae and            hydrocarbons

     17   would be in groundwater.

     18                MR, M O E S E :    W e l l , What I could

     19   do, I have my feasibility            study    lead

     20   right here, who's behind you.                He helped

     21   write the feasibility            study.

     22                MR. CHOZICK:          Basically,    there

     23   were no feasibility            tests on this

     24   particular     site..    As you pointed        out,

     25   y e s , bio has been shown now to be


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI            & WIEGMANN
                                                           900217

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 218 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                        92
20    1   effective for B-text compounds and some

      2   of the other compounds on the site.     The

      3   difficulties, biotreatment is still

     4    relatively new technology, particularly

      5   in these applications.    So you're

      6   hesitant to jump right into it on these

      7   sites.

      8             There are some compounds on

      9   this site that aren't biodegrading, so

     10   you need a treatment subsequent to the

     11   bio anyway.   Also, the concentrations on

     12   the site were fairly low, which causes

     13   problems in biotreatment.    So since you

     14   would need to have either air stripping

     15   or carbon downstream anyway and the

     16   concentrations are so low, it's much more

     17   practical to just do that treatment

     18   alone.

     19             MR. BRUNO:     I thought it was

     20   more difficult on air stripping to remove

     21   lower concentrations.

     22             MR. CHOZICK:    Actually, they

     23   opted for the carbon, it indicates,

     24   probably also for that reason, but air

     25   stripping would get down to treated


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                             900218

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 219 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         93
20    1   levels

      2              A VOICE:    How much has it cost

      3   so far?

      4              MR. TENERELLA:     Everything on

      5   the site so far?

      6              A VOICE:    Yes.

      7              MR. PORUCZNIK:     We spent

      8   approximately three million dollars on

      9   the remedial investigation and

     10   feasibility study, including both phases.

     11   I believe it was approximately

     12   one-and-a-half million dollars for the

     13   removal action.     So the total would be

     14   roughly four-and-a-half million dollars

     15   of just EPA funding.

     16              MR. TENERELLA:     That's not a

     17   lot of money relative to other Superfund

     18   sites, but that's a lot of money relative

     19   to the size of this site and the scale of

     20   it.   One-and-a-half million dollars of a

     21   small industrial site like this is a lot

     22   of money, but there was a lot of material

     23   to pull out.    The remedial investigation,

     24   up to three million, is also pretty high

     25   for a site of this size.


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & M I E C M A N F
                                                    900219

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 220 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                                        94
20    1               A VOICE:           You project     eleven

      2   million to finish the            job?

      3               MR. PORUCZNIK:              Y e s , that's our

     4    estimate right now, and that's for the

      5   implementation.

      6               MR. TENERELLA:              And that's      low

      7   in terms of the average for               Superfund

      8   cleanups    in New Jersey.          Average        cleanup

      9   cost in New Jersey runs something                   around

     10   twenty, twenty-five million nov/.                  An

     11   average site.       This is below average               in

     12   terms of the scale of the cleanup.

     13               MR. SCHRAGER:           Larry     Schrager.

     14               You mentioned          the extent of

     15   soil contamination.             You showed a diagram

     16   with a number of boxes and               rectangles

     17   around   certain areas.           Are those for the

     18   cumulative thirty-seven hundred                yard

     19   excavation?

     20                MR. M O E S E :     Yes.

     21                MR. SCHRAGER:          And you had one

     22   pile to the far northeast section of the

     23   site.    It says,     if I'm      reading     it

     24   properly,    "Rubble P i l e . "

     25                MR, M O E S E :     That's next to it.


           SCHULMAN, cTccx^¥irirr~irT?TEGHXFr!r               900220

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 221 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                           95
20   1    That, actually, would be, if you're

     2    looking at the figure, to the right of

     3    it.   This is sort of in between it.      The

     4    rubble pile you're looking at is right

     5    here, in this area.      The excavation area

     6    is actually here.

     7                MR. SCHRAGER:    Oh, so the

      8   rubble pile was not contributing in your

      9   estimation to the surface contamination?

     10               MR. MOESE:    No, that was all

     11   Jersey barriers and such, highway

     12   dividers in that rubble.

     13               MR. SCHRAGER:    It sounds like

     14   the total cost for the cleanup might run

     15   around fifteen million dollars plus.         I

     16   just thought it was interesting that the

     17   approximate cost for building a

     18   state-of-the-art landfill is about five

     19   hundred thousand dollars an acre and the

     20   Fried site fits right in with that, five

     21   thousand dollars an acre for a sanitary

     22   landfill.    It's a little upsetting --

     23               MR. TENERELLA:    This would not

     24   be defined as a sanitary landfill.        It

     25   would be designed as a hazardous waste


           SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                900221

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 222 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                    96
1    landfill    if we had to do that here.

2    P l u s , the area would then have to be

 3   restricted for future development.

 4               MR. SCHRAGER:     I'm not

 5   suggesting that this become a sanitary

 6   landfill, I'm just pointing out for the

7    same five hundred thousand dollars an

 8   acre we build sanitary landfills.

 9                MR. TENERELLA:   What I'm going

10   to suggest, I'm not sure if there's

11   anymore questions that are of a general

12   nature, if we want to get into very

13   technical questions, some other people

14   may not be interested in them, is that we

15   would stay and answer questions, more

16   detailed questions, if you have them.

17                Does that seem amenable to

18   everyone?

19                That would break into a more
20   informal session up here.       If you have

21   some further questions, we'd be happy to

22   stay.

23                Thank you very much for coming

24                (Proceedings concluded.)

25


      SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                             900222

===== SOURCE PDF FILE PAGE 223 (file index only; use the page number printed in the source text for evidence anchors) =====

                                                         97
 1

2                   C E R T I F I C A T E

 3

 4

 5

 6           I, RUTHANNE UNGERLEIDER, a Certified

 7   Shorthand Reporter and Notary Public of the State

 8   of New Jersey, certify that the foregoing is a

 9   true and accurate transcript of the proceedings,

10   on the date and place hereinbefore set forth.

11

12

13

14                            '1A\/>^   "^QoJojrbyi
                         RUTHANNE UNGERLEIDER, C.S.R,
15                       LICENSE NO. XIOi434
16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25


               SCHULMAN, CICCARELLI & WIEGMANN
                                                 900223
