This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Ashley R. ELLIS, Lieutenant Colonel 
United States Army, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0197 
Crim. App. No. 20240254 
 
Argued December 10, 2025—Decided July 28, 2028 
 
Military Judge: Adam S. Kazin 
 
For Appellant:  Captain Nicholas A. Schaffer (ar-
gued); Colonel Richard E. Gorini (on brief). 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Eli M. Creighton  (argued); 
Colonel Frank E. Kostik Jr., Lieutenant Colonel Kyle 
C. Sprague, Major Kelsey Mowatt-Larssen, and Jon-
athan F. Potter , Esq . (on brief); Major Andrew M. 
Hopkins.  
 
Amicus Curiae in Support of Appellee: Major Trevor 
N. Ward and Captain Samantha M. Castanien  (on 
behalf of the United States Air Force Appellate De-
fense Division). 
 
Amicus Curiae in Support of Appellee:  James A. 
Young, Esq., and Ann Ching, Esq. (on behalf of the 
National Institute of Military Justice). 
 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON,  Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON  joined. Judge MAGGS  filed a 
separate opinion concurring in part and in the 
judgment. 
_______________ 
 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
While Appellee’s marriage to his then-wife JSE, a fellow 
Army officer, was approaching an antagonistic end, Appel-
lee sent JSE a video that included language that the Gov-
ernment alleged was intended to humiliate, harass, or de-
grade her. Based on this conduct  and as relevant to this 
appeal, the Government charged Appellee with one specifi-
cation of conduct unbecoming an officer in violation of Ar-
ticle 133, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 
10 U.S.C. § 933 (2018). Both prior to and during trial, Ap-
pellee repeatedly challenged the Article  133 specification 
as violating his freedom of speech rights under the First 
Amendment. The military judge rejected these challenges  
and instructed the p anel using the standard instructions 
for Article 133, UCMJ, without providing any instructions 
specifically addressing Appellee’s First Amendment rights. 
At trial, Appellee raised no objection to the absence of any 
such instructions. 
An officer panel sitting as a general court -martial con-
victed Appellee, contrary to his plea s, of one specification  
of conduct unbecoming an officer in violation of Article 133, 
UCMJ. The military judge sentenced Appellee to a repri-
mand, and the convening authority approved the findings 
and sentence. 
On appeal to the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA), the ACCA held that the military judge 
erred by failing to instruct the panel on  the military-spe-
cific “ ‘clear and present danger standard’  ” set forth in 
United States v. Hartwig, 39 M.J. 125, 128 (C. M.A. 1994), 
and concluded that the error was not  harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt . United States v. Ellis, No. ARMY 
20240254, 2025 CCA LEXIS 214, at *1- 6, 2025 WL 
1400359, at *1- 2 (A. Ct. Crim. App. May 13, 2025) (sum-
mary disposition) (per curiam) (unpublished).  The ACCA 
set aside the findings and the sentence and remanded the 
case for a rehearing. Id. at *7, 2025 WL 1400359, at *3. 
Exercising his authority under Article 67(a)(2), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 867(a)(2) (2018), t he acting Judge Advocate 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
General of the Army (TJAG) certified four issues to this 
Court for review: 
I. Whether the Army Court erred by finding [Ap-
pellee] had not waived whether the military judge 
should have instructed the panel on the state of 
law of the [First] Amendment.  
II. Whether the A rmy Court erred by omitting 
analysis regarding forfeiture on whether the mili-
tary judge should have instructed the panel on the 
state of the law of the [First] Amendment. 
III. Whether the A rmy Court erred by finding a 
mandatory panel instruction on the state of the 
law of the [ First] Amendment that the military 
judge failed to give. 
IV. Whether the Army Court erred by finding the 
military judge needed to provide a panel instruc-
tion regarding a question of law. 
With respect to the first certified issue, under the spe-
cific facts presented in this case, we  agree with the ACCA 
that Appellee did not  waive his instructional error claim. 
However, with respect to the second certified issue, we dis-
agree that Appellee’s multiple motions to dismiss on First 
Amendment grounds  also qualified as objections to the 
panel instructions thereby preserving that issue for appeal. 
Accordingly, Appellee’s failure to object to the panel in-
structions forfeited his instructional error claim under 
Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 920(f), 1 and the issue 
must be reviewed for plain error. 
Because the ACCA declined  to consider whether the 
military judge committed plain error when he failed  to in-
struct the panel about Appellee’s First Amendment rights, 
we vacate the ACCA’s decision and return the case to TJAG 
for remand to the ACCA and further proceedings con-
sistent with this opinion. Upon answering this question, 
the ACCA may, if necessary, further evaluate Appellee’s 
 
1 Unless otherwise noted, all references in this opinion to the 
Rules for Courts-Martial and Military Rules of Evidence are to 
the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States (2019 ed.). 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
properly preserved First Amendment claims.  Accordingly, 
we do not reach the third and fourth certified issues. 
I. Background  
In 2022, Appellee and JSE were married Army officers 
with two children whose relationship had grown conten-
tious after JSE discovered that Appellee was having an af-
fair. Appellee and JSE both continued living in their home 
as they pursued separation , but they started seeing other 
people. 
Based on alleged mis conduct directed toward his fam-
ily, the Government charged Appellee with numerous  of-
fenses,2 but only one is relevant to this appeal : a violation 
of Article 133, UCMJ, for conduct unbecoming an officer. 
The Article 133 charge and specification stemmed fro m a 
short video that Appell ee recorded while he was going 
through the clothes in JSE’s closet when she was not at 
home. Appellee does not appear in the video, but he can be 
heard saying: 
Got some more ho dresses, right. Look at this. I 
mean, it’s like a swimsuit, but actually not a 
swimsuit. You know a lot of shit that  . . . never 
been [JSE’s] style but all of a sudden is. I mean 
damn, guess my tussin  [sic], guess my cousin 
taught you real good how to dress like a ho, right. 
After recording the video, Appellee sent it  to JSE’s cell 
phone, establishing the basis for the specification at issue 
in this appeal. The specification read: 
In that [Appellee], did, at or near Chantilly, Vir-
ginia, on or about 17 April 2023, with intent to hu-
miliate, harass, or degrade [ JSE], the spouse of 
the accused, send [ JSE] a video in which he 
 
2 The Government originally charged Appellee with sixteen 
specifications of domestic violence under Article 128b, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. §  928b (2018), one specification of child endangerment 
under Article  119b, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  919b (2018), and two 
specifications of conduct unbecoming an officer under Arti-
cle 133, UCMJ. The convening authority later withdrew one Ar-
ticle 128b specification and one Article 133 specification. 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
describes said [JSE]’s clothing as “ho dresses” and 
stating “I guess my cousin taught you real good 
how to dress like a ho, right?,” or words to that 
effect, and that, under the circumstances, the con-
duct was unbecoming an officer and gentleman. 
A. The Court-Martial 
Prior to trial, Appellee moved to dismiss the Article 133 
specification on First Amendment  grounds.3 During the 
ensuing Article 39(a) hearing, 4 the military judge 
acknowledged that Appellee’s alleged statements were 
likely protected by  the First Amendment . The military 
judge correctly recognized, however,  that in the military  
justice system, speech that would normally be protected by 
the First Amendment might still be punishable under 
Article 133, UCMJ.  During this discussion, both parties 
and the military judge agreed that for protected speech to 
be punishable, the finder of fact must determine whether 
there is a clear and  present danger that the speech  will 
personally dishonor and disgrace, or seriously compromise 
the person’s standing as an officer in the  Article 133 
context. 
In recognition of these issues, the military judge asked 
trial counsel how he should instruct the members regard-
ing the Article 133 specification. Trial counsel responded 
that instructi ng on the article’s terminal element —i.e., 
whether Appellee’s conduct was unbecoming of an officer—
would be sufficient. Appellee’s defense counsel did not sug-
gest a specific instruction, maintaining Appellee’s argu-
ment that the specification be dismissed instead. The mili-
tary judge denied Appellee’s pretrial motion to dismiss but 
 
3 Appellee also claimed that the specification contained 
statements covered by the marital privilege. In denying Appel-
lee’s motion, the military judge determined that Appellee failed 
to meet his burden establishing that the marital privilege ap-
plied to his statements. This issue is not before us.  
4 See 10 U.S.C. § 839(a) (2018) (authorizing hearings outside 
the presence of the panel members for specific purposes). 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
granted Appellee the opportunity to raise the issue again 
at the close of evidence under R.C.M. 917. 
At the close of evidence, Appellee renewed his motion to 
dismiss under R.C.M.  917 on First Amendment grounds. 
After hearing arguments and articulating the clear and 
present danger standard again on the record, t he military 
judge deferred ruling on the motion. 
After the military judge deferred his ruling  on the mo-
tion, the parties immediately began  discussing panel in-
structions. Toward the end of this lengthy discussion, the 
military judge asked whether the parties were requesting 
any specific instructions. Appellee’s defense counsel re-
quested several instructions, but none relating to Appel-
lee’s First Amendment rights. Before recessing that even-
ing, the military judge clarified that he intended to identify 
and resolve any instructional disagreements between the 
parties before the panel reconvened the next day, and that 
he would place those disagreements on the record. 
The next morning, the military judge held an Arti-
cle 39(a) hearing where he summarized the R.C.M.  802 
conferences held with counsel relating to logistics and in-
structions. The military judge identified the forty -one 
pages of panel instructions he intended to give and asked 
both parties if either  party had objections to a proposed 
nonstandard instruction concerning marital property. Nei-
ther party objected to this instruction. No mention was 
made of any disagreements between the parties as to any 
other instructions.  
The military judge instructed the panel with the stand-
ard instructions for conduct unbecoming an officer under 
Article 133, UCMJ. Afterwards, the military judge called 
an Article 39(a) hearing outside the presence of the panel . 
He identified “pen and inked” changes that he had made to 
the instructions—crossing out unwarranted language 
about intent to injure a person—that had previously been 
overlooked and asked if either party objected to his method 
for making the correction. Neither party objected. The mil-
itary judge and counsel then had the following exchange: 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
MJ: Okay. Also, after correcting myself, are the 
parties satisfied that I did correctly, subject to all 
the objections and such, correctly advise the mem-
bers as to all of the substantive law in this case? 
TC: Yes, Your Honor. 
CDC: As best we could tell, yes, sir. 
(Emphasis added.) The military judge went on to deny Ap-
pellee’s renewed R.C.M. 917 motion to dismiss the Arti-
cle 133 specification. After asking whether either party had 
any additional matters to take up while the panel deliber-
ated, both parties answered in the negative. 
The panel found Appellee guilty of  one specification of 
conduct unbecoming an officer under Article  133, UCMJ, 
and acquitted Appellee of all other charges and specifica-
tions. The military judge sentenced Appellee to a repri-
mand, and the convening authority approved the adjudged 
sentence. 
B. The ACCA Decision 
On appeal to the ACCA, and as relevant here, Appellee 
argued both that his conviction was legally insufficient be-
cause his speech in the video was protected by the First 
Amendment, and that the military judge erred by failing to 
instruct the panel about his First Amendment rights.  Re-
viewing the case under its Article 66 authority,
5 the ACCA 
declined to decide  whether Appellee’s Article 133 convic-
tion was legally sufficient, resolving the case on Appellee’s 
claim of instructional error. Ellis, 2025 CCA LEXIS 214, at 
*1, 2025 WL 1400359, at *1. 
Before reaching the merits of the instructional error is-
sue, the ACCA considered—apparently sua sponte —
 
5 See Article 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  866 (2018). Congress 
amended Article 66, UCMJ, in the National Defense Authoriza-
tion Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-81, § 539E(d), 135 
Stat. 1541, 1703 (2021). Those amendments do not apply to this 
case because Appellee’s offense occurred prior to December 27, 
2023, the effective date of those amendments. Id. § 539E(f), 135 
Stat. 1541, 1706. 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
whether Appellee waived any objection to the panel in-
structions by failing to raise any objection to the instruc-
tions during trial. Id. at *5, 2025 WL 1400359, at *2 (citing 
United States v. Davis, 79 M.J. 329, 332 (C.A.A.F. 2020) 
(holding that the accused waived all objections to the in-
structions when he expressly and unequivocally acquiesced 
to the military judge’s instructions)). The ACCA declined 
to find waiver, concluding  that the military judge’s ques-
tion to the parties about their satisfaction with the instruc-
tions contained a “broad ‘subject to all the objections and 
such’ caveat” that “transmogrified the defense’s previous 
motions and objections [concerning First Amend ment pro-
tections] to the instructions, too.”  Id. at *5, 2025 WL 
1400359, at *2. 
Proceeding to the merits of the instructional error ques-
tion, the ACCA concluded that the military judge erred by 
failing to instruct the panel on the military -specific clear 
and present danger standard for determining when an of-
ficer’s private speech violates Article  133, UCMJ.  Id. at 
*5-6, 2025 WL 1400359, at *2 (citing Hartwig, 39 M.J. at 
128). Noting that the factfinder must be made aware of the 
relevant law, the ACCA held that the military judge’s error 
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt . Id. at *5-7, 
2025 WL 1400359, at *2. The ACCA set aside the sentence 
and ordered a rehearing. Id. at *7, 2025 WL 1400359, at 
*3. TJAG certified the case for our review. 
II. Standard of Review 
When a Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) reviews a case 
under Article 66, UCMJ, the CCA enjoys broad discretion  
and its actions are typically  reviewed by this Court for an 
abuse of discretion. United States v. Guinn , 81 M.J. 195, 
199 (C.A.A.F. 2021). However, this Court reviews de novo 
whether an issue has been waived.  United States v. Cook , 
86 M.J. 104, 108 (C.A.A.F. 2025). 
Waiver and forfeiture are distinct doctrines . “Whereas 
forfeiture is the failure to make the timely assertion of a 
right, waiver is the intentional relinquishment or abandon-
ment of a known right.” Id.  at 108-09 (internal quotation 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Gladue, 67 M.J. 
311, 313 (C.A.A.F. 2009)). Stated another way, “[a] forfei-
ture is basically an oversight; a waiver is a deliberate deci-
sion not to present a ground for relief that might be avail-
able in the law.” Id. at 109 (alteration in original) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Cam-
pos, 67 M.J. 330, 332 (C.A.A.F. 2009)). Although f orfeited 
issues are reviewed for plain error, waived issues are not 
reviewed at all because there is “
 ‘no error left for [this 
Court] to correct on appeal.’ ” Id. (quoting United States v. 
Rich, 79 M.J. 472, 476 (C.A.A.F. 2020)).  
III. Discussion 
A. Waiver and Inconsistent Positions 
In the first certified issue, TJAG asks this Court to re-
view the ACCA’s determination that Appellee did not 
waive his objection to the panel instructions . The Govern-
ment argues that Appellee intentionally relinquish ed any 
instructional error claim when his defense counsel actively 
participated in the colloquy  with the military judge about 
the proposed panel instructions without raising any objec-
tions or requesting any additional instructions relating to 
the First Amendment. The Government further argues 
that the ACCA erred when it concluded that Appellee’s two 
motions to dismiss the Article  133 specification preserved 
Appellee’s objections to the panel instructions despite not 
expressly raising those objections below. 
Appellee counters that the Government relinquished its 
waiver argument before this Court because it argued before 
the ACCA that Appellee had forfeit ed his instructional 
error claim rather than waived it. In other words, Appellee 
argues that the Government should be estopped from 
changing its litigating position by the “inconsistent 
positions” doctrine. See 18B Wright & Miller’s Federal 
Practice and Procedure § 4477 (2d ed. 1992 & Supp. 2021)  
(“Absent any good explanation, a party should not be 
allowed to gain an advantage by litigating on one theory, 
and then seek an inconsist ent advantage by pursuing an 
incompatible theory.”). 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
This doctrine generally prohibits one party from chang-
ing litigation positions unless adequate reasons are pre-
sented for the change and there is no prejudice to the op-
posing party. See United States v. Schmidt, 82 M.J. 68, 80 
(C.A.A.F. 2022) (Maggs, J., concurring in the result, joined 
by Hardy, J.) (explaining that “Appellant has not offered a 
convincing justification for allowing his inconsistent posi-
tions”); United States v. Morris, 13 M.J. 297, 300 n.6  
(C.M.A. 1982) (Everett, C.J., concurring in the result) (“the 
Court of Appeals recognized that a change of theory could 
be permitted where ‘the party against whom the issue is 
raised . . . [was] not . . . prejudiced by it’ ” (alterations in 
original) (quoting United States v. Patrin , 575 F.2d 708, 
712 (9th Cir. 1978), overruled in part on other grounds by 
United States v. Gomez, 165 F.4th 1199, 1205- 07 (9th Cir. 
2026) (en banc)). 
Here, the Government’s change of position appears to 
be motivated by the ACCA’s sua sponte decision to consider 
waiver and ultimate determination that the issue was not 
waived. Whether this qualifies as a sufficient reason for the 
Government’s change of position and whether Appellee has 
been prejudiced by the Government’s change would be 
novel issues for this Court that have not been well briefed 
by the parties. For these reasons, we find it more prudent 
to resolve the waiver question on the merits. 
Under R.C.M. 920(f), “[f]ailure to object to an instruc-
tion or to omission of an instruction before the members 
close to deliberate forfeits the objection.” But in Davis, this 
Court held that the accused had not merely failed to raise 
an objection to the panel instructions  but waived his in-
structional error claim. 79 M.J. at 332 -33. This Court’s 
holding in Davis was based on the following specific facts: 
     Before issuing the  . . . instructions to the 
panel, the military judge explained to counsel for 
both parties the instructions that he chose to give, 
including the consent element instruction. After-
wards, the military judge asked whether the de-
fense had any objections or requests for additional 
instructions. After consulting with the assistant 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
defense counsel, the defense counsel answered, 
“No changes, sir.” After the military judge granted 
a finding of not guilty on one of the specifications 
and marked the instructions as an appellate ex-
hibit, he again asked the defense if there were any 
objections to the findings instructions. The de-
fense counsel replied: “No, Your Honor.”  
Id. at 330. 
Thus, this Court determined that the accused’s counsel 
had “affirmatively declined to object to the military judge’s 
instructions and offered no additional instructions.” Id. at 
331. We therefore concluded: “By ‘expressly and unequivo-
cally acquiescing’ to the military judge’s instructions, [the 
accused] waived all objections to the instructions, including 
in regards to the elements of the offense.” Id. (quoting 
United States v. Smith, 2 C.M.A. 440, 442, 9 C.M.R. 70, 72 
(1953)). 
Similar to Davis, in this case trial defense counsel de-
clined to request specific panel instruction s about Appel-
lee’s First Amendment rights  in accordance with 
R.C.M. 920(c). Trial defense counsel also declined to raise 
any objection to the military judge providing the standard 
panel instructions for the Article 133 specification.  
However, this case has a critical distinction from Davis 
that renders that case’s holding inapplicable here. The mil-
itary judge’s ambiguous question to the part ies—“ are the 
parties satisfied that I did correctly, subject to all the objec-
tions and such, correctly advise the members as to all of the 
substantive law in this case?”—prevents us from finding a n 
“intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known 
right.” Davis, 79 M.J. at 33 1 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting Gladue, 67 M.J. at 313). In this case, it is 
not clear to this Court, nor does it appear to have been clear 
to the parties at the time, what the  parties were agreeing 
to when the military judge asked his question . In particu-
lar, t he hedging within the trial defense counsel’s re-
sponse—“ As best we could tell, yes, sir ”—reaffirms  that 
Appellee did not express ly waive his instructional error 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
claim. We therefore answer the Government’s first certified 
issue in the negative. 
B. Forfeiture 
In the second certified issue, TJAG asks this Court to 
review whether the ACCA erred by failing to perform a for-
feiture analysis of Appellee’s instructional error claim. The 
Government argues that issues not raised at trial must be 
reviewed for plain error if they are not waived . United 
States v. Cole, 84 M.J. 398, 404 (C.A.A.F. 2024) . The Gov-
ernment further argues that the ACCA should not have 
provided Appellee with relief without establishing: (1) that 
an error occurred; (2) that the error was clear or  obvious; 
and (3) that the error resulted in material prejudice to the 
accused. Id. To remedy this error, the Government asks 
this Court to vacate the ACCA’s decision and to remand 
back to the ACCA for further consideration. 
There is no dispute that Appellee never requested any 
panel instructions about his First Amendment rights and 
never objected to the military judge’s failure to provide any 
First Amendment instructions. T he ACCA appeared to 
view Appellee’s First Amendment challenge and his in-
structional error claim as being intrinsically linked, such 
that the preservation of one at trial automatically pre-
served the other. Although we recognize that the two issues 
are related, we view them as separate and distinct, needing 
to be raised and pressed independently to preserve them 
on appeal. 
In its opinion, the ACCA concluded that Appellee’s vig-
orous assertion of his First Amendment claim also pre-
served any issues related to his panel instruction claim. El-
lis, 2025 CCA LEXIS 214, at *2- 5, 2025 WL 1400359, at 
*1-2. The court held that the military judge’s language 
“transmogrified the defense’s previous motions into objec-
tions to the instructions.” Id. at *5, 2025 WL 1400359, at 
*2. While it is not clear exactly what trial defense counsel 
agreed to for the purposes of finding affirmative waiver, it 
is equally unclear that the instructions colloquy qualified 
as an  objection to the instructions  on Appellee’s behalf. 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
Accordingly, we do not believe that Appellee sufficiently 
raised his panel instruction claim to preserve it on appeal. 
This deficiency places the instructional claim  squarely 
within R.C.M. 920(f) as a forfeited issue. We therefore an-
swer the second certified issue in the affirmative. 
C. Remaining Issues and Remedy 
The remaining two certified issues are related to the 
question to be decided by the ACCA on remand: whether 
the military judge committed plain error when he failed to 
provide the panel with instructions related to Appellee’s 
First Amendment rights. We decline to decide those issues 
so that they may be argued by the parties and decided by 
the ACCA in the first instance under the proper standard 
of review. 
Because the ACCA reviewed Appellee’s instructional er-
ror claim under a de novo standard of review, the appropri-
ate remedy, as requested by the Government, is to vacate 
the ACCA’s decision, vacate its order to conduct a rehear-
ing, and return the matter to the ACCA to review the in-
structional error claim for plain error.  
With respect to the Appellee’s First Amendment chal-
lenge, the ACCA never reached that issue in its original 
decision. The Government conceded at oral argument that 
Appellee has preserved his First Amendment challenge to 
his Article 133 conviction, and we agree. Thus, if necessary, 
the ACCA should also evaluate Appellee’s properly pre-
served First Amendment challenge to his Article  133 con-
viction. 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is set aside. The case is returned to the Judge 
Advocate General of the Army for remand to that court for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment. 
I concur in the  Court’s judgment and join all of the 
Court’s opinion except for P art III.A.  In Part III.A. , the 
Court considers the merits of the Government’s argument 
that Appellee waived his  present objection to the findings 
instructions. I respectfully do not join this part  of the 
Court’s opinion because I am persuaded by Appellee that 
the Government previously relinquished its waiver argu-
ment. However, b ecause the Court ultimately finds no 
waiver, this disagreement does not affect my concurrence 
in the remainder of the Court’s opinion. 
In its brief to the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA), the Government did not argue that Ap-
pellee had waived his objection to the instructions. Instead, 
the Government argued that the ACCA should review the 
issue for plain error. In its brief before this Court, however, 
the Government now argues that Appellee waived the in-
structions issue. Appellee responds that the Government 
relinquished the waiver argument by not raising it before 
the ACCA and that the Government therefore should be 
precluded from raising it now. 1 The Government, having 
chosen not to file a reply brief, makes no response. 
In general, an argument not raised on appeal is aban-
doned. 16AA Wright & Miller’s Federal Practice & Proce-
dure § 3974.1 (5th ed. 2020). Expressing this general aban-
donment principle, the United States Supreme Court has 
stated: “Ordinarily an appellate court does not give consid-
eration to issues not raised below.” Hormel v. Helvering , 
312 U.S. 552, 556 (1941). The abandonment principle may 
apply to waiver arguments that are not raised on appeal.  
For example, in United States v. Coleman, 79 M.J. 100, 102 
n.3 (C.A.A.F. 2019), the g overnment did not argue in its 
 
1 Appellee also argues that the Government did not raise a 
forfeiture argument before the ACCA . I am not persuaded.  
Although the Government did not use the word “forfeiture,” the 
Government argued that a military judge’s panel instructions 
should be reviewed by the ACCA for plain error “[e]ven if 
unobjected to, when there is a new rule of law or the law is 
previously unsettled.”  Reasonably interpreted, th is is a 
forfeiture argument. 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
2 
 
briefs that an accused’s guilty plea waived an issue of un-
reasonable multiplication of charges even though prece-
dent appeared to support the argument.  This Court “de-
cline[d] to sua sponte raise this issue on the Government's 
behalf.” Id. 
Exceptions to the general abandonment principle, how-
ever, are possible  because a “rigid and undeviating judi-
cially declared practice under which courts of review would 
invariably and under all circumstances decline to consider 
all questions which had not previously been specifically 
urged” might result in injustice. Hormel, 312 U.S. at  557. 
In some cases, for instance, settled law may demonstrate 
“the proper resolution is beyond any doubt” and addressing 
the issue may be necessary to prevent in justice. Singleton 
v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 121 (1976). In addition , if the gov-
ernment prevails at a Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) on 
a ground other than waiver, the discretionary “cross -ap-
peal doctrine” may allow the g overnment to defend its fa-
vorable judgment in this Court on grounds of waiver even 
if the government did not previously raise waiver before 
the CCA. United States v. Nelson , 82 M.J.  336, 344- 45 
(C.A.A.F. 2022) (per curiam) (Maggs, J., concurring in the 
judgment, joined by Crawford, S.J.). 
The question in this appeal  is therefore whether the 
general principle of abandonment should apply and pre-
clude consideration of the Government’s waiver argument 
or instead whether good cause exists for this Court to ex-
amine the Government’s waiver argument even though the 
Government did not present it to the ACCA . The Govern-
ment has presented nothing that persuades me that the 
general abandonment principle should not apply in this 
case. The Government offers no reasons in its brief either 
for its failure to raise a waiver argument before the ACCA 
or for this Court to consider a waiver argument  now. Ap-
pellee thus aptly summarizes the situation as follows: “The 
government now complains that the Army Court should 
have found waiver even though the government failed to 
raise the issue.” 
It is true that the ACCA briefly addressed waiver in its 
opinion. United States v. Ellis, No. ARMY 20240254, 2025 
CCA LEXIS 214, at *5, 2025 WL 1400359, at *2 (A. Ct. 
United States v. Ellis, No. 25-0197/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
3 
 
Crim. App. May 13, 2025) (summary disposition) (per cu-
riam) (unpublished). The issue of waiver, therefore, has in 
some sense become a part of this case. But the Government 
has not argued that the ACCA’s decision to address waiver 
requires this Court to consider the issue. And applying the 
“principle of party  presentation,” the Supreme Court rou-
tinely refuses to consider the merits of an issue that a lower 
court has decided when the issue was not raised at the 
lower court by one of the parties. See, e.g., Margolin v. Nat’l 
Ass’n of Immigr. Judges, 146 S. Ct. 1285, 1288 (2026) (per 
curiam) (reversing a U.S. Court of Appeals  judgment for 
deciding an issue in violation of the party -presentation 
principle); Clark v. Sweeney , 607 U.S. 7, 9 -10 (2025) (per 
curiam) (same). 
For these reasons, I would not decide the merits of the 
Government’s waiver argument. I therefore respectfully do 
not join P art III.A. of the Court’s opinion. I do, however, 
concur in the Court’s judgment and join all other parts of 
the Court’s opinion. 