This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Patrick A. FORD, Private First Class 
United States Army, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0143 
Crim. App. No. 20230263 
 
Argued April 29, 2026—Decided July 1, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Robert L. Shuck (arraignment)  
and Adam S. Kazin (trial)  
 
For Appellant: Captain Clare M. Murphy  (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini, Major Vy T. Nguyen, and 
Major Grace Van Dyck (on brief).  
 
For Appellee: Major Andrew M. Hopkins (argued); 
Colonel Frank E. Kostik Jr., Lieutenant Colonel Kyle 
C. Sprague, and Major Beau O. Watkins (on brief).  
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
Appellee was charged with, among other offenses,  two 
specifications of domestic violence under Article 128b of the 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 928b 
(2018). The acts underlying these specifications were com-
mitted against the same victim and occurred close in time 
at the same location. During the providence inquiry at Ap-
pellee’s court-martial, the military judge explained to Ap-
pellee that if he pleaded guilty , most motions available to 
him would be waived . The military judge then noted that 
the only motion Appellee had made thus far involved pre-
trial confinement credit and stated: “So that’s the only one 
that this c ourt is going to consider or that an appellate 
court might consider. Do you understand? ” Appellee re-
sponded: “Yes sir.” The United States Army Court of Crim-
inal Appeals  (CCA) concluded that this colloquy did not 
constitute a waiver of a multiplicity claim and determined 
that the two specifications at issue were in fact multi-
plicious. United States v. Ford, No. ARMY 20230263, 2025 
CCA LEXIS 123, at *5, 2025 WL 914830, at *2 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. Mar. 21, 2025) (unpublished). However, on appeal be-
fore this Court, Appellee now concedes that he waived the 
multiplicity issue at trial but argue s that the “unsettled 
state of the law ” regarding the “unit of prosecution under 
Article 128b” of the UCMJ “limits the consequences” of this 
waiver. We agree with Appellee that under this Court’s re-
cent decision in United States v. Malone, Appellee waived 
his multiplicity claim. 86 M.J. 297, 301-02 (C.A.A.F. 2026). 
Accordingly, there is nothing left for this Court to resolve,  
and we reverse the decision of the CCA. 
I. Background 
In July 2022, Appellee and his then pregnant wife, Ms. 
GB, had an argument  inside their residence . Appellee 
smashed his wife’s cell phone on the floor in order to intim-
idate her. Ms. GB then attempted to get away from Appel-
lee by going outside, but Appellee followed her and grabbed 
her arms and pulled her toward him. Ms. GB momentarily 
separated from Appellee , but he  then grabbed her again  
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
and dragged her towards his car until neighbors inter-
vened. 
The convening authority referred a number of offenses 
against Appellee, including the following two domestic vio-
lence specifications: 
SPECIFICATION 2: In that [Appellee], U.S. 
Army, did, at or near El Paso, Texas on or about 
24 July 2022, commit a violent offense against 
[Ms. GB] the spouse of the accused, to wit: unlaw-
fully grab [Ms. GB] on the [arms1] with his hand. 
. . . . 
SPECIFICATION 4: In that [Appellee], U.S. 
Army, did, on one or more occasion, at or near El 
Paso, Texas on or about 24 July 2022, commit a 
violent offense against [Ms. GB] the spouse of the 
accused, to wit: unlawfully drag [Ms. GB] with his 
hands.  
The convening authority and Appellee  entered into a 
plea agreement in which Appellee agreed to plead guilty to, 
among other offenses, these two domestic violence specifi-
cations. 
Before entering pleas, the military judge had the follow-
ing exchange with Appellee’s counsel: 
 [Military Judge (MJ)]: Private First Class Pat-
rick A. Ford, how do you plead? Before receiving 
your plea, I advise you that any motions to dismiss 
or to grant other appropriate relief should be 
made at this time. And your defense counsel will 
speak for you. 
 [Defense Counsel (DC)]: PFC Patrick Ford re-
quests for— motion for Allen credit of a total of 224 
days, Your Honor. 195 days would be for the Otero 
Prison—County Prison. And then an additional 29 
days in El Paso County, the local facility. 
 
1 The specification originally alleged that Appellee grabbed 
Ms. GB “on the neck.” However, during the plea proceedings the 
word “arms” was substituted for the word “neck.” The military 
judge entered a finding of guilty in accordance with this plea. 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
 MJ: Thank you. And we’ll address that a little 
more—a little more fully before pre- sentencing 
proceedings, if we get there today. So, please go 
ahead and enter your plea. 
 DC: Yes, Sir. 
Appellee then entered pleas “in accordance with the plea 
agreement,” including guilty pleas for the two previously 
quoted domestic violence specifications. 
After inquiring into whether there was a factual basis 
for Appellee’s offenses, the military judge reviewed the 
terms of the plea agreement with him  and affirmed that 
Appellee understood its terms. After an extended discus-
sion of the term providing for a waiver of an  Article 13, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 813 (2018), motion regarding punish-
ment prohibited before trial , the following discussion took 
place between the military judge, counsel, and Appellee: 
 MJ: Now, I note that there are no other waiv-
ers of motions in this case.  
 Is that correct? 
 [Trial Counsel]: Yes, Your Honor. 
 DC: Yes, Your Honor. 
 MJ: Is it —Even though there’s no provision 
specifically for waiver of motions, do you under-
stand that most motions are waived by virtue of 
pleading guilty? Do you understand that that is a 
waiver of most motions? 
 [Appellee]: Yes, sir. 
 MJ: Just if there was no plea agreement and 
you just entered a guilty plea that would waive 
most of the motions that could possibly be 
brought.  
 Do you understand that? 
 [Appellee]: Yes, sir. 
 MJ: The only motion so far that’s been brought 
before this Court is an issue for pretrial confine-
ment credit for civilian pretrial confinement.  So 
that’s the only one that this Court is going to con-
sider or that an appellate court might consider.  
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
 Do you understand? 
 [Appellee]: Yes, sir. 
(Emphases added.)  
The military judge sitting as a general court -martial 
convicted Appellee, pursuant to his pleas, of one specifica-
tion of absence without leave, one specification of disre-
spect to a superior commissioned officer, three specifica-
tions of failure to obey a lawful order, one specification of 
communicating a threat, and three specifications of domes-
tic vio lence,
2 in violation of Articles 86,  89, 92, 115, and 
128b, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §§ 886, 889, 892, 915, 928b (2018).  
The military judge sentenced Appellee  to a bad -conduct 
discharge, a total of sixteen months of confinement, and re-
duction to the grade of E-1. 
On appeal before the CCA, Appellee asserted  for the 
first time that the domestic violence specifications at issue 
should be consolidated as multiplicious because they were 
facially duplicative. Appellee also asserted that he did not 
expressly waive this challenge at trial. 
The CCA agreed with Appellee, noting that “courts ap-
ply a presumption against finding waiver of constitutional 
protections absent an affirmative showing ,” and holding 
that Appellee did not affirmatively waive this multiplicity 
claim—which is grounded on constitutional Double Jeop-
ardy grounds —when trial defense counsel simply identi-
fied one motion that was preserved and then entered pleas 
at the direction of the military judge. Ford , 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 123, at * 5, 2025 WL 914830, at *2. The CCA then 
concluded that Specifications 2 and 4 of the domestic vio-
lence charge were plainly multiplicious  and consolidated 
the specifications. Id. at *5-7, 2025 WL 914830, at *3-4. 
 
2 The third of these domestic violence specifications involved 
Appellee smashing Ms. GB’s cell phone during the July 2022 
incident. That offense is not relevant to the resolution of this 
appeal. 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
The acting Judge Advocate General of the Army subse-
quently certified two issues for this Court to review: 
I. Whether the Army Court erred in finding [Ap-
pellee] did not affirmatively waive multiplicity 
where counsel stated defense had no motions be-
fore entering unconditional guilty pleas. 
II. Whether the Army Court erred in finding [Ap-
pellee]’s convictions under Article 128b(1), UCMJ, 
multiplicious when the underlying “violent of-
fenses” were assaults consummated by battery. 
United States v. Ford, 85 M.J. 456 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (docket-
ing notice of certificate for review). 
II. Standard of Review 
The issue of waiver is a legal question that this Court 
reviews de novo. United States v. Cook , 86 M.J. 104, 108 
(C.A.A.F. 2025). 
III. Applicable Law 
This Court is not bound by the concessions of the parties 
on questions of law. United States v. Smith , 85 M.J. 283, 
290 (C.A.A.F. 2024). 
There is a presumption against waiver of constitutional 
rights. Malone, 86 M.J. at 302. However, waiver can occur 
when an accused intentionally relinquishes a known right 
by taking affirmative action, and this principle extends  to 
multiplicity claims. Id. at 301. In Malone, this Court held 
that an appell ee had waived any multiplicity claims that 
he might have had because: 
the military judge specifically advised defense 
counsel that any “motions to dismiss” should be 
made prior to [the a] ppellee’s plea; [Rule for 
Courts-Martial] 907(b)(3)(B) explicitly states that 
“motions to dismiss” include any multiplicity 
claims; the potential merits of a multiplicity claim 
in this case were obvious on the face of the charge 
sheet, in the stipulation of fact, and during the 
providence inquiry; and yet, defense counsel un-
ambiguously stated that he would not be filing 
any motions. 
Id. at 299. 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
When there is waiver, this Court “cannot review [ the] 
waived issue[] at all because a valid waiver leaves no error 
for us to correct on appeal.” United States v. Davis, 79 M.J. 
329, 331 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (quoting United States v. Campos, 67 M.J. 330, 332 
(C.A.A.F. 2009)).  
IV. Discussion 
A. Whether Appellee Waived the Multiplicity Issue 
In the light of this Court’s recent decision in Malone, 
Appellee expressly concedes before this Court that at trial 
he waived his current multiplicity claim regarding the two 
domestic violence specifications. He states in his brief:  
[T]he record ultimately reflects an unequivocal, 
on-the-record relinquishment. When the military 
judge later explained that “[the motion for pretrial 
confinement credit is] the only [motion] that this 
Court is going to consider or that an appellate 
court might consider[,]” and [Appellee] confirmed 
his understanding, he knowingly relinquished 
any remaining objections —including any claim 
that the specifications were multiplicious.  . . . 
That later exchange does not appear to have been 
addressed by the parties below or the Army Court. 
It nevertheless reflects a clear, on -the-record 
waiver under this Court’s precedent.  
(Second, third, and fourth alterations in original.) We agree 
with Appellee based on the law and the facts of this case. 3 
We therefore hold that Appellee waived the multiplicity 
issue. 
B. Whether There Is Anything Left for This Court to 
Consider on the Merits of Appellee’s Multiplicity Claim 
Although Appellee concedes that he waived the multi-
plicity issue at trial,  he now contends that this Court 
should not give effect to this waiver because of the “unset-
tled and underdeveloped” area of the law pertaining to “the 
 
3 In fairness to the CCA, we reiterate that Appellee argued 
before the lower court that there was no waiver of the multiplic-
ity issue. 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
unit of prosecution under Article 128b” at the time of the 
plea agreement. 
In Cook, we rejected an argument that this Court 
should automatically decline to find waiver simply because 
the underlying issue is grounded on unsettled law. We  ex-
plained:  
[This] approach ignores that the focus of waiver is 
on the nature of the right relinquished and not the 
merits of the underlying claim based on the state 
of the law. See United States v. Nguyen, 235 F.3d 
1179, 1184 (9th Cir. 2000) (“The whole point of 
waiver is the relinquishment of claims regardless 
of their merit.”).  
86 M.J. at 112 n.9 (citation modified). Instead, this Court  
stated that it  “expect[s] counsel to object when the law is 
unsettled and a certain interpretation is favorable to their 
client.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Oliver, 76 M.J. 271,  276 (C.A.A.F. 2017) 
(Stucky, C.J., concurring in the result)). While our reason-
ing in Cook reflects the general rule, this Court has applied 
forfeiture as opposed to waiver in a limited number of pre-
vious cases involving exceptional circumstances when a  
convicted servicemember had seemingly waived an issue in 
the context of an unsettled point of law at the time of trial. 
See, e.g., Oliver, 76 M.J. at 274 (applying forfeiture, rather 
than waiver, where a lesser included offense issue “was de-
finitively resolved” in the appellant’s favor by the time of 
the appellant’s appeal before this Court); United States v. 
Sweeney, 70 M.J. 296, 304 (C.A.A.F. 2011) (applying forfei-
ture, rather than waiver, despite the appellant’s failure to 
object on Confrontation Clause grounds where “subsequent 
case law opened the door for a colorable assertion of the 
right to confrontation where it was not previously availa-
ble” (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted)). 
However, the exceptional circumstances present in Oliver  
and Sweeney are absent in this case, so we apply the gen-
eral rule and hold that Appellee waived his multiplicity 
claim. 
United States v. Ford, No. 25-0143/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
We agree with Appellee that the law is indeed unsettled 
about what the unit of prosecution  is under Article 128b , 
e.g., whether Appellee can stand convicted of both “unlaw-
fully grab[bing] [Ms. GB] on the [arms] with his hand” and 
“unlawfully drag [ging] [Ms. GB] with his hands” when 
these acts were committed upon the same victim at the 
same location and at virtually the same time. However, we 
do not —indeed, we cannot —reach this issue because as 
noted above, “a valid waiver leaves no error for us to correct 
on appeal.” Davis, 79 M.J. at 331 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted). Therefore, there is nothing left 
for this Court to resolve on the merits of Appellee’s multi-
plicity argument.  
V. Conclusion 
We answer the first certified issue in the affirmative 
and decline to answer the second certified issue. The deci-
sion of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
is reversed. The case is returned to the Judge Advocate 
General of the Army for remand to the United States Army 
Court of Criminal Appeals to complete its review under Ar-
ticle 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (2018 & Supp. V 
2019-2024). 