This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
James H. BASS, Gunnery Sergeant 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0149 
Crim. App. No. 202300185 
 
Argued January 14, 2026—Decided June 24, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Ryan Lipton (arraignment)  
and Adam J. Workman (motions and trial) 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Meggie C. Kane- Cruz, 
JAGC, USN (argued); Lieutenant Commander Leah 
M. Fontenot, JAGC, USN.  
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant K. Matthew Parker, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Colonel Iain D. Pedden , USMC, and 
Major Mary C laire Finnen, USMC (on brief) ; 
Commander John T. Cole , JAGC, USN , and Brian 
K. Keller, Esq. 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court,  
in which Chief Judge OHLSON joined  with respect 
to Parts I ., II.A ., and III. , Judge MAGGS joined, 
except as to Parts II.A. and II.C., and Judge HARDY 
joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate 
opinion, concurring in part and in the judgment. 
Judge MAGGS filed a separate opinion, concurring 
in part and in the judgment , in which Judge 
JOHNSON joined with respect to Part II.A . Judge 
JOHNSON filed a dissenting opinion, in which Chief 
Judge OHLSON joined with respect to Part II . of 
Judge JOHNSON’s dissent. 
_______________ 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Secretary of the Navy issued Sec’y of the Navy, All 
Navy Gen. Admin. Msg. 074/20, Prohibition On The Use Of 
Hemp Products Updated (July 2020) [hereinafter ALNAV 
074/20], which states, in relevant part: 
2. On December 20, 2018, the President signed 
into law the Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018, 
removing industrial hemp from the Controlled 
Substances Act . . . and excluding from the 
definition of marijuana those hemp products 
containing up to 0.3 percent tetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC).  
3. Due to this change in the law, new hemp 
products are commercially available in the United 
States, the normal use of which could cause a 
positive urinalysis result. The United States Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) does not 
determine or certify the THC concentration of 
commercially available hemp products, such as 
cannabidiol (CBD). Accordingly, these products 
may contain appreciable levels of THC, yet omit 
any reference to THC on the product label and/or 
list an in accurate THC concentration. 
Consequently, Sailors and Marines cannot rely on 
the packaging and labeling of hemp products in 
determining whether the product contains THC 
concentrations that could cause a positive 
urinalysis result.  
4. . . .The prohibitions in paragraph (5) below are 
general intent offenses. This means that a 
violation of this ALNAV occurs whenever a 
Service Member intends to use any product made 
or derived from hemp . . . .  
5. Effective immediately:  
     a. Sailors and Marines are prohibited from 
using any product made or derived from hemp . . . 
including CBD . . . .  
     b. This prohibition does not apply to use . . . 
without knowledge that the product was made or 
derived from hemp, including CBD, where the 
lack of knowledge is reasonable. 
 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
Contrary to his plea, Appellant was convicted by a 
military judge, sitting as a special court -martial, of two 
specifications of violating  paragraph 5 of ALNAV 074/20,  
by wrongfully using THC -8, in violation of Article 92 , 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 892 
(2018). The military judge sentenced Appellant to a 
reduction to the grade of E -5 and a reprimand. The 
convening authority approved the sentence. The United 
States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals 
affirmed the findings and sentence. United States v. Bass, 
No. NMCCA 202300185, 2025 CCA LEXIS 70, at *16, 2025 
WL 602234, at * 7 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Feb. 25, 2025) 
(unpublished). We granted review of the following issues: 
I. Whether the military judge  abused his 
discretion in admitting evidence under 
M.R.E. 404(b) of prior positive urinalysis 
results for which Appellant had been 
previously acquitted at court-martial. 
 
II. Whether the military judge erred in relying 
on the “permissive inference” to convict 
Appellant under Article 92 of knowing use of 
a non- controlled, commonly available 
substance. 
United States v. Bass , 86 M.J. 242 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (order 
granting review). 
We hold that the military judge abused his discretion in 
admitting the prior urinalysis results and related 
testimony pursuant to Military Rule of Evidence ( M.R.E.) 
404(b) because, absent a repeated, fact -specific, innocent 
ingestion defense, they lacked the similarity required for 
the doctrine of chances and served only as impermissible 
propensity evidence. We further hold that, in prosecutions 
under ALNAV 074/20, a positive THC -8 urinalysis result 
alone cannot rationally support a permissive inference that 
a servicemember knowingly used hemp or a hemp -derived 
product. These errors, converging on the contested element 
of knowledge, cumulatively denied Appellant a fair trial, 
and we therefore set aside the findings and sentence. 
I. Background 
In 2022, Appellant was tried by special court-martial for 
violating Article 92, UCMJ, after he tested positive f or 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
THC-8 in multiple urinalyses in 2021. At trial, Appellant 
advanced a specific innocent  ingestion defense, testifying 
that he unknowingly consumed THC-8 in vitamin gummies 
his wife had given him.  Appellant explain ed that he 
recalled testing positive for THC -8 because “you only 
remember things in your life that mean something ,” he 
continued, “I remember those days because they were 
monumental days to me . . . because my career was almost 
going to get flushed down the drain.”  Appellant was 
acquitted. 
Shortly thereafter, Appellant again pro vided urine 
samples that tested positive for THC -8 and was  charged 
with two specifications under  Article 92, UCMJ, for 
violating paragraph 5 of ALNAV 074/20. Before the present 
trial, the Government gave notice of its intent to introduce 
evidence of Appellant’s 2021 positive  THC-8 urinalyses 
under M.R.E. 404(b) . The military judge  found the  
Government’s notice deficient but indicated that he might 
revisit admissibility if Appellant “raises a defense of 
innocent ingestion or mistake or accident.”  
In the defense’s opening statement, trial defense 
counsel argued, in  part, that the Government could not 
prove that Appellant  knowingly used hemp or a hemp -
derived product , as required by ALNAV 074/20. Trial 
defense counsel highlighted, among other points , the lack 
of Food and Drug Administration regulation of hemp 
products, the pervasive mislabeling of such products, 
ALNAV 074/20’s  recognition that positive urinalysis  
results alone are ordinarily insufficient to support 
prosecution, and the widespread, lawful availability of  
hemp and hemp -derived products in the civilian 
marketplace. 
The Government’s expert, Dr. JGR, a senior chemist at 
the Navy Drug Screening Lab in Jacksonville, Florida, 
testified that THC-8 is derived from hemp, whereas THC-9 
is associated with  marijuana. Dr. JGR explained  that 
urinalysis testing for THC-8 cannot identify the route of 
ingestion, the dosage, or the circumstances under which  
exposure occurred. Dr. JGR  further acknowledged that 
urinalysis testing for THC -8 cannot establish a user’s 
intent and that s he could not rule out the possibility  that 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
Appellant unknowingly ingested THC-8. Further, Dr. JGR 
noted it was unclear whether  Appellant would have 
experienced any psychoactive effect s from the THC -8. 
Finally, Dr. JGR noted that THC-8 is found in a variety of 
commercially available products, including  beverages, 
vape cartridges, candy, and gummies.  
At the close of the Government’s case, Appellant moved 
under Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 917 for a finding of 
not guilty, arguing that the evidence failed to show he 
knowingly ingested THC -8. The Government responded 
that the military judge could infer wrongful and knowing 
ingestion by applying a permissive inference  from the 
positive urinalysis results for THC -8. The military judge 
denied the motion, concluding that two positive urinalyses 
for THC -8 provided “some evidence” that Appellant 
violated ALNAV 074/20. In his defense, Appellant called 
three witnesses, each of whom testified to his good military 
character.  
After Appellant rested, the Government renewed its 
M.R.E. 404(b) motion to admit the results of  Appellant’s 
2021 urinalyses , along with  a portion of his prior court -
martial testimony to demonstrate lack of mistake as to 
Appellant’s knowing THC -8 use in the current court -
martial. Appellant objected, noting that he had not raised 
a specific innocent ingestion defense in the present case, so 
there was no logical relationship between the two court s-
martial, causing the earlier results to serve only as  
propensity evidence. The military judge  found that the 
prior results made the possibility of mistake n ingestion  
less probable and, though only somewhat probative, were 
not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice. Accordingly, the military judge admitted the 
evidence under M.R.E. 404(b).  
Although no evidence  showed that anyone observed  
Appellant possess ing or us ing hemp or a hemp-derived 
product, Appellant was nonetheless found guilty of both 
specifications. The military judge entered special findings 
under R.C.M. 918(b) . In the special findings, the military 
judge, relying on the permissive inference,  concluded that 
the THC -8 detected in Appellant’s urine resulted from 
Appellant’s wrongful and knowing use of hemp or a hemp-
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
derived product.  The military judge also considered 
Appellant’s previous positive urinalyses for THC -8 and 
testimony to establish Appellant’s knowledge of THC-8 and 
to undermine any assertion of accidental or unknowing 
ingestion of hemp or a hemp-derived product in the current 
court-martial. 
II. Discussion 
Appellant was convicted of the following: 
Charge I, Specification 1 in this case reads:  
In that Gunnery Sergeant James H. Bass, U.S. 
Marine Corps, on active duty, did, at an unknown 
location, on or about 19 October 2022, violate a 
lawful general order, which was his duty to obey, 
to wit: paragraph 5, ALNAV 074/20, dated 24 July 
2020, by wrongfully using Tetrahydrocannabinol-
8.  
Charge I, Specification 2 in this case reads:  
In that Gunnery Sergeant James H. Bass, U.S. 
Marine Corps, on active duty, did, at an unknown 
location, on or about 13 December 2022, violate a 
lawful general order, which was his duty to obey, 
to wit: paragraph 5, ALNAV 074/20, dated 24 July 
2020, by wrongfully using Tetrahydrocannabinol-
8. 
The elements of  Article 92, UCMJ, for violation of or 
failure to obey a lawful general order or regulation are: 
(a) That there was in effect a certain lawful 
general order or regulation;  
(b) That the accused had a duty to obey it; and 
(c) That the accused violated or failed to obey the 
order or regulation. 
Manual for Courts- Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 
18.b.(1) (2019 ed.).  
Paragraph 5 of ALNAV 074/20 prohibits knowing use of 
hemp-derived products, exempting reasonable unknowing 
use. Accordingly, to establish a violation of ALNAV 074/20, 
the Government had to prove beyond a reasonable doubt 
either that Appellant knew the product he used was hemp 
or hemp-derived or that his lack of such knowledge was 
unreasonable.  
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
A. Admission of M.R.E. 404(b) Evidence 
Appellant argues that the military judge abused his 
discretion by admitting his prior THC -8 urinalysis results 
and resulting testimony under M.R.E. 404(b). He contends 
that the earlier court-martial, where he advanced a specific 
innocent ingestion theory tied to vitamin gummies and was 
acquitted, did not share the kind of  fact-specific similarity 
with the present case that would give those prior acts  
probative value for knowledge he used hemp or a hemp -
derived product.  The Government contends that the 
Appellant’s argument and cross-examination in the instant 
court-martial sufficiently raised a theory of  innocent 
ingestion or mistake, thus opening the door to admission of 
his prior positive drug tests and related testimony to rebut 
that claim. 
We review a military judge’s decision to admit evidence 
under M.R.E. 404(b) for an abuse of discretion. United 
States v. Wilson, 84 M.J. 383, 390 (C.A.A.F. 2024). Military 
judges abuse their discretion if their findings of fact are 
clearly erroneous, their decisions are influenced by an 
erroneous view of the law, or their decisions are outside the 
range of choices reasonably arising from the applicable 
facts and the law. Id. 
“[P]ropensity evidence is a generally impermissible 
form of character evidence in which members ‘ prove a 
person’s character in order to show that on a particular 
occasion the person acted in accordance with the 
character.’ ” United States v. Quezada, 82 M.J. 54, 59 
(C.A.A.F. 2021)  (quoting M.R.E. 404(b)(1)).  M.R.E. 
404(b)(1) provides that “ [e]vidence of any other crime, 
wrong, or other act is not admissible to prove a person ’s 
character in order to show that on a particular occasion the 
person acted in accordance with the character. ” However, 
“[t]his evidence may be admissible for another purpose, 
such as proving mot ive, opportunity, intent, preparation, 
plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake, or lack of 
accident.” M.R.E. 404(b)(2). Where M.R.E. 404(b) evidence 
is offered for a permissible, non -propensity purpose, the 
military judge “must conduct a M.R.E. 403 balancing test 
and exclude this otherwise admissible evidence ‘ if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by a danger of 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
. . . unfair prejudice.’ ” Wilson, 84 M.J. at 390 (alteration in 
original) (quoting M.R.E. 403). 
We review a military judge’s decision to admit  M.R.E. 
404(b) evidence under the three-part test set out in United 
States v. Reynolds: (1) does the evidence reasonably 
support a finding that the accused committed a specific act; 
(2) is a fact of consequence made more or less probable by 
the existence of this evidence; and (3) is the probative value 
of the evidence substantially outweigh ed by the danger of 
unfair prejudice? 29 M.J. 105, 109 (C.M.A. 1989). “If the 
admitted evidence fails to meet any of the fac tors laid out 
in Reynolds, the military judge will have erred,” and we 
“must then assess the prejudice, if any, resulting from that 
error.” Wilson, 84 M.J. at 391. 
The military judge abused his discretion by admitting 
Appellant’s prior THC-8 urinalysis results and testimony 
under M.R.E. 404(b) . Although the military judge 
concluded that the prior results and testimony made “the 
possibility of mistake less probable,” that rationale did not 
actually make any fact of consequence more or less 
probable. Instead, it rested on a flawed application  of the 
doctrine of chances.  
The doctrine of chances permits the factfinder, in rare 
cases, to infer that a repeated, highly unusual event is 
unlikely to have occurred innocently when the underlying 
incidents share a sufficiently specific factual pattern . 
United States v. Tyndale, 56 M.J. 209, 213 (C.A.A.F. 2001) 
(plurality opinion). In Tyndale, we upheld admission of a 
prior positive methamphetamine urinalysis because  both 
the prior and charged incidents shared a highly specific 
factual pattern: each involved claimed unknowing 
ingestion at parties, the same alleged  source of the drug , 
and corroboration by the same family member.  Id. at 214. 
We emphasized, however, that the doctrine of chances: 
is not a roll of the appellate dice. Rather, as 
illustrated here, its application is limited to those 
circumstances where actions are sufficiently 
similar to demonstratively contribute to the truth 
finding process. Its use should not be frequent, 
except in  rare factual settings such as the one 
presented in this case. 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
Id.  
By contrast, in United States v. Graham , 50 M.J. 56 , 
59-60 (C.A.A.F. 1999), we held that evidence of a prior 
positive marijuana urinalysis and acquittal  was 
inadmissible where the accused offered only a general 
denial and good -soldier defense at a later trial . The 
government argued that the prior positive test could rebut 
a theory of innocent ingestion, but we rejected that view 
because the accused had not advanced a repeated, fact -
specific innocent  ingestion narrative linked to the same 
product or event.  Id. Absent such a narrative, the prior 
acquittal did not render any fact of consequence at the 
second trial more or less likely; it merely invited a 
forbidden propensity inference –that because the accused 
had tested positive for marijuana before , he likely  used 
marijuana knowingly and wrongfully on the charged 
occasion. Id. at 59. 
This case aligns with  Graham, not Tyndale. At his 
earlier court -martial, Appellant testified that he 
unknowingly ingested THC -8 through vitamin gummies 
supplied by his wife , but at the present trial he did not 
renew that theory or identify any product as the source of 
his 2022 THC -8 exposure . Instead, Appellant generally 
denied knowing use and attacked the Government’s proof 
of knowledge by highlighting, among other things, the lack 
of FDA regulation, the risk of mislabeling, ALNAV 074/20’s 
own recognition that labels may be inaccurate , and the  
lawful, widespread availability of hemp and hemp-derived 
products. Absent a repeated, fact -specific innocent  
ingestion narrative tied to similar circumstances, the 2021 
urinalysis results and prior testimony merely invited a 
forbidden propensity inference that because the accused 
tested positive before, he likely used THC-8 knowingly and 
wrongfully on the charged occasion s. We therefore hold 
that the military judge abused his discretion in admitting 
Appellant’s THC -8 urinalysis results and related 
testimony under M.R.E. 404(b).  
B. Permissive Inference 
This Court reviews question s of law de novo. United 
States v. Merritt , 72 M.J. 48 3, 486 (C.A.A.F. 2013).  A 
permissive inference is an  evidentiary tool that allows a 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
trier of fact to infer an elemental fact, such as knowledge, 
from a proved fact, such as the presence of a metabolite in 
the urine.  United States v. Harper, 22 M.J. 157, 161 
(C.M.A. 1986). A permissive inference satisfies due process 
only if there is a rational connection between the fact 
proved and the fact inferred such that the inferred fact is 
“more likely than not to flow from the proved fact on which 
it is made to depend.” Barnes v. United States, 412 U.S. 
837, 842 (1973) (citing Leary v. United States , 395 U.S. 6, 
36 (1969)). 
The Government contends we should treat prosecutions 
under ALNAV 074/20 as  analogous to prosecutions under 
Article 112a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 912a (2018), and to extend 
to hemp-derived THC-8 the familiar permissive inference 
that a positive urinalysis for a  controlled substance can 
indicate knowing and wrongful use. We decline to do so. In 
the Article 112a, UCMJ, context, we have long approved a 
permissive inference that a positive urinalysis for  a 
controlled substance supports an inference of knowing and 
wrongful use. Harper, 22 M.J. at 162; see also United States 
v. Ford , 23 M.J. 331, 337 (C.M.A. 1987) (noting the 
permissive inference has existed in the military justice 
system since 1955 and has found “longstanding and 
consistent judicial approval” in the military and civilian 
courts). That inference rests on several premises : 
controlled substances are illegal to possess, are tightly 
regulated even in lawful channels, and are commonly 
associated with noticeable psychoactive effects , making 
unknowing ingestion unlikely and a positive test a rational 
indicator of knowing, wrongful use.  
Those premises do not hold for hemp and hemp-derived 
products governed by  ALNAV 074/20.  The issuance of 
ALNAV 074/20 was a direct consequence of the legalization 
of industrial hemp by the Agriculture Improvement Act of 
2018. Unlike controlled substances, hemp and hemp -
derived products containing THC -8 are lawfully sold in 
mainstream retail venues, such as grocery stores, gas 
stations, and are legal for the civilian population . ALNAV 
074/20 itself warns that servicemembers cannot rely on 
packaging or labeling to determine if a product will cause  
a positive urinalysis, as mislabeling is pervasive. 
Moreover, the Government’s own expert testified that the 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
urinalysis results cannot determine if the user experiences 
any such psychoactive effect. 
In this  environment, a positive urinalysis for THC -8 
does not make it  more likely tha n not that the 
servicemember knew the product ingested was hemp or 
hemp-derived, as ALNAV 074/20 requires.  We therefore 
hold that a  positive THC-8 urinalysis result, standing 
alone, cannot rationally support a permissive inference of 
knowing use of a hemp or hemp -derived product under 
ALNAV 074/20, and the military judge erred as a matter of 
law in relying on such an inference to find knowledge and 
wrongfulness.  
C. Cumulative Error  
We review the cumulative effect of all errors, plain or 
preserved, de novo. United States v. Pope, 69 M.J. 328, 335 
(C.A.A.F. 2011). Under the cumulative  error doctrine, 
reversible error may exist when “  ‘a number of errors, no 
one perhaps sufficient to merit reversal, in combination 
necessitate the disapproval of a finding.’ ” Id. (quoting 
United States v. Banks, 36 M.J. 150, 170-71 (C.M.A. 1992)). 
We will reverse only when the combined effect of the errors 
deprived the accused of a fair trial. Id. 
Knowledge was the central contested element  at 
Appellant’s court-martial. Both the erroneous admission of 
M.R.E. 404(b)  evidence and the improper use of a 
permissive inference bore directly on that element . The 
military judge admitted the prior THC-8 urinalysis results 
and testimony to prove knowledge and to rebut any 
suggestion of innocent or mistaken ingestion, and  then 
expressly relied on that evidence, together with  the 2022 
urinalysis results , to invoke a permissive inference of 
knowing, wrongful use in his special findings. 
Once the inadmissible M.R.E. 404(b) evidence and the 
impermissible permissive inference are removed , the 
Government’s proof of knowledge rests solely on the bare 
fact that Appellant’s 2022 urine samples contained THC-8, 
a fact that the Government’s own expert conceded cannot, 
by itself, reveal intent, the circumstances of exposure, or 
any psychoactive effect. In a marketplace where hemp and 
hemp-derived THC -8 are widely and lawfully available , 
mislabeling is acknowledge d in ALNAV 074/20,  and 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
unknowing ingestion is anticipated by the order itself, such 
stand-alone urinalysis evidence falls far  short of 
“overwhelming” proof of knowledge. See United States v. 
Dollente, 45 M.J. 234, 242 (C.A.A.F. 1996) (“Courts are far 
less likely to find cumulative error  . . . when a record 
contains overwhelming evidence of a defendant ’s guilt.”). 
Accordingly, we conclude that the combined impact of the 
M.R.E. 404(b) error and the invalid permissive inference on 
the same critical element of knowledge denied Appellant a 
fair trial and requires reversal under the cumulative error 
doctrine. 
III. Conclusion 
The judgment of the United States Navy-Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals is reversed. The findings and 
sentence are set aside. The record is returned to the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy. A rehearing is authorized. 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in part and in the 
judgment. 
I concur with the Background section (Part I .) and two 
parts of the analysis of this Court’s lead opinion. First, I 
agree that the military judge abused his discretion by ad-
mitting Appellant’s prior THC -8 urinalysis results—and 
the resulting testimony—under Military Rule of Evidence 
(M.R.E.) 404(b). Therefore, I join Part II.A. of the lead opin-
ion. Second, I agree that we must reverse the judgment of 
the lower court and set aside the findings and the sentence 
because the M.R.E. 404(b) evidentiary error by itself re-
sulted in material prejudice. See United States v. Jones, 85 
M.J. 80, 84 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (delineating the standard for 
nonconstitutional evidentiary errors).  Therefore, I join 
Part III. of the lead opinion.  
I cannot, however, join Part II. C. of the lead opinion, 
which applies the cumulative error doctrine. Instead, I join 
Part II . of Judge Johnson’s dissenting opinion because I 
agree that the military judge did not err by applying the 
permissive inference to find Appellant guilty of violating a 
lawful general regulation by using a substance containing 
THC-8.  
For these reasons, I concur in part and in the judgment. 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins in 
part, concurring in part and in the judgment.
I. Introduction 
I join the Court’s opinion except with respect to Parts 
II.A. and II.C., and I concur in the judgment.  This means 
that I  agree with the Court’s decision that  the military 
judge erred in relying on a “permissive inference” to find 
Appellant guilty of the knowing use of a non- controlled, 
commonly available substance. It also means that I agree 
with the Court’s conclusion that the findings and sentence 
must be set aside and that a rehearing must be authorized. 
But I am not persuaded that the military judge abused his 
discretion in admitting evidence of prior positive urinalysis 
results or that it is necessary to discuss the cumulative er-
ror doctrine. 
II. Admission of Prior Urinalysis Results 
In discussing the admission of prior urinalysis results , 
the Court agrees with the parties that the precedents most 
on point are United States v. Graham, 50 M.J. 56 (C.A.A.F. 
1999), and United States v. Tyndale, 56 M.J. 209 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) (plurality opinion). In both Graham and Tyndale, the 
accused was charged with unlawful drug use. Graham , 50 
M.J. at 57; Tyndale, 56 M.J. at 210. In both cases, the mil-
itary judge admitted evidence that the accused previously 
had tested positive for using drugs. Graham, 50 M.J. at 57; 
Tyndale, 56 M.J. at 212 . And in both cases, the issue was 
whether the evidence should have been  excluded under 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 404(b) as improper pro-
pensity evidence. Graham, 50 M.J. at 60; Tyndale, 56 M.J. 
at 212- 13. T he Court in Graham held that the military 
judge abused his discretion in admitting the evidence , but 
the Court in Tyndale  held that the military judge did not 
abuse his discretion in admitting the evidence. Graham, 50 
M.J. at 57; Tyndale, 56 M.J. at 215-16. 
The Court reached opposite results in Graham and Tyn-
dale because the accused in those cases raised different de-
fenses at trial. Tyndale, 56 M.J. at 216. “In Graham, the 
defense was a general denial of the charge. . . . [Therefore,] 
there was ‘no fact of consequence that a positive result on 
a previous urinalysis, if resurrected at [that] trial, could 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge MAGGS, with whom JOHNSON, J. joins in part, 
concurring in part and in the judgment 
 
2 
 
rebut.’ ” Id. (third alteration in original) (quoting Graham, 
50 M.J. at 59). In Tyndale, by contrast, the accused raised 
an innocent ingestion defense. Id. at 212. And because the 
accused had also raised an innocent ingestion defense in 
connection with his previous positive test result, the Court 
held that the prior positive test result was admissible  
based on the “doctrine of chances.” Id. at 213-15. The Court 
explained that the doctrine of chances “posits that it is un-
likely a defendant would be repeatedly, innocently involved 
in similar, suspicious circumstances.” Id. at 213. The prior 
positive test result therefore was relevant to rebut the ac-
cused’s innocent ingestion defense  in Tyndale. Id. at 
214-15. 
The Court holds that Appellant’s case is controlled by 
Graham and distinguishable from Tyndale  based on the 
defense that Appellant raised at trial. The Court asserts: 
Appellant generally denied knowing use and at-
tacked the Government’s proof of knowledge by 
highlighting, among other things, the lack of [U.S. 
Food and Drug Administration]  regulation, the 
risk of mislabeling, [All Navy Gen. Admin. Msg. ] 
074/20’s own recognition that labels may be inac-
curate, and the lawful, widespread availability of 
hemp and hemp-derived products. 
The Court therefore concludes that the military judge 
abused his discretion in admitting the prior positive test 
results. 
I am unpersuaded that this reasoning suffices to show 
the military judge abused his discretion in admitting the 
evidence. In my view, the defense that the Court describes 
sounds more like the innocent ingestion defense raised in 
Tyndale than the general denial defense raised in Graham. 
In addition, other parts of the record indicate that Appel-
lant was raising an innocent ingestion defense in this case. 
For example, defense counsel stated in opening argument: 
“[An expert witness], a man with over 40 years in forensic 
chemistry and urinalysis test results, will tell you that the 
results of this urinalysis are consistent with an unknowing 
ingestion.” And on cross-examination of the Government’s 
expert witness, defense counsel  asked the witness to 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge MAGGS, with whom JOHNSON, J. joins in part, 
concurring in part and in the judgment 
 
3 
 
confirm that she “can’t determine the mechanism by which 
the [tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)] might have entered the 
body” and that she “can’t rule out an unknowing ingestion.” 
Based on these facts, I conclude that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion in admitting the prior positive 
test results. The military judge could reasonably have con-
cluded that, as in Tyndale, the results were relevant to re-
but Appellant’s innocent ingesti on defense and did not 
serve merely to invite a forbidden propensity inference un-
der M.R.E. 404(b).  I therefore would answer the first 
granted issue in the negative. 
III. Conclusion 
Because I concur with the Court  that the second 
granted issue should be decided in the affirmative, I also 
concur in the Court’s decision to set aside the judgment of 
the United States Navy -Marine Corps Court of Criminal 
Appeals, to set aside the findings and sentence, to return 
the case to the Judge Advocate General of the Navy, and to 
authorize a rehearing. 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
 
 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON  
joins in part, dissenting. 
I would hold  the military judge  did not abuse his 
discretion by admitting the prior urinalysis results . 
Therefore, I join Part II. of Judge Maggs’s separate opinion 
concurring in part and in the judgment . I would also hold  
the military judge did not err in relying on the permissive 
inference to find Appellant guilty of knowing use of a non -
controlled substance in violation of Article 92, U niform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 892 (2018) . 
Because I would answer both granted issues in the 
negative and affirm the decision of the United States Navy-
Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals , I respectfully 
dissent from the Court’s lead opinion. 
I. The prior positive urinalyses 
The military judge admitted the prior urinalyses  after 
concluding each of the United States v.  Reynolds, 29 M.J. 
105, 109 (C.M.A. 1989), prongs was satisfied: 
(1) the evidence reasonably supported a finding that 
Appellant committed the prior acts; 
(2) “the evidence of the prior urinalyses does make 
the possibility of mistake less probable. Testing 
positive on two prior occasions and going through 
the court -martial process  . . . makes it less 
probable that any ingestion was mistaken”; and 
(3) “the defense theory of an unknowing or mistaken 
ingestion, which was brought out on the cross -
examination of the government’s witness, does 
raise the probative value of the evidence.”  
I join Part II.  of Judge Maggs’s separate opinion 
because I agree that the military judge did not abuse his 
discretion in admitting the prior positive test results on the 
grounds that they  were logically relevant to his innocent 
ingestion defense and did not serve merely to demonstrate 
propensity. 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON 
joins in part, dissenting 
 
2 
 
II. The permissive inference 
In Article 112a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 912a (2018) , cases, 
a military judge has discretion to permit the factfinder to 
draw an inference of knowing use of a controlled substance 
from the presence of the substance in the accused ’s body. 
Manual for C ourts-Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 
50.c.(10) (2019 ed.). In this case, we must decide whether 
the permissive inference applies to an Article 92, UCMJ, 
orders violation arising out of the use of a banned but not 
“controlled” substance. Because the charged offense closely 
resembles an Article 112a offense but for the fact that the 
illicit substance is not a “controlled” substance, the 
rationale behind the permissive inference applies equally 
to the Article 92 , UCMJ,  offense of violating a lawful 
general order as charged, by wrongfully using THC -8. 
Therefore, I would hold that the military judge did not err 
in allowing the permissive inference in this case. 
“Inferences and presumptions are a staple of our 
adversary system of factfinding.” County Ct. of Ulster Cnty. 
v. Allen , 442 U.S. 140, 156 (1979). “The most common 
evidentiary device is the entirely permissive inference or 
presumption, which allows —but does not require—the 
trier of fact to infer the elemental fact from proof by the 
prosecutor of the basic one and which pla ces no burden of 
any kind on the defendant.” Id. at 157.  
When reviewing a permissive inference, the Supreme 
Court “has required the party challenging it to 
demonstrate its invalidity as applied to him.” Id. The 
inference cannot meet the prosecution’s burden if the trier 
of fact could not rationally “make the connection permitted 
by the inference. For only in that situation is there any risk 
that an explanation of the permissible inference to a jury, 
or its use by a jury, has caused the presumptively rational 
factfinder to make an erroneous factual det ermination.” 
Id.; Francis v. Franklin , 471 U.S. 307, 314- 15 (1985) 
(stating that a permissive inference “violates the Due 
Process Clause only if the suggested conclusion is not one 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON 
joins in part, dissenting 
 
3 
 
that reason and common sense justify in light of the proven 
facts before the jury”). 
Whether it is appropriate for the  government to argue 
the permissive inference of wrongfulness in a particular 
case is a question of law this Court reviews de novo. See 
United States v. Green, 55 M.J. 76, 80 (C.A.A.F. 2001) (“The 
military judge, as gatekeeper, may determine in 
‘appropriate circumstances’ that the test results, as 
explained by the expert testimony, permit consideration of 
the permissive inference that presence of the controlled 
substance demonstrates knowledge and wrongful use.”). 
Where the inference is permissible, the finder of fact must 
decide whether to draw the inference of wrongfulness. 
United States v. Bond , 46 M.J. 86, 89- 90 (C.A.A.F. 1997) 
(“ ‘[W]hether to draw an inference of wrongfulness is a 
question to be decided by the factfinder using the standard 
of reasonable doubt.’  ” (alteration in original) (quoting 
United States v. Ford, 23 M.J. 331, 335 (C.M.A. 1987))). 
In Ford, we held the permissive inference was 
constitutionally permissible in an Article 112a, UCMJ, 
case involving marijuana . 23 M.J. at 337. We cited four 
considerations that supported that conclusion.  
First, we noted that even though marijuana use and 
possession was permitted in small amounts by some 
civilian jurisdictions, it was contraband for 
servicemembers. Therefore, a servicemember’s “access to 
it, which impacts on the probability of innocent inge stion, 
is greatly reduced.” Id.  
Second, we noted that “the military services in recent 
years have greatly intensified their efforts to eliminate 
drug abuse and have well publicized this campaign. 
Therefore, the servicemember is on notice to avoid any and 
all contact with these substances , a fact which further 
reduces the possibility of innocent ingestion.” Id.  (citation 
omitted). 
Third, we observed: 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON 
joins in part, dissenting 
 
4 
 
[T]he physiological effects from the internal 
presence of the drug in the body might serve to 
alert the user to the presence of a controlled 
substance in his system. Such recognized common 
knowledge suggests that the possibility of 
knowing drug use is great when a servicemember 
fails to satisfactorily explain the presence of the 
drug’s constituent elements in his system.  
Id. (citations omitted). 
Fourth, we noted that “human experience in terms of 
self-preservation generally dictates that a person, whether 
a servicemember or not, generally knows what he 
consumes.” Id. 
For all of the reasons stated in Ford , the permissive 
inference of wrongfulness is appropriate in this case 
involving a charge of  wrongful use of a non- controlled 
substance banned by service regulation . Use and 
possession of hemp and hemp -derived substances like 
THC-8, while lawful  in some civilian jurisdictions , are 
prohibited by service regulation, which  prohibits sailors 
and Marines “from using any product made or derived from 
hemp.” Sec’y of the Navy, All Navy Gen. Admin. Msg. 
074/20, Prohibition On The Use Of Hemp Products 
Updated para. 5 (a) (July 2020).  As such, servicemembers 
are on notice to avoid products containing these 
substances. This in turn places a responsibility on 
servicemembers to restrict their access to such products,  
thereby reducing the possibility of innocent ingestion . 
Moreover, expert testimony establish ed that hemp and 
THC containing products are typically  labeled as such, 
even if the concentration or specific compound is not 
disclosed. Additionally, expert testimony established that 
THC-8 consumption may  cause physiological effects, 
suggesting that a user knows he has ingested it even if a 
positive urinalysis alone cannot determine whether a user 
felt any effects. And finally, there is no reason the instinct 
for self-preservation cited by the Court in Ford would not 
support an inference an accused knew he consumed a hemp 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON 
joins in part, dissenting 
 
5 
 
product just as it supports the inference he knowingly 
consumed a controlled substance.  
It is permissible for a trier of fact to infer the elemental 
fact (i.e., that the ingestion of the banned substance was 
knowing) if the prosecution proves the basic fact (i.e., that 
the urinalysis test demonstrated that the accused had 
ingested the banned substance). See Allen, 442 U.S. at 157. 
Here, the prosecution admitted the test results and had 
expert testimony to explain said results, in accordance with 
Green, 55 M.J. at  80-81. Under these circumstances, the 
military judge appropriately approved the u se of the 
permissive inference to prove an element of the Article 92, 
UCMJ, offense of wrongful use of THC -8. See also United 
States v. Pasha, 24 M.J. 87, 89 (C.M.A. 1987) (approving a 
permissive inference that the accused was the person who 
stole certain property if the accused was found in knowing, 
conscious, and unexplained possession of that property); 
United States v. Redmond, 21 M.J. 319, 325 (C.M.A. 1986) 
(approving a permissive inference of  intent to kill arising 
from evidence the accused smashed the victim’s head with 
a hammer and from circumstantial evidence of his state of 
mind at the time of the offense); United States v. Lyons, 33 
M.J. 88, 89-90 (C.M.A. 1991) (approving a permissive 
inference that the unlawfulness of the carrying of a 
concealed weapon may be inferred from the fact of the 
carrying). 
In Ford, we held that the permissive inference may  be 
“sufficient by itself to support a finding of wrongfulness 
beyond a reasonable doubt,” even “where the defense 
subsequently introduces evidence which purportedly 
undermines or contradicts this inference.” Ford, 23 M.J. at 
332. But the inference is just that —permissive. As the 
Court explained: 
We . . . must emphasize that the factfinder is not 
required to reach findings of guilty on this basis 
[of the permissive inference]. Moreover, the 
Government must convince or persuade the 
factfinder beyond a reasonable doubt to do so. Our 
United States v. Bass, No. 25-0149/MC 
Judge JOHNSON, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON 
joins in part, dissenting 
 
6 
 
holding today is simply that we find no 
constitutional violation in findings of guilty to 
wrongful marihuana use based on such a record. 
Id. at 337. 
Questions concerning Appellant’s access to hemp-
containing contraband; whether the levels of THC -8 
metabolite in his urinalyses correspond to physiological 
effects that would have alerted him to the presence of THC-
8 in his body; and whether he was aware that he consumed 
a product containing THC-8 are questions for the trier of 
fact to ascertain and consider in weighing whether to draw 
the inference of wrongfulness in this case. The military 
judge had the benefit of du eling expert testimony to flesh 
out the se questions, which he addressed in his special 
findings. Under the circumstances, I conclude the military 
judge did not err by applying the permissive inference to 
find Appellant guilty of violating a lawful general 
regulation by wrongfully using a substance containing 
THC-8. 