This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Daytron Abdullah, Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0070 
Crim. App. No. 20230223 
 
Argued December 9, 2025—Decided June 12, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Jacqueline L. Emanuel 
 
For Appellant: Captain Andrew W. Moore (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten , Lieutenant Colonel Au-
tumn R. Porter , and Jonathan F. Potter , Esq. (on 
brief); Lieutenant Colonel William M. Grady and 
Lieutenant Colonel Robert D. Luyties. 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Meghan E . Moore (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini, Major Vy T. Nguyen, and 
Captain Andrew T. Bobowski (on brief); Major Marc 
B. Sawyer and Captain Anthony J. Scarpati. 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge SPARKS and Senior Judge EFFRON 
joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate opin-
ion concurring in the judgment , in which Judge 
HARDY joined. Judge HARDY filed a separate opin-
ion concurring in the judgment. 
_______________ 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A military judge sitting as a special court -martial con-
victed Appellant, pursuant to his pleas, of one specification 
each of desertion, absence without leave, willfully disobey-
ing a superior commissioned officer, and wrongful use of a 
controlled substance, in violation of Articles 85, 86, 90, and 
112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 885, 886, 890, 912a (2018). The military judge sentenced 
Appellant to a reduction to E-1, confinement for a total of 
ninety days, and a bad -conduct discha rge (BCD). The 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) af-
firmed the findings and affirmed so much of the sentence  
as included ninety days of confinement . United States v. 
Abdullah (Abdullah I ), No. ARMY 20230223, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 199, at *12, 2024 WL 2045391, at *5  (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. Apr. 30, 2024) (unpublished). On reconsideration, the 
en banc CCA affirmed the findings and affirmed the sen-
tence as adjudged. United States v. Abdullah (Abdullah II), 
85 M.J. 501, 510 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2024). 
We granted review to determine whether a retired ap-
pellate judge and an appellate judge on terminal leave im-
permissibly participated in the  en banc decision of the 
CCA. For the reasons stated below, we hold that under the 
circumstances of this case, the  retired appellate judge’s 
participation in the decision was impermissible, and this 
error requires remand for a new Article 66, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 866 (Supp. III 2019-2022), review. Accordingly, we 
set aside the decision of the CCA. We reserve for another 
day the question whether the participation of a former ap-
pellate judge on terminal leave was permissible. 
I. Background 
In a memorandum opinion issued on April 30, 2024, the 
CCA held that dilatory post-trial processing violated due 
process and warranted relief under Article 66, UCMJ. Ab-
dullah I, 2024 CCA LEXIS 199, at *12, 2024 WL 2045391, 
at *5. The court affirmed the findings of guilty but affirmed 
only so much of the sentence as included ninety days of con-
finement. Id., 2024 WL 2045391, at * 5. The Government 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
filed a suggestion for reconsideration en banc , which the 
CCA adopted on June 14, 2024, thereby vacating its opin-
ion in Abdullah I . See Army Court of Criminal Appeals  
Rules of Appellate Procedure Rule 31.2(c) (Jan. 15 , 2019) 
(“An order granting reconsideration vacates the decision to 
be reconsidered.”). 
In an opinion on reconsideration issued on November 5, 
2024, the en banc CCA held that there was no unreasona-
ble post-trial delay in violation of due process or Article 66, 
UCMJ, and that setting aside the BCD was not appropriate 
relief under Article 66(d)(2) , UCMJ. Abdullah II, 85 M.J. 
at 510. Accordingly, it affirmed the original findings and 
sentence. Id. Senior Judge Walker authored the opinion of 
the eight-judge court, in which Chief Judge Smawley and 
three other judges concurred. Id. at 503, 510. In a footnote, 
the CCA noted that “Chief Judge SMAWLEY took final ac-
tion on t his case prior to his departure from the court,”  
while “Senior Judge WALKER took final action in this case 
prior to her retirement.” Id. at 503 n.1. Three judges wrote 
separately, one concurring in part and in the judgment, id. 
at 510 (Morris, J., concurring in part), and two dissenting. 
Id. at 511 (Arguelles, J., dissenting), 514 (Penland, J., with 
whom Arguelles, J., joined, dissenting). 
Appellant petitioned this Court for review of the ques-
tion whether the CCA lawfully conducted its en banc re-
view of his case where former Senior Judge Walker and for-
mer Chief Judge Smawley were not in regular active 
service when Abdullah II was issued.
1 Attached to the Sup-
plement to the Petition for Grant of Review were two mem-
oranda concerning the composition of Army CCA panels. 
The first, dated July 22, 2024, identifies Col onel Pond as 
Chief Judge and reflects that Senior Judge Walker was as-
signed to CCA Panel 4 as of that date. Former Chief Judge 
 
1 Appellant also argued the decision to grant en banc review 
was itself an abuse of discretion and challenged the CCA’s ruling 
that post-trial delay did not violate his due process rights. We 
denied review of these assertions of error, which are not at issue 
on this appeal. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
Smawley was not assigned to any panel. The second, dated 
September 30, 2024,  and effective September 23, 2024 , 
identifies Colonel Pond as Chief Judge  and reflect s that 
neither former Chief Judge Smawley nor former  Senior 
Judge Walker was assigned to a panel. Both memoranda 
state that the panel reorganization did not affect this case. 
Appellant subsequently filed a motion requesting that this 
Court take judicial notice of the p anel composition memos 
attached to the Supplement.  
Upon consideration of Appellant’s Supplement to the 
Petition for Grant of Review and his request for judicial no-
tice, we concluded there was insufficient evidence to an-
swer the assigned issue . Accordingly, o n March 24, 2025, 
we ordered the Government to file an answer to the Sup-
plement and provide an affidavit answering  the following 
questions:  
1. For former-Chief Judge Smawley: 
(a) On what date did his assignment to the United 
States Army Court of Criminal Appeals end? 
(b) If he retired, on what date did he retire from 
the United States Army? 
(c) If he retired, what date did he begin terminal 
leave? 
2. For former-Senior Judge Walker: 
(a) On what date did she retire? 
(b) On what date did she begin terminal leave? 
United States v. Abdullah, 85 M.J. 406 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (or-
der). The motion for judicial notice was denied as moot. Id. 
On April 21, 2025, the Government filed an affidavit 
with this Court providing the following information:  
1. For former-Chief Judge Smawley: 
 (a) Chief Judge Smawley relinquished com-
mand on 22 July 2024. 
 (b) Chief Judge Smawley retired from the 
Army on October 31, 2024. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
(c) Chief Judge Smawley’s transition leave 
started on September 1, 2024. Chief Judge 
Smawley completed his uncharged transition 
absence (transition administrative absence/in-
voluntary separation administrative absence) 
from August 13, 2024, through August 31, 
2024.  
2. For former-Senior Judge Walker 
(a) Colonel Walker retired on November 30, 
2024. 
(b) Colonel Walker’s terminal/transition leave 
ran from October 10, 2024, until her retire-
ment. Colonel Walker completed her un-
charged transition absence (transition admin-
istrative absence/involuntary separation 
administrative absence) from September 20, 
2024 through October 9, 2024. 
We then granted review of a modified issue: “Whether a 
retired appellate judge and an appellate judge on terminal 
leave impermissibly participated in an en banc decision of 
the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals.” 
United States v. Abdullah, 86 M.J. 138 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (or-
der granting review). 
II. Standard of Review 
Whether a court is properly constituted is a question of 
law that this Co urt reviews de novo. United States v. 
Janssen, 73 M.J. 221, 224 (C.A.A.F. 2014).  
III. Discussion 
“A complete Article 66, UCMJ, review is a ‘substantial 
right’ of an accused.” United States v. Swift , 76 M.J. 210, 
216 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (quoting United States v. Jenkins , 60 
M.J. 27, 30 (C.A.A.F. 2004)). “Only a properly constituted 
appellate panel can complete the review required by Article 
66, UCMJ.” United States v. Lane, 64 M.J. 1, 7 (C.A.A.F. 
2006). “The consideration of Appellant’s case by 
any properly constituted panel satisfies Article 66, UCMJ.” 
United States v. Shea, 76 M.J. 277, 280-81 (C.A.A.F. 2017) 
(citing United States v. Vines, 15 M.J. 247, 249 (C.M.A. 
1983) (plurality opinion)). Only a commissioned officer or a 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
civilian assigned to a CCA as an appellate military judge 
may sit en banc with a CCA. Article 66(a), UCMJ. Because 
former Chief Judge Smawley participated in the en banc 
decision of this case when he was no longer assigned to the 
CCA as an appellate judge, Abdullah II was decided by an 
improperly constituted court and, thus, the case must be 
remanded for a review by a properly constituted en banc 
court. 
A. Applicable Legal Principles 
Appellate military judges are assigned to the Courts of 
Criminal Appeals (CCAs) by the Judge Advocates General 
(TJAGs) in accordance with qualifications set forth in Arti-
cle 66(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866(a) (Supp. III 2019-2022), 
which provides: 
(1) IN GENERAL.— . . . Appellate military judges 
who are assigned to a Court of Criminal Appeals 
may be commissioned officers or civilians, each of 
whom must be a member of a bar of a Federal 
court or of the highest court of a State and must 
be certified by the Judge Advocate Ge neral as 
qualified, by reason of education, training, experi-
ence, and judicial temperament, for duty as an ap-
pellate military judge. . . . In accordance with reg-
ulations prescribed by the President, assignments 
of appellate military judges under this section (ar-
ticle) shall be for appropriate minimum periods, 
subject to such exceptions as may be authorized in 
the regulations. 
(2) ADDITIONAL QUALIFICATIONS.—  In addi-
tion to any other qualifications specified in para-
graph (1), any commissioned officer or civilian as-
signed as an appellate military judge to a Court of 
Criminal Appeals shall have not fewer than 12 
years of experience in the practice of law before 
such assignment. 
Unlike federal judges who are guaranteed lifetime tenure 
during “good Behaviour,” U.S. Const. art. III, § 1 , officers 
assigned as military judges —including those assigned as 
appellate military judges—serve limited terms and “may 
perform judicial duties only when assigned to do so by the 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
appropriate Judge Advocate General.” Weiss v. United 
States, 510 U.S. 163, 168 (1994).  
Consistent with these limitations, the Code of Judicial 
Conduct for Army Trial and Appellate Judges applies to of-
ficers only “when serving in a judicial assignment or per-
forming judicial functions on active duty.” Code of Judicial 
Conduct for Army Trial and Appellate Judges, I. Applica-
bility of This Code, at 6 (May 16, 2008). “The intent of this 
Code is to cover only those individuals who have been cer-
tified as judges by The Judge Advocate General and are 
currently performing in a judicial assignment or perform-
ing judicial functions.” Id. at Comment [2]. 
Article 66(h), UCMJ, affords the Judge Advocates Gen-
eral broad authority to create procedures governing the op-
erations of the service courts. Pursuant to this authority, 
the Joint Rules of Appellate Procedure for Courts of Crim-
inal Appeals (Jan. 1, 2019, amended through May 17, 2024) 
[hereinafter Joint Rules or JRAP] provide that “[a] major-
ity of judges who are in regular active service, as defined in 
[Joint] Rule 7 or CCA rules, and not disqualified may, sua 
sponte or in response to a suggestion, order that an appeal 
or other proceeding be considered or reconsidered by the 
Court en banc.” JRAP 27(a). The Joint Rules further pro-
vide that “[w]hen sitting en banc, a majority of the judges 
in regular active service with the [service] Court shall con-
stitute a quorum.” JRAP 7(a). The Joint Rules define “reg-
ular active service”:  
[A] judge assigned to the Court shall be deemed to 
be in regular active service if: (1) in the active com-
ponent of the armed forces; (2) in the reserve com-
ponent of the armed forces and serving on active 
duty with the Court for a period of more than 30 
consecutive days; or (3) a civilian judge who is a 
full-time employee of the agency from which ap-
pointed. . . . [or] when a reserve component mili-
tary judge who does not meet the above criteria is 
duly assigned to a matter. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
JRAP 7(b). 2 Accordingly, unless assigned to the court, a 
judge cannot be in regular active service in accordance with 
JRAP 7(a). 
B. The Error 
Former Chief Judge Smawley was not eligible to partic-
ipate in Abdullah II  because he was a retired officer not 
assigned as a CCA judge  when the case was decided. “[A] 
case or controversy is determined when it is decided.” 
Yovino v. Rizo, 586 U.S. 181, 185 (2019) (per curiam) (cita-
tion modified). Abdullah II  was decided on November 5, 
2024, when the CCA issued its en banc decision. Former  
Chief Judge Smawley retired on October 31, 2024. There is 
no evidence in the record that he was assigned to serve as 
a CCA judge after his retirement . As a retired officer not 
assigned to the CCA, he was ineligible to participate in the 
decision in Abdullah II.  
In United States v. American -Foreign S.S. Corp. , the 
Supreme Court held that a judge who retired after the in-
termediate appellate court granted a petition for rehearing 
en banc but before it issued its decision was statutorily 
barred from participating in the en banc decision. 363 U.S. 
685, 691 (1960). The relevant statute provided that en banc 
proceedings “shall be heard and determined by  . . . all ac-
tive circuit judges of the circuit.” 28 U.S.C. § 46(c)  (1958). 
The Supreme Court found that “[t]he literal meaning of the 
words seems plain enough. An ‘active’ judge is a judge who 
has not retired ‘from regular active service.’ ” American-
Foreign S.S. Corp. , 363 U.S.  at 688 (quoting 28 U.S.C. 
§ 371(b) (1958)). Moreover, “[a] case or controversy is ‘de-
termined’ when it is decided.” Id.  Because the judge in 
question retired after the court granted the petition for re-
hearing en banc but before it issued its decision, he was not 
eligible to participate in the en banc decision. Id.  at 691.
3 
 
2 The service courts are authorized to establish their own def-
initions of “regular active service” even if inconsistent with 
JRAP 7(b). JRAP 7(c). However, the Army has not done so. 
3 Congress subsequently amended 28 U.S.C. § 46(c) to allow 
retired federal judges to participate in en banc decisions. Pub. L. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
Accordingly, the Supreme Court set aside the lower court’s 
judgment. Id.  
In the service courts, as in the federal courts, a case is 
decided when the court’s decision is issued. See, e.g., United 
States v. Schreck , 10 M.J. 374, 374 (C.M.A. 1981) (noting 
that the Court “decided this case” on the date that the lead 
opinion and two separate opinions in the case issued) ; see 
also United States v. Jeffers, No. ACM 38664 (recon), 2016 
CCA LEXIS  52, at * 8, 2016 WL 381592, at *3 (A.F. Ct. 
Crim. App. Jan. 28, 2016) (holding that “cases provide prec-
edential (or persuasive) value when decided and issued, re-
gardless of their inchoate nature” pending appeal) . Joint 
Rule 7 requires the participation of the assigned judges un-
til “final resolution” of the matter before the court. JRAP  
7(a) (providing that “concurrence of a majority . . . shall be 
required for a final resolution of any matter before the 
panel or Court en banc”). “Final resolution” is synonymous 
with “heard and determined,” the statutory language at is-
sue in American-Foreign S.S. Corp., 363 U.S. at 688. Com-
pare Resolution, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024) 
(“[a] court’s solemn judgment or decision”), with Heard and 
Determined, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024) (“hav-
ing been presented to a court that rendered judgment”). 
Therefore, a case is finally resolved when a decision is is-
sued. The CCA’s November 5, 2024, decision in Abdullah 
II was its final resolution of the case.  
 
No. 88-176, 77 Stat. 331 (1963).  In its current form, 28 U.S.C. 
§ 46(c) provides:  
that any senior circuit judge of the circuit shall be 
eligible (1) to participate, at his election and upon 
designation and assignment pursuant to section 
294(c) of this title and the rules of the circuit, as a 
member of an in banc court reviewing a decision 
of a panel of which such judge was a member, or 
(2) to continue to participate in the decision of a 
case or controversy that was heard or reheard by 
the court in banc at a time when such judge was 
in regular active service. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
Here, like the judge in American-Foreign S.S. Corp., for-
mer Chief Judge Smawley retired after the intermediate 
appellate court granted the petition for rehearing en banc 
but before Abdullah II  was decided. Because he was a re-
tired officer not assigned to the CCA  when the case was 
decided, former Chief Judge Smawley was not eligible to 
participate in the en banc decision of the court. See JRAP 
7(a), (b); cf. United States v. Witt, 75 M.J. 380, 383 (C.A.A.F. 
2016) (noting that an appellate judge “has a duty not to sit 
when disqualified” equal to the judge’s “duty to sit on a case 
when not disqualified”); see also United States v. Roach, 69 
M.J. 17, 19-20 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (“A recusal means the judge 
‘may not preside over any subsequent proceedings in the 
case or perform any other judicial actions with respect to 
it.’ ” (quoting Richard E. Flamm, Judicial Disqualification: 
Recusal and Disqualification of Judges § 22.1 (1996))). 
This is true even if the opinion was written and former 
Chief Judge Smawley  had cast his final vote before retir-
ing. The Government has cited, and we have found, no “rule 
or decision . . . that renders judges’ votes and opinions im-
mutable at some point in time prior to their public release. 
And it is generally understood that a judge may change his 
or her position up to the very moment when a decision is 
released.” Yovino, 586 U.S. at 184.  
In Yovino, the Supreme Court vacated an en banc deci-
sion authored by a United States Court of Appeals for the 
Ninth Circuit judge who passed away eleven days before 
the decision was issued. Id.  at 183. A  footnote to the en 
banc decision noted that before his death, the judge “fully 
participated in this case and authored this opinion. The 
majority opinion and all concurrences were final, and vot-
ing was completed by the en banc court prior to his death.” 
Id. at 184 (citation omitted)  (internal quotation marks  
omitted). Nevertheless, the Supreme Court held: 
 Our holding in American-Foreign S.S. Corp.  
applies with equal if not greater force here. When 
the Ninth Circuit issued its opinion in this case, 
[the deceased judge] was neither an active judge 
nor a senior judge. For that reason, by statute he 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
was without power to participate in the en banc 
court’s decision at the time it was rendered. 
Id. at 185. The same is true here.  Even assuming former  
Chief Judge Smawley was assigned as a CCA judge during 
the pendency of the appeal, to include the drafting and fi-
nal voting on the decision, he was a retired officer not as-
signed as a CCA judge  when the CCA issued its decision. 
Therefore, he was not eligible to participate in Abdullah II 
at the time the decision was rendered.4  
Nothing prohibits the service secretaries from ordering 
to active duty a retired member of the regular service  for 
assignment to a service court , see 10 U.S.C. § 688 (a) 
(providing that a retired member of the regular Army may 
be ordered to active duty by the Secretary of the Army at 
any time), nor is the President prohibited from appointing 
a civilian to serve as an appellate military judge , see 
Janssen, 73 M.J. at 225 (holding that the appointment of a 
civilian as a military appellate judge can only be done by 
the President with the advice and consent of the Senate) . 
 
4 With respect to the termination of former  Chief Judge 
Smawley’s assignment to the CCA, the order issued by our Court 
discussed supra p. 4, asked the Government: “On what date did 
his assignment to the United States Army Court of Criminal Ap-
peals end?” The Government’s response—“ Chief Judge Smawley 
relinquished command on 22 July 2024 ”—did not address the 
termination of his assignment to the CCA, but instead addressed 
a different matter, the conclusion of his command responsibili-
ties at the CCA. The second question in the order issued by our 
Court asked the Government: “If he retired, on what date did he 
retire from the United States Army ?” The Government ’s re-
sponse to the second question stated: “Chief Judge Smawley re-
tired from the Army on October 31, 2024.” During oral argument 
the Government identified Oct ober 31, 2024 —the retirement 
date for former Chief Judge Smawley—as the end date of his as-
signment to the Court of Criminal Appeals. After noting that for-
mer Chief Judge Smawley could have returned to the CCA after 
he retired on October  31, 2024, the Government conceded that 
the record did not contain evidence that former  Chief Judge 
Smawley had received an order assigning him to serve as a mil-
itary appellate judge on the CCA after he retired on October 31, 
2024. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
But even if former  Chief Judge Smawley could  have been 
assigned to the CCA  after he retired, there is no evidence 
that he was either recalled to active duty or appointed by 
the President as a military appellate judge after he retired 
and before this case was decided.  
C. The Remedy 
In light of the participation of a retired officer not as-
signed as a CCA judge, we set aside the decision in Abdul-
lah II  and remand for further proceedings.  See Ryder v. 
United States, 515 U.S. 177, 188 (1995) (declining to test 
for prejudice and holding a servicemember is entitled to a 
hearing before a properly appointed panel of the Court of 
Military Review, the predecessor to the CCA). 
In Lane, we held that the participation of a United 
States Air Force Standby Reserve officer as an appellate 
military judge on a CCA panel that decided the appellant’s 
case violated the Incompatibility Clause of the Constitu-
tion where the military judge was also a sitting United 
States Senator. 64 M.J. at 7. Although his vote was imma-
terial to the result because the panel was unanimous, and 
the case was submitted on its merits to the CCA without 
assignment of error, United States v. Lane, 60 M.J. 781, 
782 (A.F. Ct. Cri m. App. 2004) (per curiam), we held that 
“[o]nly a properly constituted appellate panel can complete 
the review required by Article 66, UCMJ,” Lane, 64 M.J. at 
7. Accordingly, we vacated the decision and remanded for 
consideration by a properly constituted panel. Id. 
Lane is consistent with  federal precedent vacating the 
opinion of an improperly constituted panel and remanding 
even if the disqualified judges’ presence did not materially 
impact the result. The Supreme Court “has never doubted 
its power to vacate the judgment entered by an improperly 
constituted court of appeals, even when there was a 
quorum of judges competent to consider the appeal.” Ngu-
yen v. United States, 539 U.S. 69, 82 (2003)  (citing cases). 
Federal circuit court s of appeal s have applied the same 
remedy, vacating decisions in which  a judge erroneously 
participated. See Mayor of Baltimore v. Mathews, 571 F.2d 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
1273, 1276 (4th Cir. 1978) (per curiam) (withdrawing pre-
vious opinion where a judge had died prior to the case being 
decided and affirming the lower court on an equally divided 
vote); see also Altera Corp. v. Commissioner, 898 F.3d 1266, 
1266 (9th Cir. 2018) (withdrawing opinions sua sponte af-
ter a participating judge passed away). 
We recognize that the erroneous participation of a judge 
in an en banc decision does not always require remand. For 
example, in Vines, we found error and acknowledged that 
remand was an option where the appellant’s case was as-
signed to one lower court panel but decided by a different  
panel. 15 M.J. at 250. However, because one of the mem-
bers of the assigned panel had retired and was unavailable, 
remand would not have resulted in review by the assigned 
panel. Id. Moreover, “[t]he accused [did] not challenge the 
qualifications of the appellate military judges who re-
viewed and decided his case, and there is nothing in the 
record before us which could support such a challenge.” Id. 
at 249. In other words, there was no question the deciding 
panel was properly constituted; the lower court simply sent 
the case to the wrong panel. We concluded “the only prac-
tical solution is to affirm the decision of the p anel which 
did consider the accused’s case since there is no codal im-
pediment to such action.” Id. at 250.  
But where the CCA acts outside the scope of its author-
ity—in this case, by including a person not assigned as a 
CCA judge in the en banc decision of the court —we  do not 
require a showing of prejudice to justify a remand for a new 
Article 66, UCMJ, review. See United States v. Nerad , 69 
M.J. 138, 140 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (remanding for a new Article 
66, UCMJ, review without requiring a showing of prejudice 
where, inter alia,  “it is unclear from the CCA’s opinion 
whether it exceeded its authority by disapproving a finding 
with reference to something other than a legal standard”). 
In contrast with Vines, the en banc court here was improp-
erly constituted by virtue of former Chief Judge Smawley’s 
continued participation when he was no longer assigned to 
the CCA. And unlike Vines, remand of this case would af-
ford Appellant his statutory right to an Article 66, UCMJ, 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
review by a properly constituted court.  Therefore, we con-
clude the case should be remanded for further proceedings 
before a properly constituted en banc court. 
Even if it is necessary to find prejudice to provide Ap-
pellant with a remedy, we still conclude that remand is ap-
propriate because the CCA’s failure to ensure Appellant’s 
case was decided by a properly constituted en banc court 
prejudiced Appellant’s substantial rights. In Liljeberg v. 
Health Services Acquisition Corp. , the Supreme Court set 
forth a three-factor test for evaluating the prejudicial effect 
of errors involving the participation of disqualified judges 
in a case: “the risk of injustice to the parties in the partic-
ular case, the risk that the denial of relief will produce in-
justice in other cases, and the risk of undermining the pub-
lic’s confidence in the judicial process.” 486 U.S. 847, 864  
(1988); see also United States v. Gonzalez, 79 M.J. 466, 470 
(C.A.A.F. 2020) (Maggs, J., with whom Ryan, J., joined, dis-
senting) (recognizing that “[n]ot all errors in conducting a 
review under Article 66(c), UCMJ, are prejudicial” (citing 
cases where the Court found errors in the CCAs’ Article 66 
review harmless)). 
“Because not every judicial disqualification requires re-
versal,” this Court has “adopted the standards announced 
by the Supreme Court in Liljeberg to determine whether a 
military judge’s conduct warrants that remedy to vindicate 
public confidence in the military justice system.” United 
States v. Martinez , 70 M.J. 154, 158 (C.A.A.F. 2011). We 
apply the same standards to evaluate the conduct of appel-
late military judges. Witt , 75 M.J. at 384 (“Although CCA 
judges are not ‘judges of the United States,’ we have  ap-
plied the Liljeberg factors in evaluating the participation of 
recused judges in the military justice system.”). As we have 
explained, the third Liljeberg factor “is not limit[ed] . . . to 
facts relevant to recusal, but rather review[s] the entire 
proceedings, to include any post -trial proceeding, the con-
vening authority action, the action of the [CCA], or other 
facts relevant to the Liljeberg test.” United States v. Uribe, 
80 M.J. 442, 449 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (citation modified). 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
15 
 
In Roach, the Court found prejudicial error where a 
recused appellate judge recommended his replacement to 
the Judge Advocate General of the Air Force (TJAG) after 
his recusal, and TJAG accepted the recommendation. 69 
M.J. at 19. The recused judge “took a procedural step after 
his recusal” which “created the appearance of directly im-
pacting a case from which he was recused.” Id.  at 20. We 
accepted the appellant’s concession that the error was not 
structural, noting that notwithstanding the error, the ap-
pellant “had his case reviewed by a three -member CCA 
panel composed of military judges appointed by the TJAG 
consistent with applicable regulations.” Id. Accordingly, we 
tested for prejudice under Liljeberg and held: 
 The third Liljeberg factor is determinative in 
this case. First, public confidence in the military 
judicial process is undermined where judges act in 
cases from which they are recused. This is true, 
whether the judge’s role is significant or minimal. 
The record supports the CCA ’s conclusion that 
“any ‘influence’ flowing from [the recused judge’s] 
‘recommendation’ was at best minimal and re-
sulted in no discernible prejudice to the appel-
lant.” Nonetheless, either a military judge is 
recused or he is not. A military judge who acts in-
consistently with a recusal, no matter how mini-
mally, may leave a wider audience to wonder 
whether the military judge lacks the same rigor 
when applying the law. 
Id. at 20-21 (citation omitted); see also Witt, 75 M.J. at 384 
(holding that the participation of disqualified judges in the 
Air Force CCA’s en banc decision on reconsideration “pro-
duced a significant ‘risk of undermining the public’s confi-
dence in the judicial process,’ and thus prejudiced Appel-
lant’s substantial rights. Article 59(a), UCMJ” (quoting  
Liljeberg, 486 U.S. at 864)).  
The participation of a former military appellate judge 
who is no longer assigned to the CCA makes the case for 
prejudice even stronger here . We conclude the third 
Liljeberg factor is dispositive as we did in Roach, and we 
reach the same result : former Chief Judge Smawley’s 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
16 
 
participation in Abdullah II  materially prejudiced Appel-
lant’s rights. 
Appellant asks this Court to set aside the decision of the 
en banc CCA because two of the judges who participated in 
the decision were not assigned to the CCA  when the deci-
sion issued. In light of our conclusions  that former Chief 
Judge Smawley was not eligible to participate in a decision 
issued after he retired when he was no longer assigned to 
the CCA and that his participation materially prejudiced 
Appellant’s substantial rights, in our decretal paragraph 
we set aside that decision of the CCA. As a result, we need 
not decide whether former Senior Judge Walker was eligi-
ble to participate in the decision of the en banc court when 
she was on terminal leave or whether her participation had 
a prejudicial impact.  
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is set aside. The record is remanded for a new 
Article 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 ( Supp. III 2019 -2022) 
review by a properly constituted en banc court. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom Judge HARDY joins, 
concurring in the judgment. 
In my view, the following principles control this case. 
In order to be authorized to participate in deciding a 
United States Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) case, a per-
son must be properly serving as a CCA judge. United States 
v. Lane, 64 M.J. 1, 7 (C.A.A.F. 2006) (“Only a properly con-
stituted appellate panel can complete the review required 
by Article 66, UCMJ.”).  
The Joint Rules of Appellate Procedure for Courts of 
Criminal Appeals (Jan. 1, 2019, amended through May 17, 
2024) [hereinafter JRAP], state that in order for a military 
officer to properly sit to consider a case en banc, that person 
must be “in regular active service.”  JRAP 7(a).  And the 
JRAP further state that a military officer: 
shall be deemed to be in regular active service for 
purposes of these rules if [he or she is]: (1) in the 
active component of the armed forces; [or] (2) in 
the reserve component of the armed forces and 
serving on active duty with the Court for a period 
of more than 30 consecutive days.1  
JRAP 7(b). 
Brigadier General (BG) Smawley (Ret.)— through no 
fault of his own—was no longer “in regular active service” 
at the time the en banc opinion in this case was finally is-
sued because he had retired. 2 Simply stated, BG Smawley 
(Ret.) did not fit into any of the cat egories provided under 
JRAP 7(b) on the date the opinion in this case was issued. 
The date the opinion was issued is key because the Su-
preme Court has held that a case is not decided until a 
court issues its decision.  See United States v. American -
 
1 The JRAP also have a provision stating when a civilian can 
serve as a CCA judge. See JRAP 7(b). That provision does not 
apply to the facts of this case. 
2 BG Smawley (Ret.) could have been recalled to active duty 
and then appointed to the CCA, but that did not happen here. 
See Article 66(a), Uniform Code of Military Justice , 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(a) (Supp. III 2019-2022). 
 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom Judge HARDY joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
2 
 
Foreign S.S. Corp. , 363 U.S. 685, 688 (1960) (“A case or 
controversy is ‘determined’ when it is decided.”). The Su-
preme Court noted that a judge’s vote is not rendered “im-
mutable at some point in time prior to [an opinion’s] public 
release. . . . [A] judge may change his or her position up to 
the very moment when a decision is released.” Yovino  v. 
Rizo, 586 U.S. 181, 184 (2019) (per curiam); accord United 
States v. Schreck, 10 M.J. 374, 374 (C.M.A. 1981)  (stating 
that “[o]n February 2, 1981, we decided this case and three 
opinions issued”).  
Accordingly, because BG Smawley (Ret.) retired on Oc-
tober 31, 2024, but the opinion was not issued until Novem-
ber 5, 2024, BG Smawley (Ret.) was not authorized to par-
ticipate in deciding this en banc CCA case. 
In light of these circumstances, for the reasons cited in 
the majority opinion, United States v. Abdullah, __ M.J. __, 
__ (12-14) (C.A.A.F. 2026), the appropriate remedy is to va-
cate the CCA’s decision and remand for consideration by a 
properly constituted en banc court. See Lane, 64 M.J. at 7.  
Because the majority reaches this same result —albeit  
through a different analytical approach —I  concur in the 
judgment. 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment. 
I agree with Chief Judge Ohlson that Brigadier General 
(BG) Smawley (Ret.) was not eligible to participate in the 
en banc decision below because he was not in regular active 
service when the case was decided, and I join his opinion in 
full. I write separately to highlight  a foundational consti-
tutional question presented by this case but unaddressed 
by the parties : whether BG Smawley (Ret.) possessed the 
authority of an “ Officer of the United States ” when the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) is-
sued its en banc decision. See Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 
125-26 (1976) (per curiam) (holding “that any appointee ex-
ercising significant authority pursuant to the laws of the 
United States is an ‘Officer of the United States’ ”). I raise 
this question because the Constitution’s Appointments 
Clause “is more than a matter of ‘etiquette or protocol’; it is 
among the significant structural safeguards of the consti-
tutional scheme.” Edmond v. United States, 520 U.S. 651, 
659 (1997). Yet neither Appellant nor the Government dis-
cussed this issue in their briefs.  
During a flurry of litigation during the 1990s, this Court 
and the Supreme Court  examined the role of military 
judges on the Courts of Criminal Appeals (CCAs) and re-
solved several questions about their place in our tripartite 
federal government. From those cases, we know much 
about the constitutional  status of CCA judges and how 
their positions relate to the Appointment s Clause of Arti-
cle II of the Constitution. 
First, because they exercise significant authority under 
federal law, CCA judges are officers of the United States 
who must be appointed pursuant to the Appointments 
Clause. Weiss v. United States, 510 U.S. 163, 169-70 (1994); 
Edmond, 520 U.S. at 654. However, because their work is 
supervised by other executive branch officers in two sepa-
rate ways, CCA judges are inferior rather than  principal 
officers under the Constitution.
1 Edmond, 520 U.S. at 
 
1 The Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution as rec-
ognizing two types of officers of the United States. Principal of-
ficers work independently without supervision from other offic-
ers, and inferior officers  who are directed and supervised by 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
2 
 
665-66. The respective Judge Advocate General (TJAG) of 
each military branch exercises significant administrative 
oversight over the CCAs , including the ability to remove 
CCA judges from their judicial assignments without cause. 
Id. at 664 .2 Additionally, this Court has substantial au-
thority to review the opinions issued by the CCAs . Id. at 
664-65. Accordingly, because CCA judges are inferior offic-
ers with only limited ability to render a final decision on 
behalf of the United States on their own , Congress may 
vest the ir appointment “in the President alone, in the 
Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments. ” U.S. 
Const. art. II, § 2, cl. 2; Edmond, 520 U.S. at 665. 
Second, because CCA judges are officers of the United 
States, Congress cannot give TJAGs the power to appoint 
CCA judges because that power can only  be conferred on 
the President, department heads, or a court of law. Ed-
mond, 520 U.S. at 658.  Thus, the language in Article  66, 
UCMJ, describing TJAGs’ duties in overseeing the CCAs 
and referring to the appellate judges who are “assigned” to 
a CCA does not give TJAGs authority to appoint CCA 
judges. Id. TJAGs may only assign existing officers of the 
United States to serve as CCA judges. Id . (“Article 66(a) 
concerns not the appointment of [CCA] judges, but only 
their assignment.”). 
Third, this limitation on TJAGs’ authority is not an im-
pediment to staffing the CCAs because all senior military 
officers—including BG Smawley (Ret.)—are already offic-
ers of the United States by virtue of being nominated by 
the President and confirmed by the Senate.
3 Weiss, 510 
 
others who were appointed by presidential nomination with the 
advice and consent of the Senate. Edmond, 520 U.S. at 662-63.  
2 See also  Article 66(h) , Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §  866 (“The Judge Advocates General shall 
prescribe uniform rules of procedure for Courts of Criminal Ap-
peals and shall meet periodically to formulate policies and pro-
cedure in regard to review of court-martial cases in the offices of 
the Judge Advocates General and by Courts of Criminal Ap-
peals.”) 
3 Unlike the other service courts, the judges of the United 
States Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals need not already 
be officers of the United States because Congress has vested the 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
3 
 
U.S. at 170; see also 10 U.S.C. § 624(c) (mandating that mil-
itary promotions for senior officers “shall be made by the 
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Sen-
ate”); 10 U.S.C. § 7037(a) (mandating that general officers 
in the Judge Ad vocate General’s Corps shall be appointed 
by “the President, by and with the advice and consent of 
the Senate”). The President nominated BG Smawley (Ret.) 
to be a brigadier general in the Army Judge Advocate Gen-
eral’s Corps on May 27, 2021, and the Senate confirmed his 
nomination on June 24, 2021.
4 Because the Supreme Court 
has expressly rejected the argument that the Appoint-
ments Clause requires a second nomination and confirma-
tion by the Senate for a commissioned military officer to be 
assigned as a CCA judge, Weiss, 510 U.S. at 176, there can 
be no question that the original assignment of BG Smawley 
(Ret.) to the ACCA satisfied the Appointments Clause and 
that he was authorized to exercise  significant government 
authority under the Constitution prior to his retirement. 
But this case raises a question that the Supreme Court 
did not answer in the 1990s: whether a commissioned mil-
itary officer in retired status retains his constitutional au-
thority to exercise the duties  of an officer of the United 
States. According to the Government’s affidavit, BG Smaw-
ley (Ret.) “relinquished command” on July 22, 2024, under-
went a period of transition leave, and retired from the 
Army on October 31, 2024. The en banc decision below was 
decided on November 5, 2024, five days after BG Smawley 
(Ret.) formally retired and approximately three months af-
ter he relinquished his command. In other words , at the 
 
authority to appoint them in the Secretary of Homeland Secu-
rity, who is a department head. See 14 U.S.C. § 507 (“The Secre-
tary may appoint civilian employees of the department in which 
the Coast Guard is operating as appellate military judges, avail-
able for assignment to the Coast Guard Court of Criminal Ap-
peals as provided for in [Article 66(a), UCMJ].” ); see also Ed-
mond, 520 U.S. at 658. 
4 See Nominations PN611, 117th Cong. (2021), 
https://www.congress.gov/nomination/117th-congress/611/ 
all-info?r=1; 117 Cong. Rec. S4797 (daily ed. June 24, 2021). 
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
4 
 
time the en banc decision was published ,5 there can be no 
doubt that BG Smawley (Ret.) had already retired from ac-
tive duty status. 
Neither party addressed what constitutional authority 
a senior judge advocate officer retains after transitioning 
to retired status in their briefs. At oral argument, the Gov-
ernment suggested that BG Smawley (Ret.) retained all his 
relevant authority after his retirement, based on the theory 
that once a commissioned military officer has been nomi-
nated by the President and confirmed by the Senate, he  
may act as an officer of the United States for the rest of his 
life. That may well be true as long as the officer stays on 
(or is recalled to) active duty , but it does not seem con-
sistent with the military’s own practice with respect to the 
authority of military officers after they retire.  
There is remarkably little controlling legal authority 
describing what authorities a military officer retains  after 
retirement. One limitation that Congress has made clear is 
that “[a] retired officer has no right to command except 
when on active duty. ” 10 U.S.C. §  750. But beyond being 
stripped of that critical authority, the exact legal status of 
retired military officers is less clear. In a 2023 report about 
military retirees, the Congressional Research Service ob-
served that retirees “do not participate in military activi-
ties, are not subject to fitness standards, are not assigned 
to specific commands, lack authority to issue orders, and 
may not serve as panel members for courts -martial.” An-
dres Kuersten, Military Jurisdiction Over Retired Service-
members, LSB10945, at 3, Cong. Rsch. Serv. (Apr. 5, 2023). 
That report appears to have rel ied on Judge Tatel’s sepa-
rate opinion in Larrabee v. Del Toro, where he made simi-
lar observations about the retired enlisted Marines who 
make up the Fleet Marine Corps Reserve. See 45 F.4th 81, 
102-03 (D.C. Cir. 2022) (Tatel, J ., concurring in part and 
dissenting in part) (noting that the day-to-day lives of the 
Fleet Marine Corps Reserve are equivalent to those of 
 
5 I am in complete agreement with my colleagues that this is 
the critical date for the purposes of this appeal. See  United 
States v. Abdullah, __ M.J. __ , __ (9-11) (C.A.A.F. 2026); Id. at 
__ (1-2) (Ohlson, J., concurring in the judgment).  
United States v. Abdullah, No. 25-0070/AR 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
5 
 
ordinary civilians). Based on these sources, it is not at all 
clear that retired military officers are empowered to exer-
cise significant government authority as officers of the 
United States. 
At the very least, there is a strong argument that the 
constitutional authority of BG Smawley (Ret.) as an officer 
of the United States was suspended once he entered retired 
status on October 31, 202 4. Presumably, that authority 
could be returned to BG Smawley (Ret.) if the Secretary of 
the Army ordered him back to active duty pursuant to 10 
U.S.C. § 688 and the associated regulations, but nothing in 
the record suggests that that happened in this case.  If BG 
Smawley (Ret.) participated in the en banc decision below 
while no longer possessing the authority of an officer of the 
United States, I find it likely that his participation not only 
violated the Joint Rules of Appellate Procedure for Courts 
of Criminal Appeals (Jan. 1, 2019, amended through May 
17, 2024), but also the Appointments Clause of the Consti-
tution.  