This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jaelen M. JOHNSON, Senior Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0202 
Crim. App. No. 40537 
 
Argued January 14, 2026—Decided May 26, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Lance R. Smith 
 
For Appellant:  Captain Joshua L. Lopes (argued); 
Captain Michael J. Bruzik (on brief); Megan P. 
Marinos, Esq. 
 
For Appellee:  Major Regina Henenlotter (argued); 
Colonel Matthew Talcott and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. 
(on brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, and Judge 
HARDY joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a 
separate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Introduction 
Appellant entered DF’s private room and touched and 
photographed him while he slept. Law enforcement 
recovered two iPhones belonging to Appellant at the crime 
scene. Law enforcement sought several search 
authorizations, the second of which is relevant here. Later, 
the iPhones were searched, and incriminating evidence 
was found on an iPhone 13. Before trial, the defense moved 
to suppress all evidence obtained from the search of the 
iPhones, but the military judge denied the motion.  
A general court -martial convicted Appellant, contrary 
to his pleas, of one charge and specification of assault, one 
charge and specification  of unlawful entry (a lesser 
included offense of burglary), and one charge and 
specification of indecent visual recording, in violation  of 
Articles 128, 129, and 120c, Uniform C ode of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 9 28, 929, 920c (2018 ). 
Appellant was found not guilty of one charge and 
specification of abusive sexual contact in violation of 
Article 120, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920 (201 8). The military 
judge sentenced Appellant to eighteen months of 
confinement, reduction to the lowest enlisted grade, 
forfeiture of all pay and allowances, a reprimand, and a 
bad-conduct discharge. The United States Air Force Court 
of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) affirmed  the findings and 
sentence. 
We granted review to consider “[w]hether it was error 
to rely on Appellant’s incidental possession of two phones 
at the time of arrest as the basis to search the phones’ 
contents going back more than eight months.” United 
States v. Johnson , 86 M.J. 286 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (order 
granting review). For the reasons stated below, we answer 
the granted issue  in the negative . Assuming without 
deciding that there was no probable cause, we hold the good 
faith exception applies. Accordingly, we affirm the decision 
of the AFCCA. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
I. Background 
On August 12, 2022 , Appellant drove his car onto  
Aviano Air Base (Aviano A B), Italy, where he was 
stationed. He parked his car at the Child Development 
Center (CDC), leaving behind his keys, wallet, and a gym  
bag, and entered a nearby temporary lodging facility (TLF). 
DF, a civilian special agent with the Office of Special 
Investigations (OSI), was sleeping when he was awakened 
by a sensation of something touching his buttocks and later 
his foot. He kicked, turned on the light and found Appellant 
laying on the floor at  the end of his bed. Appellant was 
dressed in black  from head to toe, wearing a beanie, face 
mask, shirt, boxer briefs, and a pair of socks . His pants, 
shoes, and cell phone were on the floor nearby.  
DF punched Appellant in the face several times and 
then detained him. As Appellant pleaded with DF not to 
call the police, DF walked him out of the room  and yelled 
for help. Appellant tried to flee, but DF restrained him 
until help arrived. 
When security forces arrived, they took custody of 
Appellant and secured the scene.  Upon searching  
Appellant’s person, they recovered an iPhone 13. Several 
hours later , OSI Special Agent (SA) AP searched DF’s 
quarters and recovered an iPhone 7 belonging to Appellant 
from the floor next to the bed. 
A. The first search authorization 
Later that day , SA AP sought authorization to search 
Appellant’s cell phone1 for geolocation data that could place 
Appellant at the crime scene at the relevant time . SA AP 
and a judge advocate from the  legal office met with the 
commander of the 31 st Medical Group, A viano AB, Italy 
(commander), and SA AP told him under oath about 
Appellant’s actions at the TLF and the cell phone2 that was 
 
1 It is unclear from the record which iPhone SA AP sought to 
search. 
2 It is unclear from the record which iPhone was discussed. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
discovered at the scene.  After consulting with a judge 
advocate, t he commander found probable cause to grant 
oral search authorization based on SA AP’s representations 
that Appellant was apprehended at the scene after a 
physical altercation witnessed by others  and that his cell 
phone was discovered in DF’s room.3 
Several days later,  SA AP  followed up the verbal 
request with  a written affidavit and application to the 
same commander, requesting authorization to search both 
iPhones for geolocation data . Although it did not contain 
all of the details they had discussed on August 12 , t he 
affidavit described the August 1 2 incident, clarified that  
two iPhones were found, and stated that the judge advocate 
had opined there was probable cause to search both 
iPhones for geolocation data.  On August 23, 2022, t he 
commander signed the  search authorization (the first 
search authorization). 
B. The second search authorization 
On August 31 , 2022, SA JA, a different OS I agent, 
provided the same commander with a sworn affidavit in 
support of a request for authorization to expand the search 
of the iPhones to include “ all call logs, messages .  . . sent 
and received, and media produced between 29 Dec 21 and 
12 Aug 22 related to t he violation of Article  120, UCMJ, 
Sexual Assault; Article 128, UCMJ, Assault; and A rticle 
129, UCMJ, Burglary.” The affidavit provided new details 
about the August 1 2 incident,4 including the fact that 
Appellant left his keys, wallet, and a duffel bag full of 
civilian clothes in his unlocked, parked car ; he had in his 
 
3 This was the first search authorization ever granted by this 
commander. Prior to granting the search authorization , he had 
received “one mandatory training for new commanders ” 
consisting of  “approximately 80 PowerPoint slides” which a 
judge advocate reviewed with the commander and then left with 
him for future reference. 
4 The affidavit did not include any information derived from 
the first search authorization because that search had not yet 
occurred. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
possession only the clothes he was wearing and an iPhone 
when he was apprehended;  and he left another iPhone on 
the floor of DF’s room . SA JA deduced that by leaving 
clothes and other items in the car, Appellant “had sanitized 
himself” of possessions that could be traced to him , except 
for the iPhones . The fact that Appellant brought two 
iPhones into the TLF after leaving his other personal 
effects in his car suggested that he was using the phones 
during the commission of the charged offenses. SA JA had 
previously met with the base legal office and was advised 
by a judge advocate that the evidence supported probable 
cause for the expanded search.  
In addition to the written affidavit, following SA JA’s 
meeting with the base legal office, SA JA met with both the 
commander and a judge advocate to discuss the August 31 
search authorization request. Because Appellant parked at 
the CDC and ended up at the TLF, SA JA deduced that “he 
may have gone to other locations” before going to the TLF. 
To support his assertion that Appell ant was using the 
iPhones during the commission of the charged offense, SA 
JA provided the commander with his theory that Appellant 
captured images of individuals while they were sleeping.  
SA JA also informed the commander  about a similar, 
unsolved incident  at Incirlik Air Base  (Incirlik AB) , 
Turkey, on December 29, 2021, when Appellant was 
stationed there. OSI had learned that a person dressed in 
black and matching Appellant’s description was found 
crawling in a man’s bedroom. When confronted, the 
intruder asked the man not to call the police before he fled.  
The commander initially refused to authorize the 
search, citing “inaccuracies on the document.” Once those 
were corrected, he signed  the search authorization (the 
second search authorization) . At trial, the commander 
testified that he found three facts highly  relevant to his 
probable cause determination . First, the fact that 
Appellant brought two phones into the TLF led him to 
believe the phones were used during the commission of the 
offense. Second, the proximity of the car to the crime scene 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
made it more likely that Appellant was near the crime 
scene. Third, the Aviano incident  “mirrored” the Incirlik 
incident, which occurred when Appellant was stationed at 
Incirlik AB. 
The iPhone 13 was searched on September 7, 2022. The 
search revealed a “significant” number of photographs of 
DF’s feet taken “around the same time” as the  August 12 
incident; photographs of feet of “dozens” of other 
unidentified individuals in various locations, including 
photos taken while they were sleeping ; photographs of 
nude buttocks taken on February 27, 2022; and videos of a 
nude man showering in a locker room, taken on August 10, 
2022. There was no geolocation data on the iPhone 13.5  
C. The third search authorization 
On October 14, 2022, SA JA sought another search 
authorization, this time with no date -range limitation,  
from the same commander.  The supporting affidavit 
referenced the videos and photos found in the previous 
search, and added “Indecent Viewing, Visual Recording, or 
Broadcasting” as a suspected offense.  SA JA, prior to his 
meeting with the commander, consulted with a judge 
advocate who opined that probable cause existed  for the 
expanded search. Following the meeting with the judge 
advocate, SA JA met with the commander and was sworn 
to the facts in his affidavit. The commander found probable 
cause and granted search authorization  (the third search 
authorization). Appellant did not identify or challenge the 
admissibility of any evidence obtained as a result of the 
third search authorization.
6 
 
5 The iPhone 7 was not unlocked and searched until January 
or February 2023. There was geolocation data on the iPhone 7, 
but not associated with any pictures or videos relevant to this 
case. Appellant does not identify or challenge  the admission of 
any evidence discovered on the iPhone 7. 
6 Appellant’s argument focuses on the  second search 
authorization. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
D. Motion to suppress 
Appellant was charged with abusive sexual contact, 
indecent visual recording, assault, and burglary , in 
violation of Articles 120, 120c, 128, and 129, UCMJ. Before 
trial, the defense moved  to suppress all evidence  derived 
from the searches of the iPhones 7 under Military Rule of 
Evidence (M.R.E.) 311(a), which generally makes 
“[e]vidence obtained as a result of an unlawful search or 
seizure . . . inadmissible against the accused .” Appellant 
argued there was no probable cause to search the iPhones 
because there was no reason to believe they were used in 
the commission of any offense. In the alternative, he 
argued there was no probable cause to search for anything 
beyond geolocation data. Therefore, the evidence obtained 
in the search was inadmissible under M.R.E. 311(a) and 
there was no applicable exception to the exclusionary rule.  
The military judge denied the motion, finding probable 
cause for the August 12 and August 31 search 
authorizations.
8 In the alternative, the military judge 
applied the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule 
under M.R.E. 311(c)(3). 
Regarding the August 12 search authorization for 
geolocational data, the military judge concluded: 
Having reviewed [ the commander’s] probable 
cause determination,  and granting [ the 
commander] the required substantial deference, 
this court does not find this to be a close call. The 
court upholds [ the commander’s] probable cause 
determination on the first [verbal and written] 
search authorizations. 
 
7 The motion to suppress specifically identifies “cell phones,” 
thus the iPhone 7 and iPhone 13 are the targets of the motion to 
suppress.  
8 As noted above, Appellant did not identify or challenge the 
admissibility of any evidence obtained as a result of the third 
search authorization. Therefore, the military judge did not 
specifically address the third search authorization , but instead 
addressed the first and second search authorizations. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
The August 31 search authorization was a “closer call.” 
The military judge not ed that “the facts of the 12 August 
2022 incident and the Incirlik incident do not provide facts 
sufficient to go rummaging about in [Appellant ’s] cell 
phones and thus would not support probable cause on their 
own.” Nevertheless, he concluded, “ [w]hat saves this 
evidence for the Government here is the facts about the car, 
its contents, and the fact [that Appellant] was carrying two 
phones—which [ the commander] found particularly 
compelling,” especially in light of the judge advocate’s 
agreement that the totality of the circumstances supported 
probable cause to believe  the iPhones were used in the 
commission of the charged offenses and could contain other 
relevant photographs or recordings.  Therefore, “ the 
execution in this case was legally sufficient, so even if an 
appellate court were to disagree with this court ’s decision 
on [ the commander’s] probable cause determination, the 
court could still apply the good faith basis in this case.” 
Finally, the military judge concluded that even if there 
was no probable cause and the good faith exception did not 
apply, exclusion of the evidence would not appreciably 
deter future unlawful searches and any such deterrent 
effect was outweighed by the costs to the system of 
excluding the evidence. 
E. The appeal 
Appellant challenged the military judge’s suppression 
ruling on appeal to t he AFCCA. Addressing only the good 
faith exception, the AFCCA held “that even if the search 
authorization for evidence predating the TLF offense was 
lacking in probable cause, the good faith exception applies.” 
United States v. Johnson, No. ACM 40537, 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 193, at *24, 2025 WL 1276579, at *7 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. May 2, 2025) (unpublished). Accordingly, the AFCCA 
affirmed the findings and sentence. Id.  at *1-2, 2025 WL 
1276579, at *1.  
We granted review to consider “[w]hether it was error 
to rely on appellant ’s incidental possession of two phones 
at the time of arrest as the basis [for the second search 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
authorization] to search the phones’ contents going back 
more than eight months. ” Johnson, 86 M.J. at 286. 
Assuming without deciding that there was no probable 
cause, we hold the good faith exception applies. 
Accordingly, we affirm the decision of the AFCCA.  
II. Applicable Legal Principles 
When reviewing a lower court’s decision on a military 
judge’s ruling, this Court “ ‘typically ha[s] pierced through 
that intermediate level and examined the military judge’s 
ruling, then decided whether the Court  of Criminal 
Appeals was right or wrong in its examination of the 
military judge’s ruling.’ ” United States v. Blackburn , 80 
M.J. 205, 211 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (quoting United States v. 
Shelton, 64 M.J. 32, 37 (C.A.A.F. 2006)) . “We review the 
military judge’s ruling on a motion to suppress for abuse of 
discretion, considering the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prevailing party. ” United States v. 
Harborth, 85 M.J. 469, 476 (C.A.A.F. 2025). An abuse of 
discretion occurs “when the ‘military judge’s findings of fact 
are clearly erroneous, the court’s decision is influenced by 
an erroneous view of the law, or the  military judge’s 
decision on the issue at hand is outside the range of choices 
reasonably arising from the applicable facts and the law.’ ” 
Id. (quoting United States v. Shields, 83 M.J. 226, 230 
(C.A.A.F. 2023)).  
A military judge reviewing a commander’s decision to 
issue a search authorization must determine “whether the 
[commander] had a substantial basis for concluding that 
probable cause existed.” United States v. Rogers, 67 M.J. 
162, 164- 65 (C.A.A.F. 2009). A substantial basis exists 
“when, based on the totality of the circumstances, a 
common-sense judgment would lead to the conclusion that 
there is a fair probability  that evidence of a crime will be 
found at the identified location. ” Id. at 165 . The probable 
cause determination is “inherently contextual, 
dependent . . . upon the overall effect or weight of all  
factors presented to the [commander] .” United States v. 
Nieto, 76 M.J. 101, 106 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (internal quotation 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
marks omitted) (quoting United States v.  Leedy, 65 M.J. 
208, 213 (C.A.A.F. 2007)).  
“[I]f a [ commander] has ‘a substantial basis to find 
probable cause, a military judge  [does] not abuse his 
discretion in denying a motion to suppress. ’ ” Id. at 105  
(third alteration in original) (citation omitted). However, if 
the commander does not have a substantial basis to find 
probable cause, the exclusionary rule ordinarily bars 
admission of evidence obtained as a result of the ensuing,  
unlawful seizure or search.9 Id. at 106. 
In United States v. Leon, the Supreme Court recognized 
a good faith exception to the exclusionary rule, holding that 
evidence obtained as a result  of an unlawful search or 
seizure is nevertheless admissible  if law enforcement 
officers reasonably relied on a search warrant issued by a 
 
9 The exclusionary rule is embodied in M.R.E. 311(a), which 
provides: 
Evidence obtained as a result of an unlawful 
search or seizure made by a person acting in a 
governmental capacity is inadmissible against the 
accused if: 
     (1) [t]he accused makes a timely motion to 
suppress or an objection to the evidence under this 
rule; 
     (2) the accused had a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the person, place, or property searched; 
the accused had a legitimate interest in the 
property or evidence seized when challenging a 
seizure; or the accused would otherwise have 
grounds to object to the search or seizure under 
the Constitution of the United States as applied to 
members of the Armed Forces; and 
     (3) exclusion of the evidence results in 
appreciable deterrence of future unlawful 
searches or seizures and the benefits of such 
deterrence outweigh the costs to the justice 
system. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
neutral and detached magistrate .10 468 U.S. 897, 922 
(1984). The exception is grounded in the Supreme Court’s 
“strong preference” for warrants, which “is most 
appropriately effectuated by according ‘great deference’ to 
a magistrate’s determination” of probable cause. Id. at 914. 
At the same time, the Court was unwilling to afford 
“boundless” deference to the magistrate. Id.  Accordingly, 
the good faith exception does not apply in circumstances 
involving:  
(1) False or reckless affidavit — Where the 
magistrate “was misled by information in an 
affidavit that the affiant knew was false or would 
have known was false except for his reckless 
disregard of the truth”; 
(2)    Lack of judicial review —Where the 
magistrate “wholly abandoned his judicial role” or 
was a mere rubber stamp for the police; 
(3) Facially deficient affidavit —Where the 
warrant was based on an affidavit “so lacking in 
indicia of probable cause as to render official belief 
in its existence entirely unreasonable”; and 
(4) Facially deficient warrant —Where the 
warrant is “so facially deficient—i.e ., in failing to 
particularize the place to be searched or the things 
to be seized —that the executing officers cannot 
reasonably presume it to be valid.” 
United States v. Carter, 54 M.J. 414, 419-20 (C.A.A.F. 2001) 
(citing Leon, 468 U.S. at 923). 
In the military justice system, the good faith exception 
is embodied in M.R.E. 311(c)(3), which provides that 
evidence obtained as a result of an unlawful search or 
seizure is admissible if: 
     (A) the search or seizure resulted from an 
authorization to search, seize, or apprehend 
 
10 In the military justice system,  a commander serves a 
similar function to that of a federal civilian magistrate judge. 
See M.R.E. 315(d)(1) (authorizing a commander to grant search 
authorization of persons and premises under their control).  
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
issued by an individual competent to issue the 
authorization under Mil. R. Evid. 315(d) . . .  
     (B) the individual issuing the authorization or 
warrant had a substantial basis for determining 
the existence of probable cause . . . ; and  
     (C) the officials seeking and executing the 
authorization or warrant  reasonably and with 
good faith relied on the issuance of the 
authorization or warrant. Good faith is to be 
determined using an objective standard. 
This Court has “construed M.R.E. 311(c)(3) in a manner 
consistent with the Supreme Court’s decision in Leon ,” 
interpreting M.R.E. 311(c)(3)(B) to address the first and 
third Leon exceptions and interpreting M.R.E. 311(c)(3)(C) 
to address the second and fourth Leon  exceptions. United 
States v. Hernandez , 81 M.J. 432, 440-41 (C.A.A.F. 2021) 
(citing Carter, 54 M.J. at 421). 
III. Discussion 
Appellant argues the military judge abused his 
discretion in denying the motion to suppress because, in 
the absence of any evidence Appellant  used his phones in 
the commission of an offense, there was no probable cause 
to search them for anything other than location data. 
Additionally, he argues there was no probable cause to 
expand the date range for the search to include the month  
leading up to the Aviano incident  because there was 
insufficient evidence linking Appellant to the Incirlik 
incident—and in an y event,  Appellant argues that  the 
commander did not rely on the Incirlik incident when he 
granted the second search authorization . Finally, 
Appellant argues the military judge made erroneous 
findings of fact and failed to consider other important facts 
in finding probable cause.  
We need not decide whether there was probable cause  
for the second search authorization
11 because we conclude 
 
11 Appellant has not identified any evidence discovered or 
admitted as a result of the search pursuant to the third search 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
the good faith exception applies. See Hernandez, 81 M.J. at 
442 (presuming without deciding that probable cause did 
not exist and holding the military judge did not abuse his 
discretion admitting evidence under the good faith 
exception to the exclusionary rule);  United States v.  
Perkins, 78 M.J. 381, 386-87 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (assuming for 
purposes of appeal that there was no probable cause and 
holding the military judge did not abuse his discretion in 
denying a motion to suppress under the good faith 
exception).  
A. The good faith exception 
Under the good faith exception, even if a search 
authorization is unsupported by probable cause, a military 
judge does not abuse his discretion in concluding the 
evidence obtained from the search is admissible where “(1) 
the seizure resulted from a search and seizure 
authorization issued, in relevant part, by a [commander] ; 
(2) the [commander]  had a substantial basis for 
determining probable cause existed; and (3) law 
enforcement reasonably and in good faith relied on the 
authorization.” Nieto, 76 M.J. at 107 (citing M.R.E. 
311(c)(3)). We conclude all three requirements of the good 
faith exception are satisfied in this case. 
The parties do not dispute  the first requirement of the 
good faith exception was satisfied: the search authorization 
was issued by “an individual competent to issue the 
authorization under Mil. R. Evid. 315(d).” M.R.E. 
311(c)(3)(A). In his motion to suppress, Appellant conceded 
the commander was  competent to issue the search 
authorization. The military judge agreed. Therefore, we see 
no reason to disturb the AFCCA’s  conclusion that the 
commander was competent to issue the search 
authorization at issue here. 
 
authorization. Therefore, we do not address whether there was 
probable cause for the third search authorization.  
 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
The second requirement of the good faith exception is 
satisfied “if the [commander] authorizing the search had a 
substantial basis, in ‘the eyes of a reasonable law 
enforcement official executing the search authorization,’ 
for concluding that probable cause existed.” Perkins, 78 
M.J. at 387 (quoting Carter, 54 M.J. at 422, (citing M.R.E. 
311(c)(3)(B))). In Perkins, we held that an OSI special agent 
who “received and apparently relied on the advice of 
appropriate government lawyers  . . . had an objectively 
reasonable belief that [the search authority]  had a 
substantial basis for determining the existence of probable 
cause.” Id. at 388. Specifically, the agent reasonably could 
have concluded that when the search authority issued the 
authorization, he was confirming what government 
counsel had told the agent. Id. 
In this case, as in Perkins, “ ‘the law enforcement official 
had an objectively reasonable belief that the [ commander] 
had a “substantial basis” for determining the existence of 
probable cause.’  ” Id. at 386  (alterations in original 
removed) (quoting Carter, 54 M.J. at 422). The military 
judge found that SA JA “ successfully provided sufficient 
facts to persuade [the judge advocate]  and [the 
commander] that probable cause existed. ” The military 
judge’s conclusion was based on his finding that the 
commander relied on information provided by SA JA in 
conversation and by affidavit , including: a description of 
the charged conduct ; what Appellant was (and was not) 
wearing at the time ; the fact Appellant brought two cell 
phones into the TLF but left his other personal effects 
behind in his car , which was parked near but not at the 
TLF; a description of the Incirlik allegations ; and the fact 
that Appellant was stationed at Incirlik AB when that 
similar incident occurred. The military judge found that SA 
JA explained, in the affidavit or in conversation, his  belief 
that Appellant used the cell phones in the commission of 
the charged conduct  and may have engaged in similar 
misconduct on oth er occasions.  And significantly, SA JA 
advised the commander that he had previously consulted 
with a judge advocate (who coincidentally was present for 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
15 
 
this conversation)  and agreed the evidence established 
probable cause . Under these circumstances, it was 
objectively reasonable for SA JA to believe the commander 
had a substantial basis for his probable cause 
determination.  
Appellant argues that SA JA knowingly or recklessly 
misled the commander by claiming that an expanded 
search was necessary  without an explanation as to why.  
While it is true that an “affidavit must not be intentionally 
or recklessly false, and it must be more than a bare bones 
recital of conclusions,” Hernandez , 81 M.J. at 440- 41 
(citation modified ), the affidavits in this case were 
supplemented by SA JA’s discussions with the commander. 
SA JA testified that he told the commander about the 
Incirlik incident, which was the basis for the expanded date 
range, and the commander testified that he found the 
similarity of the Incirlik incident to the August 12 incident 
to be highly relevant to his probable cause determination. 
We conclude the military judge’s finding that “it was clear 
that [the commander] had been briefed on it,” even if he 
was unable to reca ll some of the details, was not clearly 
erroneous. 
Turning to the third requirement for the good faith 
exception, we apply an objective standard to determine 
whether “ the officials seeking and executing the 
authorization or warrant reasonably and with good faith 
relied on the issuance of the authorization or warrant. ” 
M.R.E. 311(c)(3)(C). “The fact that a neutral [commander] 
has issued a warrant is the clearest indication that the 
officers acted in an objectively reasonable manner . . . or in 
objective good faith.” Hernandez, 81 M.J. at 442 (citation 
modified). On the other hand, “law enforcement agents do 
not act in good faith if they know that the magistrate 
merely ‘rubber stamped’ their request, or when the 
warrant is facially defective.”  Perkins, 78 M.J. at 389 
(citation modified). 
Here, SA JA reasonably and in good faith relied on the  
commander’s issuance of a search authorization based on 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
16 
 
SA JA’s representations  as to the facts and the judge 
advocate’s advice. SA JA testified to his belief, based on his 
understanding of the facts  and his discussion with the 
judge advocate, that there was probable cause to search the 
phones. In his affidavit (supporting the second search 
authorization request), he explained, based on his 
understanding of the facts, his professional experience, his 
training, and his discussion with the judge advocate, that 
the second search authorization request was based on 
probable cause.
12 
“In the absence of an allegation that the [ commander] 
abandoned his detached and neutral role, suppression is 
appropriate only if the officers were dishonest or reckless 
in preparing their affidavit or could not have harbored an 
objectively reasonable belief in the existence of probable 
cause.” Leon, 468 U.S. at 926.  The military judge  in this 
case found “no evidence” the commander “wholly 
abandoned his judicial role and merely acted as a rubber 
stamp for OSI. ” To the contrary, the military judge found 
that agents sought legal advice before they sought search 
authorization, and a judge advocate was “available and 
consulted with [the commander] before he made his 
ultimate decisions.” And, as noted above, the military judge 
 
12 The same is true for the forensic examiner, SA JB. The 
military judge found that after the first search authorization 
was granted but before the cell phones were searched, SA JA 
told SA JB that the search authorization would be expanded. A 
week later, SA J A obtained the second, expanded search 
authorization, which he provided to SA JB. The supporting 
affidavit stated, among other things, that SA JA had consulted 
with a judge advocate, who opined there was probable cause to 
expand the search as stated in the search authorization request. 
SA JB testified that it was his common practice to print out a 
search authorization and supporting affidavit so that he could 
refer to it during his search. The military judge’s finding that he 
did so in this case is not clearly erroneous , and it supports the 
conclusion that SA JB reasonably believed the magistrate had a 
substantial basis for his probable cause determination. 
 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
17 
 
found no evidence agents intentionally or recklessly 
provided false information to the commander. Once again, 
we conclude the findings are not clearly erroneous. 
B. The military judge did not abuse his discretion 
The military judge did not abuse his discretion when he 
denied the suppression motion for the second search 
authorization and declined to apply the exclusionary rule 
to the evidence obtained as a result of the search of  the 
iPhones.  
First, the military judge’s finding s of fact were not 
clearly erroneous . The  military judge ’s findings included 
the following: that the commander was a competent, 
neutral, and detached authority; there was no evidence the 
commander was provided with false information ; and the 
commander was provided with sufficient facts to support 
his probable cause determination. As previously stated, the 
military judge’s findings stemmed from sworn testimony 
and evidence described above.  Thus, the findings are 
supported by the record and are not clearly erroneous.  
Second, the military judge’s decision was not influenced 
by an erroneous view of the law . The military judge ’s 
factual findings supported his legal conclusion  that the 
good faith exception  applied, and therefore, the 
exclusionary rule did not apply.  
Finally, the military judge’s ruling on the motion was 
not outside the range of choices reasonably arising from the 
facts of the case and the law. As  stated previously , his 
findings of fact supported the application of the good faith 
exception, which in turn justified his denial of the motion 
to suppress. Assuming without deciding that there was no 
probable cause for the second search authorization, the 
military judge did not abuse his discretion by denying the 
motion to suppress. 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting. 
In United States v. Lattin, I observed that “we are pre-
sented . . . with a classic and straightforward example of a 
blatantly unconstitutional fishing expedition” by a special 
agent of the Air Force Office of Special Inves tigations 
(OSI). 83 M.J. 192, 199 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (Ohlson, C.J., with 
whom Hardy, J., joined, dissenting). Three years later, here 
we are again. 
The lead OSI agent in this case, Special Agent (SA) JA, 
had Appellant dead to rights  for his involvement in a bi-
zarre incident that occurred at Aviano Air Base, Italy, on 
August 12, 2022. But then SA JA made a speculative leap 
in logic and suspected that Appellant also might have been 
involved in an incident that occurred at Incirlik A ir Base, 
Turkey, on December 29, 2021.  Instead of confining the 
search of Appellant’s phone to photos taken on August 12, 
2022—or even stretching probable cause  to the breaking 
point and also searching Appellant’s phone  for photos 
taken on December 29, 2021 —SA JA sought and obtained 
from a commander a second search authorization for virtu-
ally the entire contents of Appellant’s phone for the entire 
seven-and-a-half-month period between those two dates .  
Under these circumstances, the military judge should have 
suppressed the evidence gained from Appellant’s phone 
during that illegal search. And yet, he did not.    
The majority assumes without deciding that there was 
no probable cause to support the issuance of the search au-
thorization. But then the majority chooses to uphold the 
search based on the good faith exception.  United States v. 
Johnson, __ M.J. __, __ ( 12-13) (C.A.A.F. 2026). I cannot 
agree with the latter decision because in my view, the mil-
itary judge clearly abused his discretion in applying that 
doctrine. Furthermore, I conclude that the military judge 
also abused his discretion when he determined in the alter-
native that the exclusionary rule should not be applied in 
this case .
1 Because the majority fails to  hold OSI 
 
1 Unlike the majority, instead of merely assuming without 
deciding that there was no probable cause here, I would specifi-
cally find that there was a glaring lack of probable cause to sup-
port the issuance of the second search authorization.  However, 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
2 
 
accountable for perpetrating another unconstitutional 
search that violate d the Fourth Amendment rights of a  
member of the United States Air Force , I must again re-
spectfully dissent.  
The Good Faith Exception Should Not Apply Here 
Under the circumstances of this case, there are two fac-
tors identified by the Supreme Court in United States v. 
Leon, 468 U.S. 897, 923, 926 (1984), that result in the good 
faith exception being inapplicable here—(a) the search au-
thorization was based on a facially deficient affidavit, and 
(b) Colonel (Col)  JF, the commander who approved the 
search authorization, “wholly abandoned his judicial role.” 
I will address each of these factors in turn. 
First, the affidavit submitted by SA JA, even supple-
mented by his conversation with Col JF , is too deficient to 
justify the good faith exception. As the Supreme Court has 
held, the good faith exception is inapplicable when law en-
forcement relies on a  warrant affidavit that is “so lacking 
in indicia of probable cause as to render official belief in its 
existence entirely unreasonable” Id. at 923 (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) (citation omitted) ; see also  United 
States v. Lopez, 35 M.J 35, 42 (C.M.A. 1992). Here, SA JA’s 
affidavit described at length the August 12, 2022, incident 
at Aviano Air Base but failed to even mention the Decem-
ber 29, 2021, incident at Incirlik Air Base. Although SA JA 
provided Appellant’s commander with some information 
about that earlier incident orally, Col JF was provided with 
no information whatsoever that constitutionally justified 
searching Appellant’s iPhones for approximately seven -
and-a-half months of content. Thus, even though SA JA 
consulted with a judge advocate on the issue of probable 
cause, as Appellant correctly argues: “The affidavit [even 
as supplemented by information provided orally to Col JF] 
was entirely lacking in justification for the date range,” and 
“[i]t was unreasonable for [the OSI agent who executed the 
search] to have carried out the search based on the affidavit 
 
because of the approach taken by the majority , I too will focus 
on the good faith exception and then continue my analysis by 
considering the exclusionary rule. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
3 
 
[and supplemental information orally] provided.” See Leon, 
468 U.S. at 923. 
Second, Col JF, who was Appellant’s commander, abdi-
cated his judicial role in this important process  when he 
granted the second search authorization’s broad date range 
despite the fact that there was no  articulated or theoreti-
cally defensible basis  for doing so. See id. (identifying an-
other instance where the good faith exception is inapplica-
ble as when “the issuing magistrate wholly abandoned his 
judicial role ”); United States v. Carter , 54 M.J. 414, 419 
(C.A.A.F. 2001) (stating that the good faith exception does 
not apply when the search authority “ was a mere rubber 
stamp” for law enforcement). Simply stated, if C ol JF had 
properly fulfilled his responsibilities, he would have neces-
sarily recognized that there was nothing in the affidavit or 
in the supplemental information that supported the expan-
sive, approximately seven-and-a-half-month date range of 
the second search authorization.  Col JF’s acquiescence to 
SA JA’s request serves as an exemplar of a commander act-
ing as a “rubber stamp.” See Leon, 468 U.S. at 923; Carter, 
54 M.J. at 419. 
Because SA JA reasonably knew that the search au-
thorization was facially deficient and reasonably knew that 
Col JF merely acted as a rubber stamp here, it was patently 
unreasonable for OSI agents to carry out this excessively 
broad search. See Leon, 468 U.S. at 922-23. Therefore, the 
military judge abused his discretion in finding that the 
good faith exception applied. 
The Exclusionary Rule Should Apply Here 
Supreme Court precedent  recognizes that competing 
principles come into play when deciding  whether the 
exclusionary rule should be applied in a specific case . In 
essence, these principles can be distilled to two key factors 
articulated by the Court in United States v. Davis: 
(a) “When [law enforcement officers] exhibit ‘ deliberate,’ 
‘reckless,’ or ‘grossly negligent ’ disregard for Fourth 
Amendment rights,” or “the case involve[s] ‘ recurring or 
systemic negligence’ on the part of law enforcement, ” “the 
deterrent value of exclusion is strong and tends to 
outweigh the resulting costs, ” but (b) “ when [law 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
4 
 
enforcement officers] act with an objectively ‘ reasonable 
good-faith belief’ that their conduct is lawful, or when their 
conduct involves only simple, ‘ isolated’ negligence, the 
‘deterrence rationale loses much of its force.’ ” 564 U.S. 229, 
238, 240 (2011) (citations omitted). 
These two competing principles have been codified in 
Military Rule of Evidence  (M.R.E.) 311(a)(3). The exclu-
sionary rule should apply under two conditions: (1) when 
“exclusion of the evidence results in appreciable deterrence 
of future unlawful searches or seizures,” and (2) when “the 
benefits of such deterrence outweigh the costs to the justice 
system.” M.R.E. 311(a)(3). I will refer to these two condi-
tions as the “appreciable deterrence test” and the “balanc-
ing test.” 
The military judge’s conclusion that the application of 
the “appreciable deterrence test ” and the “balancing test” 
did not support implementation of the exclusionary rule 
was clearly unreasonable and, hence, his disposition of the 
motion to suppress constituted an abuse of discretion. 
Applying the appreciable deterrence test , SA JA was 
reckless or grossly negligent when he sought a search au-
thorization that spanned the entire period of time between 
the two incidents at issue here.
2 It would be one thing if SA 
JA had simply sought to search Appellant’s phones for pic-
tures and videos that were generated on the actual dates of 
 
2 The majority notes that “SA JA had previously met with 
the base legal office and was advised by a judge advocate  that 
the evidence supported probable cause for the expanded search.” 
Johnson, __ M.J. at __ (5). However, in my view, the fact that a 
U.S. Air Force judge advocate provided such woefully incorrect 
advice to SA JA  is more governmental gross negligence that 
would be deterred through the application of the exclusionary 
rule. See Lattin , 83 M.J. at 201- 02 (Ohlson, C.J., with whom 
Hardy, J., joined, dissenting) (“[T]his deterrence principle would 
apply to all those involved in criminal investigations—to include 
judge advocates who, as in the instant case, may be presented 
with facially and conspicuously deficient language in a search 
authorization and must choose whet her or not to fulfill their 
professional obligation to protect the rights of 
our servicemembers by simply saying, ‘No. This material does 
not pass constitutional muster.’ ”). 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
5 
 
the two incidents, December 29, 2021 , and August 12, 
2022, and it was determined in hindsight that probable 
cause was lacking to support the search of the phone for 
the Incirlik incident. But here, SA JA sought and obtained 
the search authorization for an extensive period —and for 
virtually the entire contents of the phone —that was fa-
cially overbroad and without any objectively reasonable ra-
tionale to support it. Thus, SA JA’s actions can only be de-
scribed as reckless or grossly negligent.  Accordingly, the 
appreciable deterrence test weighs in favor of applying the 
exclusionary rule. 
Although the appreciable deterrence aspect is obvious, 
the balancing test asks  if this deterrence outweighs  the 
price paid by the justice system. M.R.E. 311(a)(3). To be 
sure, Appellant’s conviction for making an indecent record-
ing of an unwitting male servicemember showering at the 
base gym  would have been lost if the evidence had been  
suppressed. However, the military judge identified no 
other “cost to the justice system” and thus it must be noted 
that even if the exclusionary rule had been properly ap-
plied, Appellant still would stand convicted of unlawfully 
entering a civilian OSI agent’s room and assault ing him. 
Thus, the “costs” here would not have outweighed the ben-
efits of deterrence. 
For these reasons, the military judge abused his discre-
tion when he ruled in the alternative that the exclusionary 
rule should not be applied in this case. As such , the evi-
dence generated from the search of Appellant’s phones and 
all derivative evidence should have been suppressed . See 
M.R.E. 311(a); United States v. Conklin, 63 M.J. 333, 334 
(C.A.A.F. 2006). Accordingly , the United States Air Force 
Court of Criminal Appeals’ decision to the contrary should 
be reversed, as well as that part of the lower cou rt’s deci-
sion that affirmed  Appellant’s conviction for indecent re-
cording and the accompanying sentence.  
It is judicially necessary  to penalize reckless or grossly 
negligent government behavior of this nature by excluding 
improperly obtained evidence from a court-martial. Other-
wise, we should not be surprised if government investiga-
tors come to believe that there will be no negative conse-
quences if they fail to comply with the rule of law. 
United States v. Johnson, No. 25-0202/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
6 
 
I respectfully dissent. 