This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Donte M. BROWN, Private First Class 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0181 
Crim. App. No. 20230168 
 
Argued February 10, 2026—Decided May 12, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Steven C. Henricks 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Colonel Robert D. Luyties 
(argued); Colonel Frank E. Kostik Jr. and Major Pe-
ter Ellis (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Captain Matthew C. Whear (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini, Lieutenant Colonel Marc 
B. Sawyer, and Major Stephen L. Harmel (on brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Judge SPARKS, Judge HARDY, and Judge 
JOHNSON joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a sep-
arate opinion concurring in the judgment. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
This appeal requires the Court to address the admissi-
bility of prior consistent statements under Military Rule of 
Evidence (M. R.E.) 801(d)(1)(B) (i) [hereinafter subpara-
graph (B)(i)] and M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) [hereinafter sub-
paragraph (B)(ii)], a subject which the Court also recently 
addressed in United States v. Ayala, 81 M.J. 25 (C.A.A.F. 
2021), United States v. Finch, 79 M.J. 389 (C.A.A.F. 2020), 
and United States v. Frost , 79 M.J. 104 (C.A.A.F. 2019).  
The granted issues are: 
I. Whether the military judge abused his discre-
tion when he incorrectly admitted two supposed 
prior consistent statements by misstating the law, 
applying both [subparagraphs of M.R.E. 
801(d)(1)(B)] in violation of Ayala/Finch, and fail-
ing to identify a statement that predated the clear 
and persistent motive to fabricate pursued by Ap-
pellant. 
II. Whether the Army Court erred when it disre-
garded this Court’s plain language in Ayala/Finch 
and failed to explain how the prior consistent 
statements were relevant to rehabilitate the wit-
ness under  [subparagraph (B)(ii)]  beyond mere 
repetition. 
III. Whether this Court should adopt the Pierre 
standard from federal courts for prior consistent 
statements defining “relevant to rehabilitate.”
1 
For reasons that we explain below, we answer all three 
questions in the negative. We hold that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion in admitting the prior con-
sistent statements under the exception in subparagraph 
(B)(ii). We do not decide whether the statements were ad-
missible under  subparagraph (B)(i). We affirm th e judg-
ment of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
(ACCA). United States v. Brown , No. ARMY 20230168, 
2025 CCA LEXIS 213, 2025 WL 1368171 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 
May 9, 2025) (unpublished). 
 
1 The question refers to United States v. Pierre, 781 F.2d 329 
(2d Cir. 1986). 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
I. Background 
Appellant was charged with two specifications of do-
mestic violence in violation of Article 128b, Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 928b (2018). Spec-
ification 1 alleged that Appellant committed a violent of-
fense against his wife, K.B., “ by stabbing her in the back 
and shoulder with a knife.” Specification 2 alleged that he 
committed a violent offense against K.B. by “grabbing her 
neck wi th his hands. ” These specifications alleged that 
both incidents occurred on or about July 2, 2022. In re-
sponse to these allegations, the defense theory was that 
Appellant had acted in self-defense after K.B. pointed a pis-
tol at him during an argument. 
In their opening statements at the court-martial, coun-
sel for both sides informed the members that a key issue in 
the case would be whether K.B. had in fact pointed a pistol 
at Appellant before he stabbed her. Trial counsel acknowl-
edged that K.B. had access to a pistol at the time  of the 
argument but told the members that he expected K.B. to 
testify that “[K.B.]’s pistol was sitting unloaded on her bed 
when the accused stabbed her in the back ” and that 
“[K.B.]’s pistol was sitting unloaded on her bed when t he 
accused stabbed her the second time in the shoulder.” 
Defense counsel responded in his opening statement by 
saying: “[B]ased on what I expect [K.B.]  to tell you, based 
on what I just heard from the government’s opening state-
ment, the defense stands ready to dispute her version of 
events because [Appellant] did, in fact, act in self-defense.” 
He suggested that K.B. might have a motive to deny that 
she pointed a pistol at Appellant because she was worried 
about losing custody of her children, explaining: “[A]s long 
as [K.B.] is the victim in this case, she gets to see her chil-
dren. As long as [Appellant] is the aggressor, he doesn’t get 
to see their children.” 
Defense counsel then told the members that they would 
hear that K.B. made statements to an emergency medical 
technician (EMT), to a paramedic, to medical staff at the 
Irwin Army Community Hospital (IACH), and to an agent 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
of the Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID).  He 
said: 
     Now, after this incident occurred, [K.B.]  pro-
vided a number of statements to people who 
needed to know details about what happened in 
the house. She spoke to an EMT and a paramedic 
who arrived pretty soon after the incident to pro-
vide emergency medical care. She spoke to medi-
cal professionals at IACH who gave her initial 
treatment as well. CID conducted a formal inter-
view with [K.B.] after she had been released from 
the hospital a couple of days later, and you ’re go-
ing to hear about all of those statements. 
Defense counsel finally told the members that they should 
consider several questions: 
Is the story that [K.B.] tells you in this courtroom 
consistent with all of the other stories that she 
just told the EMT, the paramedic, medical profes-
sionals at IACH, CID? Or has the story changed? 
And if it did change, did it change in small ways, 
as the government would like you to believe, or 
has it changed in ways that are significant? And 
if it did change, why? 
The Government called K.B. as a witness. On direct ex-
amination, K.B. testified that she and Appellant were ar-
guing in their bedroom.  K.B. testified that s he retrieved 
her pistol from the top drawer of her dresser,  dropped the 
magazine onto the bed, cleared a round from the chamber 
and dropped it onto the bed, and then placed the unloaded 
pistol onto the bed. K.B. testified that as she was facing her 
bed, she “happened to look back and that’s when [Appel-
lant] stabbed” her in the back. K.B. testified that Appellant 
then stabbed her again, this time in her left shoulder. K.B. 
testified that her pistol was unloaded on the bed when the 
stabbings occurred. 
On cross -examination, K.B. agreed that her children 
“are the most important thing in this world” to her and that 
she “would do anything for them.” K.B. agreed that her tes-
timony was that she did not point the pistol at Appellant 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
intentionally or “flag[]” Appellant.2 Defense counsel asked 
K.B. whether the EMT and a paramedic who attended her 
in an a mbulance “would be wrong” if they thought K.B. 
pointed her pistol at Appellant’s face.  K.B. replied in the 
affirmative. K.B. also testified that she filed for divorce 
about a month after the incident and that she opposed Ap-
pellant’s petition for custody of their children. K.B. denied 
pointing her pistol at Appellant’s face. 
The Government called a neighbor who aided K.B. after 
the stabbings. Trial counsel asked the neighbor what hap-
pened. The neighbor testified that K.B.’s children were 
screaming at her front door, so she went next door to check 
on K.B. The neighbor “opened the door and [K.B.] kind of 
fell towards the door.” Without objection, the neighbor tes-
tified: “[Appellant] said, ‘Why’d you have to point the gun 
at me?’ And [K.B.] said, ‘I didn’t point a gun at you. You 
stabbed me.’ ” 
The Government called an EMT who attended K.B. in 
an ambulance after the stabbing. After the EMT described 
K.B.’s injuries, trial counsel asked the EMT what K.B. had 
told her . Without objection, the EMT testified that K.B. 
“admitted that she pulled an unloaded firearm and pointed 
it at his face.” 
The Government called a  CID agent who interviewed 
K.B. on two occasions. The CID agent stated that he first 
interviewed K.B. informally on July 2 while she was in the 
hospital. The agent testified, without objection, that during 
the interview “[K.B.] said that she did not point the pistol 
at him. She kept it in low ready position. ” The agent testi-
fied that he conducted a formal recorded interview, on July 
8, in which K.B. provided more details. 
The Government then moved to introduce two brief seg-
ments of a video recording  of K.B.’s July 8 interview with 
the agent. In the first segment , which is one  minute and 
fifty-two seconds in length, K.B. discusse d her argument 
 
2 K.B. later clarified that she uses the word “flag[]” to mean 
inadvertently pointing the barrel of a weapon at someone. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
with Appellant and how she oriented her pistol. In the sec-
ond segment, which is approximately the same length, K.B. 
discussed the moments leading up to the stabbing and how 
she oriented her pistol. K.B. repeatedly told the CID agent 
that she did not point the pistol at Appellant’s face. But she 
also said  that while she was handling the pistol, “it did 
have to pass him, like, his body.” 
Defense counsel initially objected to admission of the re-
cordings on grounds that the defense had not received prior 
notice. Defense counsel then clarified that the objection 
was because “the agent has already testified to what [K.B.] 
stated.” The military judge asked defense counsel: “So your 
objection is only cumulative [and] it has nothing to do with 
prior consistent statement requirements? ” When defense 
counsel did not provide a definite answer, the military 
judge asked trial counsel: “ Under what provision of the 
MREs are you offering the prior consistent statement?” 
Trial counsel answered the question by submitting two 
written argument s. In the first written argument, trial 
counsel asserted that the recordings were admissible under 
subparagraph (B)(i). He explained:  
The declarant ’s credibility as a witness was at-
tacked through an express or implied charge that 
she “acted from a recent improper influence or mo-
tive in testifying. ” M.R.E. 801(d)(l)(B)(i). Specifi-
cally, defense counsel elicited evidence that [K.B.] 
filed a petition for divorce near the end of the 
month of July, and that in that same proceeding 
she sought full custody of her children. The obvi-
ous implication from this line of questioning is 
that one of [K.B.]’s motives in testifying at trial is 
to ensure she will gain full custody and favorable 
rulings in the divorce proceedings. 
He further explained: “The prior consistent statements of-
fered by the Government rebut this charge by showing 
[K.B.] provided a prior consistent statement to [the CID 
agent].” 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
In the second written argument, trial counsel  argued 
that the recordings were admissible under subparagraph 
(B)(ii). He explained: 
The declarant ’s credibility as a witness was at-
tacked “on other grounds ” than [those] listed in 
M.R.E. 801(d)(l)(B)(i). Specifically, defense coun-
sel attacked [K.B.] on the grounds that she testi-
fied inconsistently with a prior statement she 
made to first responders about pointing a pistol at 
the Accused prior to the first stabbing. The impli-
cation of this cross examination [sic] is that [K.B.] 
is now embellishing her testimony and attempting 
to present herself in a light more favorable to the 
fact finder. Additionally, during opening state-
ments, defense counsel stated that  [K.B.] spoke 
with several people, including paramedics and 
law enforcement officials, before posing the ques-
tion, “if [K.B.’s] testimony did change, why? ” or 
words to that effect. 
Trial counsel further asserted: “The prior consistent state-
ments offered by the Government rehabilitate the declar-
ant by placing these purported inconsistencies in context 
and showing that the declarant has consistently stated 
that she did not point her pistol toward the Accused before 
he stabbed her.” 
The military judge admitted the two recorded state-
ments as prior consistent statements under both subpara-
graphs (B)(i) and (B)(ii).
3 The military judge did not make 
an express finding about how the admission of the 
 
3 The admitted statements are recorded on a DVD admitted 
as Prosecution Exhibit 26. The military judge also admitted a 
recorded statement by K.B. to CID that concerned the words in 
Specification 2 alleging that Appellant grabbed K.B.’s neck with 
his hands. This statement was admitted as Prosecution Exhibit 
27. The parties disagree in their briefs about whether Prosecu-
tion Exhibit 27 is material to the issues in this appeal . We con-
clude that while Prosecution Exhibit 27 might have been rele-
vant to an assessment of prejudice if the military judge had 
abused his discretion in admitting Prosecution Exhibit 26, it is 
not material because the military judge did not abuse his discre-
tion. We therefore do not address Prosecution Exhibit 27. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
statements might rehabilitate K.B. under subparagraph 
(B)(i) but expressly found “ based on the examination of 
[K.B.], this does potentially refute an improper motive for 
testimony . . . under [subparagraph] (B)(ii).” 
Defense counsel subsequently called the paramedic who 
attended K.B. in the ambulance.  The paramedic testified, 
without objection from either side, that K.B. told him that 
K.B. and her husband were arguing, that she had a pistol, 
and that “she pointed it at his face.” On cross-examination, 
the paramedic testified that K.B. had told him that the 
“two attacks with the knife occurred after she set her un-
loaded pistol down.”  
The court-martial found Appellant guilty of Specifica-
tion 1 and, with exceptions and substitutions, also guilty of 
Specification 2.  The military judge, however, dismissed 
Specification 2 of the charge for being unreasonably multi-
plied with Specification 1. The military judge sentenced 
Appellant to a dishonorable discharge, confinement for 
forty months, and reduction to the grade of E-1. 
The ACCA held that the military judge did not abuse 
his discretion in admitting the prior consistent statements 
under subparagraph (B)(ii). Brown, 2025 CCA LEXIS 213, 
at *22, 2025 WL 1368171 , at *8 . The ACCA alternatively 
held that even if the military judge erred in admitting the 
statements, the error was harmless. Id. at *22-24, 2025 WL 
1368171, at *8. The ACCA did not decide whether the 
statements were also admissible under subparagraph 
(B)(i). Id. at *19, 2025 WL 1368171 , at * 7. The ACCA af-
firmed the findings and sentence. Id.  at *2 4, 2025 WL 
1368171, at *8. 
II. Standard of Review 
“This Court reviews a military judge’s decision to admit 
evidence for an abuse of discretion.” Frost, 79 M.J. at 109. 
An abuse of discretion occurs if the military judge’s “find-
ings of fact are clearly erroneous, the court’s decision is in-
fluenced by an erroneous view of the law, or the military 
judge’s decision on the issue at hand is outside the range of 
choices reasonably arising from the applicable f acts and 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
the law.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted). The abuse of discretion standard requires “more 
than a mere difference of opinion. The challenged action 
must be arbitrary . . . , clearly unreasonable, or clearly er-
roneous.” United States v. Wicks, 73 M.J. 93, 98 (C.A.A.F. 
2014) (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted). 
“When reviewing a lower court ’s decision on a military 
judge’s ruling, we typically have pierced through that in-
termediate level and examined the military judge’s ruling, 
then decided whether the Court of Criminal Appeals was 
right or wrong in its examination of the military judge ’s 
ruling.” United States v. Blackburn , 80 M.J. 205, 211 
(C.A.A.F. 2020) (citation modified). This Court can affirm 
admission of evidence on a ground not cited by a  military 
judge because “the rule is settled that, if the decision below 
is correct, it must be affirmed, although the lower court re-
lied upon a wrong ground or gave a wrong reason.” United 
States v. Leiffer, 13 M.J. 337, 345 n.10 (C.M.A. 1982) (in-
ternal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Helvering v. 
Gowran, 302 U.S. 238, 245 (1937)). 
III. Governing Law 
A basic rule of evidence is that “hearsay” is not admis-
sible unless some exception applies. M.R.E. 802. The defi-
nition of “hearsay” generally includes an y statement that 
“the declarant does not make while testifying” at trial and 
that is offered “to prove the truth of the  matter asserted.” 
M.R.E. 801(c) (1)-(2). The definition of hearsay, however, 
expressly excludes certain out-of-court statements under 
conditions specified in M.R.E.  801(d). This case concerns 
the exclusion of a witness’s prior statements under subpar-
agraphs (B)(i) and (B)(ii), which state:  
(d) Statements that Are Not Hearsay. A statement 
that meets the following conditions is not hearsay: 
 (1) A Declarant-Witness’ Prior Statement. The 
declarant testifies and is subject to cross -exami-
nation about a prior statement, and the state-
ment: 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
  . . . . 
  (B) is consistent with the declarant’s testi-
mony and is offered: 
       (i) to rebut an express or implied charge 
that the declarant recently fabricated it or acted 
from a recent improper influence or motive in so 
testifying; or 
       (ii) to rehabilitate the declarant’s credi-
bility as a  witness when attacked on another 
ground . . . . 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i)-(ii). 
In Frost, this Court explained the elements of subpara-
graph (B)(i) as follows: 
From the plain language of the rule, we derive 
three criteria for the admission of prior consistent 
statements: (1) the declarant of the statement 
must testify and must be subject to cross -exami-
nation about the prior statement; (2) the state-
ment must be consistent with the declarant’s tes-
timony; and (3) the statement must be offered “to 
rebut an express or implied c harge that the de-
clarant recently fabricated it or acted from a re-
cent improper influence or motive in testifying.” 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i). 
In addition, this Court has recognized two ad-
ditional guiding principles as governing the ad-
mission of a prior consistent statement: (1) the 
prior statement, admitted as substantive evi-
dence, must precede any motive to fabricate or im-
proper influence that it is offered to rebut; and (2) 
where multiple motives to fabricate or multiple 
improper influences are asserted, the statement 
need not precede all such motives or inferences, 
but only the one it is offered to rebut. 
79 M.J. at 110-11. 
In Finch, this Court explained the requirements of sub-
paragraph (B)(ii) as follows: 
[F]or a prior consistent statement to be admissible 
under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) it must satisfy the 
following: (1) the declarant of the out -of-court 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
statement must testify, (2) the declarant must be 
subject to cross-examination about the prior state-
ment, (3) the statement must be consistent with 
the declarant’s testimony, (4) the declarant’s cred-
ibility as a witness must have been “attacked on 
another ground” other than the ones listed in 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i), and (5) the prior consistent 
statement must actually be relevant to rehabili-
tate the witness’s credibility on the basis on which 
he or she was attacked. The proponent of the evi-
dence bears the burden of articulating the rele-
vancy link between the prior consistent statement 
and how it will rehabilitate the witness with re-
spect to the particular type of impeachment that 
has occurred. 
79 M.J. at 396. 
In Ayala, this Court addressed the relationship between 
subparagraphs (B)(i) and (B)(ii) by stating: “ prior con-
sistent statements may be eligible for admission under ei-
ther (B)(i) or (B)(ii) but not both .” 81 M.J. at 28 (emphasis 
added). The ACCA, in its opinion in this case,  found this 
statement troublesome and respectfully requested that 
this Court provide more clarity . Brown, 2025 CCA LEXIS 
213, at *15-17, 2025 WL 1368171, at *6. Having reviewed 
the ACCA’s concerns, we agree that th is Court’s explana-
tion of the relationship between subparagraphs (B)(i) and 
(B)(ii) in Ayala requires further explanation. 
In some instances, a witness’s testimony will be at-
tacked on only one ground. In such cases, what the Court 
said in Ayala is correct based on the wording of subpara-
graph (B)(ii). Subparagraph (B)(ii) excludes from the defi-
nition of hearsay a  prior consistent statement offered “ to 
rehabilitate the declarant ’s credibility as a witness when 
attacked on another ground.” (Emphasis added.) As a lead-
ing treatise explains, t he phrase “ on another ground” 
means on “any other ground than the narrow ground recog-
nized in Rule 801(d)(1)(B)(i). ” 30B Wright & Miller’s Fed-
eral Practice & Procedure § 6754 ( 2017 ed. Supp. 2025) 
(emphasis added). The United States Court of Appeals for 
the Eighth Circuit has similarly explained that “[t]he im-
peachment must truly be “on another ground to qualify, one 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
not covered by the first category.  Only when a party im-
peaches a witness on a ground ‘[]other’ than—or in addition 
to—a motive to lie does the second category kick in.” United 
States v. Begay, 116 F.4th 795, 801 n.2 (8th Cir. 2024)  (al-
teration in original) (citation omitted). 
It follows that if a witness’s testimony is attacked on 
only one ground, a  prior consistent statement  offered to 
rebut that challenge  may be eligible for admission under 
either subparagraph (B)(i) or subparagraph (B)(ii), but not 
both, because the two subparagraphs address different 
possible grounds of attack . For example, if a declarant 
attacks a witness’s testimony only as a recent fabrication, 
a prior consistent statement offered to rebut that attack 
could fit only into the exclusion in subparagraph (B)(i), and 
not subparagraph (B)(ii), because  subparagraph (B)(ii) 
concerns only grounds other than those covered by 
subparagraph (B)(i). 
But sometimes a witness’s testimony will be attacked  
on more than one ground . For example, a party might at-
tack the witness’s testimony as being a recent fabrication 
and also attack the testimony based on the witness ’s poor 
memory. In such circumstances, a prior consistent state-
ment might be properly offered to rebut the recent fabrica-
tion attack under subparagraph (B)(i) and also properly of-
fered to rebut the poor memory attack under subparagraph 
(B)(ii). This was the case in  Begay, where the court held 
that a witness’s prior consistent statements fit into both 
subparagraphs (B)(i) and (B)(ii) because “she withstood 
multiple attacks on her credibility.” 116 F.4th at 799. Spe-
cifically, the defense counsel attacked the witness as hav-
ing a motive to lie and as being untrustworthy because she 
had a faulty memory. Id.  Thus, even if the witness had a 
motive to lie, the court  found that her “statements were 
still admissible to counter the ‘attack[s] on another 
ground,’ like her allegedly faulty memory.” Id. at 802 (al-
teration in original) (citation omitted) ; see also United 
States v. Campo Flores, 945 F.3d 687, 705-06 (2d Cir. 2019) 
(holding it was not error to admit prior consistent state-
ments under subparagraph (B)(ii) when a witness was 
13
 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
attacked as having a motive to fabricate and a faulty 
memory). The Court’s statement in Ayala is therefore not 
applicable to situations in which a witness’s testimony is 
challenged on multiple grounds. 
IV. Discussion
We now  consider whether the  challenged statements 
that the military judge admitted are excluded from the def-
inition of hearsay under subparagraph (B)(ii). Because we 
are persuaded that they are  excluded , the question 
whether the statements were also excluded from the defi-
nition of hearsay under subparagraph (B)
(i) is moot. 
As the Court explained in Finch , subparagraph (B)(ii) 
has five elements.  The first element is that  the declarant 
of the out -of-court statement testifie s at trial . Finch , 79 
M.J. at 396. The parties agree that this element is met be-
cause K.B. testified at the court-martial. The second ele-
ment is that the declarant is  subject to cross-examination 
about the prior statement . Id. The parties agree that this 
element is satisfied because K.B. was subject to cross -ex-
amination.
The third element identified in Finch is that the state-
ment must be consistent with the declarant’s testimony. Id. 
The parties disagree about whether this element was sat-
isfied. Appellant contends that it was not, because the 
statements that K.B. made to the CID agent were not con-
sistent with the statements that K.B. made when testifying 
at the court-martial. Appellant asserts that K.B. admitted 
to the CID agent that her pistol may have passed by Appel-
lant’s body, but she testified at the court -martial that she 
did not “flag” him  with the pistol . The Government re-
sponds that the statements were consistent with respect to 
the key fact at issue, which was that K.B. never intention-
ally pointed the pistol at Appellant. 
We are persuaded by the Government’s argument and 
conclude that the military judge did not abuse his discre-
tion in concluding that the third element was satisfied. As 
this Court explained in Finch, a “prior statement need only 
be ‘for the most part consistent ’ and in particular, be 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
‘consistent with respect to . . . fact[s] of central importance 
to the trial. ’ ” Id. at 395 (alterations in original) (quoting 
United States v. Vest, 842 F.2d 1319, 1329 (1st Cir. 1988)). 
The military judge could reasonably conclude that the is-
sue of central importance at trial was whether K.B. did or 
did not intentionally point her pistol at Appellant, which  
was relevant to the question whether Appellant  acted in 
self-defense. 
The fourth element  identified in Finch  is that the de-
clarant’s credibility as a witness must have been “attacked 
on another ground ,” which a s explained above,  means a 
ground other than the  narrow grounds listed in subpara-
graph (B)(i). Id. at 396 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). The parties also disagree about this ele-
ment. The Government contends that this element is satis-
fied because defense counsel attacked K.B.’s credibility on 
grounds of “inconsistency.” Appellant, however, counters  
that “inconsistency” is not a proper “[]other ground” within 
the meaning of subparagraph (B)(ii). Appellant assert s 
that if a challenge of inconsistency made a prior consistent 
statement admissible then any time “ a witness is im-
peached with a prior inconsistent statement, any con-
sistent statement the witness made may be admissible un-
der [subparagraph] (B)(ii).” Appellant argues that such an 
interpretation would undermine the purpose of  subpara-
graph (B)(ii), which is to allow prior consistent statements 
only for limited rehabilitative reasons.  
To address the fourth element, we must consider two 
issues. One is whether defense counsel attacked K.B.’s tes-
timony on grounds of “ inconsistency,” as the Government 
argues. The other is whether “inconsistency” is not a proper 
“[]other ground” within the meaning of subparagraph 
(B)(ii), as Appellant argues. 
With respect to the former issue, we see in defense coun-
sel’s opening statement two distinct challenges  to K.B.’s 
credibility. One is that K.B. had a motive to fabricate  her 
testimony in court so that she could have  custody of her 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
children.4 But we also see a separate line of attack in which 
defense counsel suggested to the members that they should 
not believe K.B.’s expected testimony because it was incon-
sistent with her prior statements . Defense counsel made 
this second attack, in our view,  without tying the  alleged 
inconsistency to a motive to fabricate . To repeat, defense 
counsel specifically directed the members to consider: 
Is the story that [K.B.] tells you in this courtroom 
consistent with all of the other stories that she 
just told the EMT, the paramedic, medical profes-
sionals at IACH, CID? Or has the story changed? 
And if it did change, did it change in small ways, 
as the government would like you to believe, or 
has it changed in ways that are significant? And 
if it did change, why? 
With respect to the latter issue, w e need not decide in 
this case whether an attack solely on the ground of “incon-
sistency” would be a proper “[]other ground” under subpar-
agraph (B)(ii) in all contexts . We decide only that in this 
case, defense counsel’s attack on grounds of inconsistency 
fits within subparagraph (B)(ii) based on how defense coun-
sel presented the attack . As explained above, defense 
 
4 If K.B.’s having a motive to fabricate were the only ground 
on which defense counsel attacked K.B.’s credibility, then we 
would need to confront the question whether K.B.’s prior con-
sistent statement should be analyzed exclusively under subpar-
agraph (B)(i). See United States v. Portillo , 969 F.3d 144, 174 
(5th Cir. 2020) (holding that accusing witnesses of “incon-
sistency only to support [the] claim that the [witnesses]  fabri-
cated their stories [is] a motive that fits squarely within 
801(d)(1)(B)(i), and not the alternative 801(d)(1)(B)(ii)”). In Por-
tillo, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit 
found it “impossible to separate the defendants’ attack on the 
[witnesses’] motivations from their charges of inconsistency, 
making it difficult to hold that the [witnesses] were attacked on 
‘another ground.’ ” Id. at 175. Thus, admission of the witnesses’ 
prior consistent statements under subparagraph (B)(ii) was pre-
cluded in Portillo. Id. We do not need to confront that question 
here because, as stated, we view defense counsel’s attack on 
K.B.’s motivation to fabricate as separate from defense counsel’s 
attack on K.B.’s inconsistency. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
counsel not only stated that K.B.’s testimony was incon-
sistent with prior statements but also told the members  
that they could only assess K.B.’s credibility based on the 
entirety of her statements. Defense counsel said that K.B. 
made multiple statements after the stabbing incident, in-
cluding statements to an EMT, to a paramedic, and to CID, 
and he expressly promised the members that “you’re going 
to hear about all of those  statements.” (Emphasis added.) 
Defense counsel further asked the members to consider: “Is 
the story that [K.B.] tells you in this courtroom consistent 
with all of the other stories that she just told the EMT, the 
paramedic, medical professionals at IACH, CID?” (Empha-
sis added.) 
In the light of these remarks by defense counsel, we are 
persuaded that the military judge did not abuse his discre-
tion with respect to  the fourth element. In short, d efense 
counsel attacked K.B.’s credibility based on inconsistency  
and told the members that they must assess this incon-
sistency by hearing all o f her statements, including those  
to CID. Yet defense counsel then opposed the Government’s 
effort to introduce the recordings of her statements to CID. 
An “opposing party may not pick and choose among  prior 
statements to create an appearance of conflict and then ob-
ject when this appearance is rebutted by means of a fuller 
version of the same prior statements.” United States v. Tar-
antino, 846 F.2d 1384, 1411 (D.C. Cir. 1988).
5 
The fifth element identified in Finch  is that the prior 
consistent statement must actually be relevant to rehabil-
itate the witness’s credibility. 79 M.J. at 396. The parties 
also disagree about this element. Appellant contends that 
this element is not met because the military judge “never 
found what rebutting force the statements had beyond 
 
5 A leading treatise cites Tarantino and explains that courts 
have justified the principle it expresses based on doctrines of 
completeness, estoppel, and “opening the door.” 30B Wright & 
Miller’s Federal Practice & Procedure § 6754. We do not select 
among these different justifications but simply conclude that 
subparagraph (B)(ii) applies in this context. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
mere repetition.” Appellant further argues that this Court 
should modify the fifth element by replacing the “relevant 
to rehabilitate” test with a more demanding “significant re-
butting force” test discussed in Pierre, 781 F.2d at 330 (in-
ternal quotation marks omitted) . The Govern ment re-
sponds that K.B.’s statements to CID  were “relevant to 
rehabilitate” because defense counsel attacked K.B.’s cred-
ibility on the ground of inconsistency and her statements 
were not inconsistent. 
We agree with Appellant that mere repetition is not 
enough to satisfy the fifth element.  As this Co urt has ex-
plained, a “[m]ere repeated telling of the same story is not 
relevant to whether that story, when told at trial, is true.” 
United States v. McCaskey , 30 M.J. 188, 192 (C.A.A.F. 
1990). But we also agree with the Government that K.B.’s 
prior consistent statements  were relevant to rehabilitate 
her credibility based on the specific attack on her credibil-
ity in this case. While K.B.’s statement to CID that she did 
not point her pistol at Appellant does not make her con-
sistent testimony at trial true, it directly responds to  de-
fense counsel’s attack that she lacks credibility because she 
made inconsistent statements, including statements to 
CID, and that her credibility could be assessed only by con-
sidering all her statements. 
Appellant also argues that the prior consistent state-
ment that the military judge admitted did not “ repair the 
damage done by the July 2nd statement  to the EMTs.” As 
recounted, an EMT testified that K.B. told her that she had 
pointed her pistol at Appellant before he stabbed her.  We 
agree that the prior consistent statement by itself could not 
disprove the truth of the EMT’s statement. B ut the prior 
consistent statement still was relevant to r ehabilitate 
K.B.’s credibility based on defense counsel’s attack that she 
made inconsistent statements and that her credibility had 
to be judged by all of her statements . Under these circum-
stances, we see no need to revisit our “relevant to rehabili-
tate” test and adopt the apparently more demanding test 
in Pierre; under either test, we are persuaded that the 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
military judge did not abuse his discretion in concluding 
that the fifth element was satisfied. 
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion in admitting the prior 
consistent statements at issue under subparagraph (B)(ii). 
We need not decide whether the statements were admissi-
ble under subparagraph (B)(i) because that question is 
moot. 
V. Conclusion 
The Court answers the three granted questions in the 
negative. The judgment of the United States A rmy Court 
of Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment. 
Unlike the majority, I conclude that the military judge 
abused his discretion when he admitted at trial the prior 
consistent statement of the victim pursuant to Military 
Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 801(d)(1)(B)(ii). 1 Indeed, I am 
concerned that the approach taken by the majority blurs 
the line between statements that are properly admissible 
under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) and those that are not, and 
thus risks opening the door in future cases to statements 
that the Military Rules of Evidence  were designed to ex-
clude. Nonetheless, I have determined that in the instant 
case the military judge’s error did not prejudice Appellant. 
Therefore, I concur in the judgment. 
I. Three Main Concerns 
I have three main concerns with the majority opinion. I 
will address each of them in turn. 
A. Characterization of the Defense Counsel’s Position 
In its opinion the majority states:  
In short, defense counsel attacked K.B.’s credibil-
ity based on inconsistency and told the members 
that they must assess this inconsistency by hear-
ing all of her statements, including those to [the 
Army Criminal Investigation Division (CID)]. Yet 
defense counsel then opposed the Government’s 
effort to introduce the recordings of her state-
ments to CID.  
United States v. Brown, __ M.J. __, __ (16) (C.A.A.F. 2026). 
If this characterization is correct, the majority’s stance in 
this case is understandable because the doctrines of com-
pleteness and estoppel could legitimately be seen as coming 
into play. However, upon reviewing the record, I am not as 
convinced as the majority that the defense counsel actually 
asserted that the panel members needed to hear all of the 
 
1 The majority does not reach the issue of whether  the 
victim’s statement was admissible under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i). 
As a result , I find no need to address this issue because, as 
explained below, even if the military judge did abuse his 
discretion in admitting the statement under this provision, the 
error was harmless.  
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
2 
 
victim’s statements in order to assess her credibility based 
on inconsistency.  
In support of its characterization of what the defense 
counsel said, the majority points to two comments he made 
during opening statements.  First, defense counsel said to 
the panel members : “[Y]ou’re going to hear about all of 
those statements [made by the victim] .” However, I note 
that defense counsel told  the panel members that they 
would hear “about” the statements; he did not say that they 
would actually hear the statements themselves. (Emphasis 
added.) And indeed, the panel members already had heard 
“about” the statements—from Government counsel .2 That 
is a fine distinction, but it merits mentioning.  
Second, and more importantly, the majority points to a 
passage where defense counsel said: “Is the story that [the 
victim] tells you in this courtroom consistent with all of the 
other stories” that she previously had told. However, as the 
majority notes, the defense counsel then said to the panel 
members: “And if [the victim’s story] did change, why?”  
Further, the defense counsel’s comment about the victim 
changing her story came directly after he highlighted that 
“as long as [the witness] is the victim in this case, she gets 
to see her children. As long as [Appellant] is the aggressor, 
he does n’t get to see their children.”  Thus, t he defense 
counsel’s query about “why” the victim’s story changed 
seems to tie any inconsistent statements made by the vic-
tim to her motive to fabricate 3—which is a ground for ad-
mission under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i) rather than M.R.E. 
801(d)(1)(B)(ii).  
In light of these facts, I am not convinced  the defense 
counsel argued that the panel members needed to hear all 
 
2 The defense counsel made the  comment cited above while 
reminding the panel members that the Government had asked 
them during voir dire: “ ‘Are you open to the idea that when a 
person has to retell an event over and over again, the retelling 
may vary in small ways?’ ” 
3 In essence, the defense theory was that the victim changed 
her earlier statement  that she had  pointed her firearm at 
Appellant because she later realized such an admission would 
jeopardize gaining custody of her children.  
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
3 
 
of the victim’s prior statements in order to assess her cred-
ibility based on inconsistency. 4 Rather, it seems that de-
fense counsel was referring to the victim’s motive to fabri-
cate. Accordingly, admission of her prior consistent 
statement under (B)(ii) was improper,  as the witness was 
never impeached on “another ground.”   
To be sure, these facts are specific to the instant case.  
However, the majority’s view of them and its consequent 
disposition of the M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) issue raises con-
cerns for future cases. I believe the law is clear that a prior 
consistent statement is not automatically admissible under 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) simply because a defense counsel 
notes in passing that the witness made a prior inconsistent 
statement and then ties that inconsistency to a ground spe-
cifically provided for in M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i). Although a 
prior consistent statement may be admissible under both 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i) and M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii), the 
grounds for admissibil ity under each provision are sepa-
rate and distinct. This point is amply demonstrated by the 
plain language of M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) stating th at a 
prior statement is not hearsay if it is consistent with the 
witness’s testimony at trial, and if the statement is offered 
to rehabilitate the witness’s credibility “ on another 
ground,” i.e., on a ground other than  those spelled out in 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i). I am concerned that a dmitting the 
statements here may be seen as opening the door to admis-
sion whenever a witness has been impeached with prior in-
consistent statements, regardless of the timing or content 
of the consistent statements , and regardless of the pur-
ported ground for the admission of those statements. 
B. Inconsistency, Standing Alone, is Not a  
Basis for Admission 
The majority opinion states: “[W]e need not decide in 
this case whether an attack solely on the ground of ‘incon-
sistency’ would be a proper ‘[]other ground’ under subpar-
agraph (B)(ii) in all contexts.” __ M.J. at __ (15) (second al-
teration in original). This statement is technically correct; 
 
4 Perhaps it is these weaknesses in the factual underpinning 
of this approach that caused the Government not to pursue such 
an argument at trial or before this Court. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
4 
 
we need not decide this point as broadly phrased. However, 
I am concerned that a potential for mischief lurks in this 
seemingly innocuous point. 
No one reading the majority opinion should be under 
the impression that it is an open question whether a wit-
ness’s prior consistent statement becomes admissible un-
der M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) whenever defense counsel 
simply points out an inconsistency in the witness’s trial 
testimony. That approach obviously would ignore the lan-
guage, and gut the purpose, of M.R.E. 801.  
While the Advisory Committee Notes to Fed. R. Evid. 
801 (2014 amendment) make reference to “inconsistency” 
as another grounds of impeachment allowing admission 
under (B)(ii), this is in reference to “consistent statements 
that are probative to explain what otherwise appears to be 
an inconsistency  in the witness’s testimony.”
5 (Emphasis 
added.) The Advisory Committee Notes further clarify that 
the amendment did “not change the traditional and well-
accepted limits on bringing prior consistent statements be-
fore the factfinder for credibility purposes,” and they do not 
“allow impermissible bolstering of a witness.” Id. As this 
Court recognized in United States v. Finch, the “permissi-
ble uses of admitted evidence have changed, but the re-
quirements to admit that evidence have not.” 79 M.J. 389, 
396 (C.A.A.F. 2020).  
And caselaw on this point is clear—inconsistency alone 
is not a ground of admission. See, e.g. , United States v. 
Toney, 161 F.3d 404, 409 (6th Cir. 1998) (noting the “prior 
consistent statements in no way clarify or explain the even 
earlier inconsistent statements that [the witness] allegedly 
made,” which “would only have bolstered [her] in-court ex-
culpatory statements” and thus “had no rehabilitative 
value”); United States v. Cotton, 823 F.3d 430, 437 (8th Cir. 
 
5 The M.R.E. 801 Drafters’ Analysis explaining the 2016 
amendment omits this initial language, but there is no basis to 
conclude that this is an intentional departure given the 
amendment is described as “in accordance with an identical 
change to Federal Rule of Evidence 801(d)(1)(B).”  Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States, Analysis of the Military Rules of 
Evidence app. 22 at A22-61 (2016 ed.). 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
5 
 
2016) (“Use of a prior consistent statement to rehabilitate 
the credibility of a witness who has been impeached by a 
prior inconsistent statement is appropriate when the state-
ment contextualizes, clarifies, or amplifies the meaning of 
the witness ’s testimony or inconsistent statemen t.”); 
United States v. Miller, 874 F.2d 1255, 1274 (9th Cir. 1989) 
(exclusion correct where “prior statements in no way help 
to explain or amplify the inconsistent statement with 
which [the witness] was impeached”); United States v. Ad-
ams, 385 F.2d 548, 550 n.3 (2d Cir. 1967) (noting prior con-
sistent statements “would have been equally incompetent 
after impeachment which here was solely by contradic-
tion”); United States v. Simonelli, 237 F.3d 19, 27 (1st Cir. 
2001) (providing “prior statements are admissible which 
tend to show the statement is not really inconsistent when 
it is understood in its proper context”); United States v. Iu, 
917 F.3d 1026, 1033- 34 (8th Cir. 2019) (endorsing admis-
sion of “  ‘prior consistent statement to rehabilitate the 
credibility of a witness who has been impeached by a prior 
inconsistent statement . . . when the statement contextual-
izes, clarifies, or amplifies the meaning of the witness’s tes-
timony or inconsistent statement’  ” (quoting Cotton , 823 
F.3d at 437)). 
C. Here, the Prior Consistent Statement Did Not 
“Rehabilitate” the Witness 
As noted, “inconsistency” may be an appropriate ground 
for admission where the prior consistent  statement serves 
to (a) “explain the alleged inconsistency or to show that it 
was not really inconsistent at all,” United States v. 
McCaskey, 30 M.J. 188, 193 (C.M.A. 1990), or (b) for exam-
ple, rebut the assertion or implication that the witness’s 
testimony is the product of a faulty memory,� United States 
v. Ruiz, 86 M.J. 75, 83 (C.A.A.F. 2025). A prior consistent 
statement that does not serve these functions would in-
stead merely repeat and bolster the testimony of the wit-
ness. As the Supreme Court recognized in Tome v. United 
States, were admission premised on an idea “that, in a 
broad sense, any prior statement by a witness concerning 
the disputed issues at trial would have some relevance in 
assessing the accuracy or truthfulness of the witness’  in-
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
6 
 
court testimony,” then “Congress could have adopted that 
rule with ease.” 513 U.S. 150, 159 (1995).  
The majority quotes United States v.  Tarantino, 846 
F.2d 1384, 1411 (D.C. Cir. 1988), for the proposition that 
an “ ‘opposing party may not pick and choose among prior 
statements to create an appearance of conflict and then ob-
ject when this appearance is rebutted by means of a fuller 
version of the same prior statements. ’ ” Brown, __ M.J. at 
__ (16). Fair enough. But I do not believe that is what hap-
pened here. Appellant did not “pick and choose among prior 
statements to create an appearance of conflict”—the im-
peaching statement and prior consistent statement are in-
deed in conflict, and the victim’s prior consistent statement 
did not explain this conflict or put it into context. This dif-
fers from Tarantino, where impeachment with testimony 
from a prior proceeding  allowed admission of “additional 
testimony given  . . . at the same previous trial” which 
“place[d] those statements in context. ” 846 F.2d at 1411;  
see also United States v. Portillo , 969 F.3d 144, 176 (5th 
Cir. 2020)  (rejecting admission under “rule of complete-
ness” because it was “ not demonstrated that the state-
ments . . . correct any misleading impressions created by 
the defendants’ references to the prior statements”).  
Here, the admitted statement s by the victim only pro-
vided repetition, not rehabilitation, because they did noth-
ing to explain the impeaching inconsistent statements. As 
we have noted, “Mere repeated telling of the same story is 
not relevant to whether that story, when told at trial, is 
true.” McCaskey, 30 M.J. at 192.  
II. The Military Judge Abused His Discretion 
In light of these points, I conclude that t he military 
judge misunderstood and misapplied the law here. It is 
evident from the record that he believed that inconsistency 
alone was a sufficient basis under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) to 
admit the victim’s statements that are at issue. And yet, as 
demonstrated above, the military judge was not correct on 
this point. Therefore, the military judge  abused his 
discretion. 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
7 
 
III. Appellant Was Not Prejudiced by This Error 
Although the military judge erred by admitting these 
statements, Appellant’s conviction should stand because he 
was not prejudiced. In these circumstances, “the test for 
prejudice is ‘whether the error had a substantial influence 
on the findings.’  ” Finch, 79 M.J. at 398 (quoting United 
States v. Kohlbek, 78 M.J. 326, 334 (C.A.A.F. 2019)). To as-
sess prejudice, “this Court weighs: ‘(1) the strength of the 
Government’s case, (2) the strength of the defense case, 
(3) the materiality of the evidence in question, and (4) the 
quality of the evidence in question.’ ” Id. (quoting Kohlbek, 
78 M.J. at 334).  
The Government’s case was fairly strong. KB testified 
as to the sequence of events and that the weapon had been 
cleared and placed on the be d before the stabbing. Photo-
graphs of the scene and the investigating CID agent’s tes-
timony corroborated that the firearm was cleared and 
found on the bed. And Appella nt admitted he believed the 
weapon had been put down by the time he stabbed KB and 
that he did not believe (though he was uncertain) the mag-
azine had been in the weapon at the time. Cf. United States 
v. Frost, 79 M.J. 104, 112 (C.A.A.F 2019) (weak case where 
only witness had credibility undermined and “the Govern-
ment presented at trial no forensic evidence, no other direct 
witnesses, and no evidence of previous” behavior). 
Conversely, the defense theory of self-defense was 
weak. Nothing suggested Appellant was in fear for his life 
when he decided to stab KB, and while the defense sought 
to impeach KB as to her motive to fabricate, this approach 
failed to adequately rebut evidence that the weapon was 
set aside when the stabbing took place. The defense offered 
no explanation as to why the gun was found without the 
magazine and with the chamber cleared, other than vague 
intimations that the scene had not been secured. 
As to materiality and quality, the conclusion that the 
prior statements lacked rebutting force and relevance con-
versely suggests that they lacked materiality. The state-
ments, being consistent with trial testimony, were largely 
cumulative. Because the statements failed to rebut the in-
consistent statements, and did not add substantially to 
United States v. Brown, No. 25-0181/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
8 
 
what was already before the panel, it seems unlikely the 
evidence was significant in the minds of the members. Nor 
did the statements work to malign Appellant or effectively 
bolster KB’s credibility, given trial defense counsel persua-
sively argued they were self-serving statements made after 
she had “days . . . to think about how to adjust her story.”  
Moreover, while KB’s statements about whether she  
pointed the gun at Appellant were important, they did not 
go “to the heart of the matter in dispute,” Frost, 79 M.J. at 
112, given the evidence that the gun was set  aside by the 
time KB was stabbed. As trial counsel noted in closing, Ap-
pellant’s and KB’s stories “vary in several ways, but there 
is one glaring consistency. . . . [KB] put that gun down on 
the bed. She was empty -handed. She was unarmed .” See 
Kohlbek, 78 M.J. at  334 (holding excluded statement not 
“particularly material” where it “only call[ed] into question 
the reliability of [appellant’s] confession” but did not “ne-
gate or otherwise disprove the remaining evidence”). 
Thus, considering the above factors, the Government 
has met its burden of showing the error in admission was 
harmless. 
IV. Conclusion 
While the military judge’s error in admission was ulti-
mately harmless, it still is imperative to maintain the prin-
ciples undergirding the text and purpose of  M.R.E. 
801(d)(1)(B)(ii). Where the Military Rules of Evidence and 
our precedents outline  requirements for admission, such 
guidance must control. Because the prior consistent state-
ments here did not  explain or contextualize the incon-
sistent statements with which the witness was impeached, 
the consistent statements lack rebutting force and thus rel-
evance as to the impeachment w hich occurred. Accord-
ingly, they should have been excluded. I therefore respect-
fully disagree with the majority’s contrary conclusion. 