This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
John D. KERSHAW, Staff Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0177 
Crim. App. No. 40455 
 
Argued January 13, 2026—Decided April 30, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Brian C. Mason (motions), Dayle P. 
Percle (Article 30a proceedings), Lance R. Smith (mo-
tions and arraignment), Shad R. Kidd (trial on the 
merits), and Tiny L. Bowman (remand) 
 
For Appellant: Major Ashley T. Levine (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
Jenny A. Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
For Appellee: Major Frederick J. Johnson  (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams. 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS and Judge JOHNSON  
joined. Judge MAGGS  filed a dissenting opinion, in 
which Judge HARDY joined. 
_______________ 
 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
If at a court-martial there is a discrepancy between any 
of the facts pleaded by the government and the facts proven 
at trial, a service Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) has the 
authority under the prior version of Article 66 of the Uni-
form Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)
1 to find the  appel-
lant’s conviction to be factually insufficient. However, if 
there is a discrepancy between a  fact pleaded by the gov-
ernment and a fact proven at trial —and if th at fact is not 
an integral part of an  element of the charged offense—a 
CCA has the alternative authority to conduct a variance 
analysis and test that discrepancy for prejudice. This holds 
true regardless of whether the trier of fact made exceptions 
and substitutions at trial. If the variance analysis reveals 
no prejudice to the appellant, the CCA may affirm the con-
viction on factual sufficiency grounds despite the discrep-
ancy. Because in the instant case the Air Force CCA com-
mitted legal error by disclaiming the latter authority, we 
set aside the opinion below and remand the case for further 
review in accordance with this Court’s opinion. 
 
1 Congress has altered the Article 66 factual sufficiency re-
view of the CCAs, but these new standards apply only to cases 
where all findings of guilty are for offenses occurring after Jan-
uary 1, 2021. See William M. (Mac) Thornberry National De-
fense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 
116-283, § 542(b), (e)(2), 134 Stat. 3388, 3612 -13 (2021). Con-
gress has further changed the language of Article 66(d)(1), with 
the current version controlling those cases where all findings of 
guilty are for offenses occurring after December 27, 2023. See  
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Pub. 
L. No. 117- 81, § 539E(d)(1), (f), 135 Stat. 1541, 1703, 1706 
(2021). Because the offenses here occurred no later than 2016, 
these changes do not apply. Accordingly, our opinion in this case 
need not and does not consider how the congressional amend-
ments to Article 66 might affect the scope of a CCA’s factual suf-
ficiency review authority going forward. 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
I. Factual and Procedural Background 
The facts of this case are complicated.2 In sum, the vic-
tim (FA) disclosed to a high school counselor that when she 
was considerably younger, Appellee (her uncle) intention-
ally exposed his genitalia to her and penetrated her mouth 
with his penis. Appellee was then charged with two speci-
fications under Article 120b, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920b 
(2012), alleging he had (1) “commit[ted] a lewd act upon 
[FA], a child who had not attained the age of 16 years, by 
intentionally exposing his genitalia to her with an intent to 
gratify his sexual desire,” and (2) “commit[ted] a sexual act 
upon [FA], a child who had not attained the age of 12 years, 
by causing penetration of her mouth with his penis.” Im-
portantly for the purposes of this appeal, the charge sheet 
alleged that these events occurred “between on or ab out 1 
April 2016 and on or about 30 April 2016.” 
At trial, the Government relied primarily on testimony 
from the victim and her mother to prove its case. Although 
the testimony as to the conduct itself was more or less con-
sistent, the time line was confusing. In order to identify the 
dates when the charged offenses occurred, the victim and 
her mother needed to rely on a complex mental matrix of 
various locations at which they had lived and personal 
events that had occurred. As such, their testimony regard-
ing the date of the offenses was muddled.  
Upon recognizing that there was a potential discrep-
ancy between the dates listed on the charge sheet and those 
raised in the trial testimony, trial counsel asked the mili-
tary judge to instruct the panel members on variance.
3 The 
 
2 The CCA opinion provides a detailed review of the testi-
mony adduced at trial. United States v. Kershaw , No. ACM 
40455 ( f rev), 2025 CCA LEXIS 205, at *4-8, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *2-3 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 27, 2025)  (un-
published). 
3 “A variance between pleadings and proof exists when evi-
dence at trial establishes the commission of a criminal offense 
by the accused, but the proof does not conform strictly with the 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
military judge did so . The panel members subsequently 
convicted Appellee, contrary to his pleas, of the sexual 
abuse of a child specification without any exceptions or 
substitutions. They acquitted him of the rape of a child 
specification. The military judge sentenced Appellee to two 
years of confinement, reduction to the grade of E -1, a rep-
rimand, and a dishonorable discharge. 
Upon appeal to the Air Force CCA, Appellee challenged 
the factual sufficiency of his conviction, claiming that the 
evidence adduced at trial demonstrated that the alleged 
sexual abuse occurred outside the charged time frame. The 
CCA agreed. In a divided decision, the lower court held that 
Appellee’s conviction was factually insufficient in light of 
the failure of the evidence to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the offense in issue occurred “ between on or 
about 1 April 2016 and on or about April 30, 2016. ” Ker-
shaw, 2025 CCA LEXIS 205, at *16, 2025 WL 1331477, at 
*6 (internal quotation marks omitted). The CCA concluded 
that the conflicting evidence indicated “the best estimate 
as to when the incident occurred is sometime between April 
2015 and October 2015, placing the offense date six months 
to a year before the timeframe charged in the specifica-
tion.” Id. at *14, 2025 WL 1331477, at *5. The lower court 
went on to opine that such a time gap was “too substantial” 
to be encompassed by the “on or about” lang uage of the 
specification, and thus the evidence failed “to support a 
finding of factual sufficiency.” Id. at *15, 2025 WL 1331477, 
at *6.  
In reaching this conclusion, the CCA declined the Gov-
ernment’s invitation to apply “a variance standard of re-
view.” Id. at *12, 2025 WL 1331477, at *5. The lower court 
reasoned that because a variance instruction was given at 
trial and the members “made no changes,” “there is no var-
iance issue for [us] to  consider.” Id. at *12 -13, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *5. The dissenting judge argued that the con-
viction was factually sufficient and that the majority erred 
 
offense alleged in the charge.” United States v. Teffeau, 58 M.J. 
62, 66 (C.A.A.F. 2003) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
in failing to “consider[] divergences between the charged 
timeframe and proof at trial as a mere variance under the 
specific facts of this case and then evaluating for preju-
dice.” Id. at *17, 2025 WL 1331477, at *6 (Kearley, J., dis-
senting).  
The acting Judge Advocate General of the Air Force 
then certified the following issue for our review: 
Where time was not an essential element of the 
offense, did the Air Force Court of Criminal Ap-
peals err by finding factual insufficiency based on 
a discrepancy between the dates pleaded and the 
dates proved, when the Court should have applied 
a variance analysis and found a non-fatal variance 
instead. 
United States v. Kershaw , 86 M.J. 133 (C.A.A.F. 2025) 
(docketing notice of certificate for review). 
In sum, Appellee argues before this Court that the CCA 
“acted within its discretion when it declined to analyze the 
discrepancy in proof as a variance.” The Government, on 
the other hand, argues that “if there are discrepancies be-
tween the proof and pleading of non-essential facts, courts 
conducting factual sufficiency reviews must assess the dif-
ference as a variance and analyze whether the variance 
was (1) material; and (2) if it prejudiced the appellant.” We 
address both of these opposing positions below. 
II. Discussion
4 
The version of Article 66, UCMJ, that applies to the in-
stant case states in pertinent part: “[A service Court of 
Criminal Appeals] may affirm only such findings of guilty 
. . . as [it] finds correct in law and fact and determines, on 
the basis of the entire record, should be approved.” 10 
 
4 We highlight that the following principles of law pertain to 
a CCA’s review of a specification that resulted in a conviction 
following a contested trial for that offense. However, when a 
CCA reviews a conviction resulting from a guilty plea, it applies 
neither legal nor factual sufficiency review and instead consid-
ers the providence of the plea. United States v. Faircloth, 45 M.J. 
172, 174 (C.A.A.F. 1996). 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
U.S.C. § 866 (d)(1) (2018). As relevant to this appeal, this 
provision empowers a CCA to engage in what is colloquially 
known as a “factual sufficiency review.” See, e.g. , United 
States v. Harvey, 85 M.J. 127, 129 (C.A.A.F. 2024). A review 
of our key precedents in this area of the law is helpful in 
determining the scope and nature of this authority. 
In the recent case of United States v. Patterson , this 
Court affirmed the Air Force CCA’s finding that a convic-
tion was factually insufficient because the government had 
not proven that the incident occurred during the dates al-
leged in the specification. 86 M.J. 24, 30 (C.A.A.F. 2025).  
In doing so, we concluded that this finding was within the 
CCA’s discretionary authority under the prior version of 
Article 66. Id. at 29-30. Thus, Patterson stands for the prop-
osition that a CCA may base a finding of factual insuffi-
ciency on a discrepancy between the dates pleaded and 
those proven at trial , without the CCA conducting a vari-
ance analysis. Accordingly, the Government’s contention 
before this Court that CCAs must employ a variance anal-
ysis in these types of cases is foreclosed by our precedent.  
It is important to note, however, that our opinion in Pat-
terson explicitly declined to address whether a CCA can  
conduct a variance analysis in such circumstances and as-
sess for prejudice. Specifically, in resolving the question 
presented in Patterson this Court “express[ed] no opinion 
about whether the AFCCA might have affirmed the finding 
of guilty notwithstanding the discrepancy between the 
facts alleged and the facts proved using . . . [a] variance 
analysis.” Id. at 29. Therefore, we must turn to earlier prec-
edents for guidance in answering this question. 
In United States v. Hunt, the government used the typ-
ical “on or about” language in the charge sheet when citing 
the date that the offense allegedly occurred. 37 M.J. 344, 
345 (C.M.A. 1993) . However, even with this latitude af-
forded the government, the appellant argued there was a 
variance between the date pleaded and the date proven at 
trial. Id. The lower court engaged in a variance analysis, 
even in the absence of exceptions and substitutions by the 
panel at trial, and found that the variance in the date  
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
pleaded and the date proven was “not fatal” based on such 
“criteria” as the following: the appellant was not misled by 
the variance; the appellant had notice of what he needed to 
defend against at trial; and the variance did not undermine 
the appellant’s ability to protect himself from another trial 
for the same offense. United States v. Hunt , 34 M.J. 779, 
781-82 (A.C.M.R. 1992). In other words, the lower court in 
Hunt engaged in a variance analysis and tested for preju-
dice—and this Court affirmed the lower  court. In doing so, 
we did not merely say there was no material variance be-
tween the dates pleaded and the dates proven at trial. Ra-
ther, we also stated:  
[A]ssuming a material variance [between the 
dates pleaded and the dates proven] occurred here 
as a matter of law, we still cannot find reversible 
error in the judge’s denial of the motion for a find-
ing of not guilty. To prevail on that motion appel-
lant must show that he was prejudiced by the var-
iance in this case. 
Hunt, 37 M.J. at 347.  
This Court’s affirmance of the lower court’s decision in 
Hunt demonstrates that a CCA may engage in a variance 
analysis even when there are no exceptions and substitu-
tions made by the trier of fact. This position is consistent 
with our other case law that makes it clear that when a 
CCA conducts a factual sufficiency review, it must engage 
in an independent determination of the sufficiency of the 
evidence. See, e.g. , United States v. Washington , 57 M.J. 
394, 399 (C.A.A.F. 2002) (noting a CCA conducting a fac-
tual sufficiency review “must assess the evidence in the en-
tire record without regard to the findings reached by the 
trial court, and it must make its own independent determi-
nation”). Thus, a CCA’s authority to engage in a variance 
analysis is not derivative of, or dependent upon, a panel’s 
decision to make exceptions and substitutions. Stated 
simply, the factfinder below cannot serve as a variance 
gatekeeper; a CCA has the authority to engage in a vari-
ance analysis regardless of what a panel has done in terms 
of exceptions and substitutions below.  
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Next, we examine the case of United States v. Lubasky. 
In that case we were not confronted with a factual  suffi-
ciency review by a CCA; rather, we conducted our own legal 
sufficiency review of the offense for which the appellant 
was convicted. 68 M.J. 260 (C.A.A.F. 20 10). Moreover, the 
factual discrepancy in that case involved the person who 
was the victim of the charged larceny—which is an element 
of that offense.
5 Id. at 263. As can be seen then, our holding 
in Lubasky did not touch on the extent of a CCA’s factual 
sufficiency review authority under Article 66 when the dis-
crepancy between the fact pleaded and the fact proven was 
not an element of the charged offense. Thus, Lubasky  is of 
limited guidance here. 
The case of United States v. English , however, does 
stand for several important principles applicable here . 79 
M.J. 116 (C.A.A.F. 2019) . In English, the government 
charged the appellant under Article 120(a)(1) , UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 920(a)(1) (2012),  and thus was required to 
prove as an element of the offense that the accused had 
used “unlawful force” in the course of committing the sex-
ual act. But instead of simply invoking the phrase “by using 
unlawful force” as provided for in the sample specification, 
the government chose to include in the ch arge sheet the 
factual detail that the accused had forced the victim to en-
gage in the sexual act by “ grabbing her head with his 
hands.” 79 M.J. at 119 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
And yet at trial, the victim did not testify to this fact, ex-
plaining that she could not remember the details of the sex-
ual assault. Id. Nevertheless, on appeal the CCA affirmed 
the appellant’s conviction by excepting the words “to wit: 
grabbing her head with his hands.” Id. at 120 (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) . We rev ersed, concluding that the 
CCA did not have the authority to affirm the appellant’s 
 
5 The elements of Article 121, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  921, re-
quire the government to prove, among other things, “[t]hat the 
property belonged to a certain person” because the government 
must prove that the victim had a superior possessory interest 
vis-à-vis the accused. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States 
pt. IV, para 64.b (2024 ed.) (MCM). 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
conviction “based on a theory of criminality not presented 
at trial.” Id. at 119.  
English stands for three  key principles that are rele-
vant here. First, a CCA may make exceptions if they “nar-
row the scope of an appellant’s conviction to that conduct it 
deems legally sufficient” or may affirm a lesser included 
offense of the convicted offense pursuant to the provisions 
of Article 59(b), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 859(b). English, 79 M.J. 
at 120 & n.3. Second , “there is no authority, statutory or 
otherwise, that permits [a CCA] to except language from a 
specification in such a way that creates a broader or differ-
ent offense than the offense charged at trial .” Id. at 121. 
And third, “it is a fundamental tenet of due process that an 
appellate court may not affirm a conviction based on a more 
generalized and generic theory of force not submitted to the 
trier of fact.” Id. at 122.  
In reviewing these facts and the principles derived 
therefrom, we conclude there is nothing in English  that 
prohibits a CCA from conducting a variance analysis in the 
course of a factual sufficiency review when there is a dis-
crepancy between the facts pleaded by the government and 
the facts proven at trial  if the discrepant facts are not  an 
integral part of an element of the charged offense. We fur-
ther conclude that there is nothing in English  that pre-
vents a CCA from finding a conviction factually sufficie nt 
if the variance does not prejudice the appellant such as by 
creating a broader or different offense than the offense 
charged at trial or by otherwise offending the due process 
rights of the appellant.
6  
 
6 For example, if an accused is charged with stealing a blue 
car but the testimony at trial demonstrates that the car he stole 
was actually dark green, and if a CCA concludes that the appel-
lant would not be prejudiced by the CCA excepting the word 
“blue,” then the CCA would not err by doing so. The factual de-
scription of the stolen car might be broader or different but the 
offense would not be broader or different — the appellant would 
still stand convicted of the offense of larceny. For the same rea-
son, the color of the car (while relating  to an element) is not an 
integral part of an element, being mere surplusage.  
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
Having demonstrated that neither the text of Article 66 
nor applicable precedents preclude a CCA from conducting 
a variance analysis within the parameters described above, 
we now turn our attention to explaining why this authority 
properly resides within t he purview of a service court. 
First, testing for prejudice is a traditional role of appellate 
courts when there are errors or missteps at the trial level.
7 
Indeed, even many errors of constitutional dimensions are 
subject to being tested for prejudice. See United States v. 
Dominguez Benitez, 542 U.S. 74, 81 (2004)  (noting “relief 
for [nonstructural] error is tied in some way to prejudicial 
effect”); United States v. Cole , 84 M.J. 398, 404 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (noting if “forfeited error is constitutional in nature, 
then material prejudice is assessed using the harmless be-
yond a reasonable doubt standard ” (citation modified)).  
Therefore, it would be odd indeed if this Court were to deny 
this ability to the CCAs when they are exercising their fac-
tual sufficiency  review authority which is derived from 
statute.
8 Second, for many decades this Court has repeat-
edly emphasized that the prior version of Article 66 grants 
CCAs “awesome, plenary” authority in the course of con-
ducting factual sufficiency reviews. See, e.g., United States 
v. Nerad, 69 M.J. 138, 144 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Beatty , 64 
M.J. 456, 458 (C.A.A.F. 2007)). It would be incongruous for 
 
7 The types of prejudice that a CCA must consider in this 
context include whether the discrepancy materially misled the 
accused regarding what he needed to defend against at trial; 
failed to protect the accused from another prosecution for the 
same offense; altered the nature of the offense; changed the ap-
plicable maximum punishment; or in any other way materially 
infringed on the accused’s due process rights. See, e.g., United 
States v. Treat, 73 M.J. 331, 336 (C.A.A.F. 2014) ; United States 
v. Lee, 1 M.J. 15, 17 (C.M.A. 1975). 
8 The invocation of phrases such as “The government is in 
control of the charge sheet and therefore should be required to 
prove whatever facts it pleads” does not rebut this point. There 
are many things that a trial counsel is “in control of” before and 
during a trial, but a CCA still is typically authorized to assess 
the prejudice such actions have on the accused.  
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
this Court to now change course and place a novel re-
striction on this authority when such a step is not com-
pelled by the plain language of Article 66.
9 And third, plac-
ing such a restriction on the CCAs would run counter to the 
interests of justice. This latter point is perhaps best illus-
trated by the following hypothetical.  
Let us say that the government has charged a service-
member with assault consummated by a battery under Ar-
ticle 128, UCMJ. This offense requires the government to 
prove just three elements: “(a) That the accused did bodily 
harm to a certain person; (b) T hat the bodily harm was 
done unlawfully; and (c) T hat the bodily harm was done 
with force or violence. ” MCM pt. IV, para. 77.b.(2).  How-
ever, the specification as drafted by the trial counsel fol-
lows the sample specification in the Manual  and reads as 
follows: “In that Private John R. Smith did, in Arlington, 
Virginia, on or about 15 June 2025, unlawfully strike Pri-
vate James S. Jones on the back with a baseball bat.” See 
id. para. 77.e.(2). At trial, the only person who testifies as 
to the location of the  offense states that it occurred in Al-
exandria, Virginia, rather than Arlington. On appeal, the 
defense argues that because there is a discrepancy between 
the facts that were charged by the government and the 
 
9 The dissent’s concern over “allow[ing] a CCA to affirm” ver-
dicts “[it] finds to be incorrect in fact” as contrary to Article 66 is 
misplaced. United States v. Kershaw, __ M.J. __, __ (6) (C.A.A.F. 
2026) (Maggs, J., with whom Hardy, J., joined , dissenting). For 
example, CCAs under the current version of Article 66 only re-
view factual sufficiency upon request of an appellant and thus 
may well affirm a conviction not “correct in fact.” 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(d)(1). Likewise, waiver doctrine may preclude considera-
tion of a defense that, if assessed, would undermine a finding of 
guilt as a factual matter. See, e.g. , United States v. Franks, 76 
M.J. 808, 814 n.5 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2017) (holding “the defense 
of lack of mental responsibility” affirmatively waived). And as-
sessment of prejudice is often applied in consideration of legal 
error—which has never been seen as counter to Article 66’s re-
quirement that a CCA  affirm only findings of guilt it finds are 
“correct in law.” 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
facts that were proven at trial, the appellant’s conviction 
was factually insufficient.  
We conclude that at this point, the CCA has two options: 
it can decide that the conviction is indeed factually insuffi-
cient because of the noted factual discrepancy or , because 
the location of the incident was not an integral part  of one 
of the elements of the offense, the CCA can instead engage 
in a variance analysis and test for prejudice.
10 Then, if the 
CCA concludes that the discrepancy between the fact 
pleaded (that the assault occurred in Arlington) and the 
fact proven at trial (that the assault occurred in Alexan-
dria) did not prejudice the appellant, the CCA would have 
the authority to find that the conviction was factually suf-
ficient. To hold otherwise would not be consistent with 
basic principles of justice. As noted above, errors and mis-
steps are an unfortunately common by-product of criminal 
trials, and absent extraordinary circumstances, they do not 
serve as automatic death knells for righteous convictions. 
Rather, testing these errors and missteps for prejudice is 
the typical legal paradigm upon appellate review, and such 
an approach should not be prohibited here. And we under-
score that as shown in the hypothetical explored above, the 
appellant would have been charged  with the offense of 
 
10 The instant case involves dates. This fact adds a layer of 
analytical complexity because, as is typical in such instances, 
the specification refers to “on or about” a certain date range. 
Therefore, the discrepancy at issue is not initially binary as is 
the case in the hypothetical discussed above. So, to be clear, in 
those cases where dates are involved, a CCA must first resolve 
the question of whether the “on or about” language in the speci-
fication means that there actually is no variance to address. In 
doing so, our case law on this subject remains good law; nothing 
in this opinion disturbs our precedent on this topic. See  United 
States v. Simmons, 82 M.J. 134, 139 (C.A.A.F. 2022); Hunt , 37 
M.J. at 347; United States v. Allen , 50 M.J. 84, 86 (C.A.A.F. 
1999). It is only after a CCA determines that the date proven at 
trial falls outside of the range created by the use of the “on or 
about” language in the specification that the CCA should then 
proceed to the next step of deciding whether to use the type of 
variance analysis discussed above. 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
assault consummated by a battery for unlawfully inflicting 
bodily harm on Private James S. Jones  by hitting him on 
the back with a baseball bat, and the appellant would stand 
convicted of the offense of assault consummated by a bat-
tery for unlawfully inflicting bodily harm on Private James 
S. Jones by hitting him on the back with a baseball bat . 
There is nothing fundamentally unfair here.11   
III. Conclusion 
Consistent with this Court’s precedents, and pursuant 
to the CCAs’ broad authority under the prior version of Ar-
ticle 66, we hold that if there is a discrepancy between a 
fact pleaded by the government and a fact proven at trial—
and if that fact is not an integral part of an element of the 
charged offense—a CCA has the authority to conduct a var-
iance analysis and test the discrepancy for prejudice. This 
holds true regardless of whether the trier of fact made ex-
ceptions and substitutions at trial. If the variance analysis 
reveals no prejudice to the appellant, the CCA may affirm 
the conviction on factual sufficiency grounds despite the 
discrepancy. Because the court below disclaimed any au-
thority to conduct the variance analysis  and thereby com-
mitted legal error, the decision below is set aside. The rec-
ord is returned to the Judge Advocate General of the Air 
Force for remand to the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals for a new factual sufficiency review of the 
conviction, consistent with this opi nion, as well as consid-
eration of any other issues mooted by its prior decision.  
 
 
11 As an aside, we note that if we were to adopt the position 
of Appellee in this case, future accused servicemembers could be 
disadvantaged because we would be incentivizing trial counsel 
to draft bare -bones specifications providing the constitutional 
minimum of notice. Conversely, accused servicemembers would 
be incentivized to avoid broaching a variance issue when spotted 
at trial so as to retain a devastating trump card on appeal. 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge H ARDY joins, 
dissenting. 
A general court martial found Appellee guilty of a single 
specification of child abuse committed “between on or about 
1 April 2016 and on or about 30 April 2016.” On appeal, the 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
(AFCCA) conducted a factual sufficiency review  as re-
quired by the applicable version  of Article 66(d), Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 866(d) (2018). 
United States v. Kershaw , No. ACM 40455 (f rev) , 2025 
CCA LEXIS 205, at *8-16, 2025 WL 1331477, at *3-6 (A.F. 
Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 27, 2025)  (unpublished). In so doing, 
the AFCCA determined that “convincing evidence” showed 
that the offense occurred “several months” before the date 
alleged in the specification . Id. at *1 2, *1 6, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *5-6. The AFCCA therefore concluded that the 
evidence was not factually sufficient and set aside the find-
ing of guilty and the sentence. Id.  at *16, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *6. 
The Court today sets aside the AFCCA’s decision and 
remands the case for a new factual sufficiency review. The 
Court directs that on remand the AFCCA consider a new 
rule that the Court articulates as follows: 
[I]f there is a discrepancy between a fact pleaded 
by the government and a fact proven at trial—and 
if that fact is not an integral part of an element of 
the charged offense—a [Court of Criminal Appeals 
(CCA)] has the . . . authority to conduct a variance 
analysis and test that discrepancy for preju-
dice. . . . If the variance analysis reveals no preju-
dice to the appellant, the CCA may affirm the con-
viction on factual sufficiency grounds despite the 
discrepancy. 
The Court emphasizes that this new rule  applies “regard-
less of whether the trier of fact made exceptions and sub-
stitutions at trial.” 
In my view, the new rule articulated by the Court is not 
supported by precedent and stands at odds with other well-
established principles that the CCAs must apply when con-
ducting a factual sufficiency review.  I therefore would not 
remand the case for the AFCCA to consider this new rule. 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
2 
 
Instead, I would simply affirm the AFCCA’s judgment. Be-
cause the Court reaches a different conclusion, I respect-
fully dissent. 
I. The AFCCA’s Application of Settled Principles 
In conducting its factual sufficiency review, the AFCCA 
considered and applied four  uncontroversial principles. 
The first principle is that a CCA conducts a variance anal-
ysis when a court-martial finds an accused guilty with ex-
ceptions and substitutions pursuant to Rule for Courts -
Martial 918(a) . United States v. Marshall , 67 M.J. 418, 
420-21 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (analyzing whether a substitution 
concerning the name of the soldier from whom the accused 
was alleged to have escaped custody was material and prej-
udicial). In this case, t he AFCCA concluded that this  first 
principle did not apply because the court -martial did not 
find Appellee guilty by exceptions and substitutions.  Ker-
shaw, 2025 CCA LEXIS 205, at *12-13, 2025 WL 1331477, 
at *5.  
The second principle is that when a specification alleges 
that an offense occurred “on or about” a stated date, t he 
words “ ‘on or about’ connote[] a range of days to weeks .” 
United States v. Simmons, 82 M.J. 134, 139 (C.A.A.F. 
2022). Based on this definition, the AFCCA concluded that 
Appellee’s conduct did not occur “on or about” the dates al-
leged in the specification because “convincing evidence” 
showed that they occurred “several months ” earlier. Ker-
shaw, 2025 CCA LEXIS 205 , at *1 2, *16, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *5-6. 
The third principle is that “there is no authority, statu-
tory or otherwise, that permits [a CCA] to except language 
from a specification in such a way that creates a . . . differ-
ent offense than the offense charged at trial.” United States 
v. English, 79 M.J. 116, 121 (C.A.A.F. 2019). The AFCCA 
recognized this principle and did not attempt to change the 
wording of the specification of which Appell ee was found 
guilty so that it would match the proof at trial. Kershaw , 
2025 CCA LEXIS 205, at *13, 2025 WL 1331477, at *5. 
The fourth principle, which comes directly from the ap-
plicable version of Article 66(d) (1), UCMJ, is that a CCA 
“may affirm only such findings of guilty  . . . as the Court 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
3 
 
finds correct in  . . . fact.” (Emphasis added.) Conducting  
this required factual sufficiency review, in conjunction with 
the three previously stated principles, the AFCCA set aside 
the finding of guilty. Kershaw , 2025 CCA LEXIS 205 , at 
*16, 2025 WL 1331477, at *6. T he finding of guilty, in the 
AFCCA’s determination, was not supported by factually 
sufficient evidence given the discrepancy between the 
dates alleged and the dates proved.  Id. at *8-16, 2025 WL 
1331477, at *3-6. 
The Court today expresses no disagreement with the 
AFCCA’s application of any of these four principles  and 
does not ask the AFCCA to revisit them on remand . The 
Court accepts that the AFCCA was not required to perform 
a variance analysis because t he court-martial did not find 
Appellee guilty by exceptions and substitutions. The Court 
does not mention any  disapproval of the AFCCA’s conclu-
sion that a period of several months is too great to fit into 
the narrow range described by the words “on or about.” The 
Court similarly does not fault the AFCCA for failing to ad-
just the specification using exceptions or substitutions. The 
Court even agrees that Article 66(d), UCMJ, authorized the 
AFCCA to set aside the finding of guilty in this case be-
cause of the discrepancy between the dates pleaded by the 
Government and the proof presented at trial. 
But despite this general agreement, the Court decides  
that a remand to the AFCCA is necessary so that the 
AFCCA can consider the application of its new rule. The 
Court’s remand for this purpose is proper, however, only if 
the new rule is valid. 
II. Validity of the Court’s New Rule 
The Court’s new rule—to repeat —a uthorizes, but does 
not require, a CCA to affirm a finding of guilty, even if the 
government did not prove a fact stated in the specification, 
so long as the “fact is not an integral part of an element of 
the charged offense” and a failure of the government’s proof 
causes no prejudice to the accused. To apply this new rule, 
the CCA presumably must draft amended findings—as if it 
had the authority to make exceptions and substitutions  
even when it does not—and then use a variance analysis to 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
4 
 
compare those amended findings to the panel’s actual 
findings. 
This new rule may or may not reflect  good policy con-
siderations, but I cannot agree with it  as a matter of law.  
The new rule that the Court is asking the AFCCA to con-
sider is not supported by this Court’s precedent.  And the 
new rule also stands at odds with most of the uncontrover-
sial principles described above that the AFCCA used to de-
cide this case. 
As authority for the new rule, the Court relies primarily 
on a brief passage in United States v. Hunt , 37 M.J. 344 
(C.M.A. 1993), cert. denied, 510 U.S. 1111 (1994). The pas-
sage states: 
[A]ssuming a material variance [between the 
dates pleaded and the dates proven] occurred here 
as a matter of law, we still cannot find reversible 
error in the judge’s denial of the motion for a find-
ing of not guilty. To prevail on that motion appel-
lant must show that he was prejudiced by the var-
iance in this case. 
Id. at 347. This passage from Hunt does not exactly match 
the Court’s new rule because it does not distinguish be-
tween integral and nonintegral facts and it does not men-
tion findings by exceptions and substitutions. But  I agree 
with the Court that th e passage contemplates that a CCA 
will conduct a prejudice analysis when assessing a discrep-
ancy between the facts pled and the facts proved. That said, 
I am not persuaded that this passage is binding. 
The Hunt decision was primarily about the meaning of 
the words “on or about” in a specification. The specification 
at issue alleged that the appellant had  committed a rape 
“on or about 20 October 1989.” Id. at 345. Evidence in the 
record established that the conduct in question may have 
occurred as early as three weeks before October 20, 1989. 
Id. at 346. This Court nevertheless affirmed the finding of 
guilty, holding that the  words “on or about” could cover 
dates within a three-week range. Id. at 347. The Court ex-
plained: 
Appellant was not charged with rape on October 
20, 1989, but with rape “ on or about October 20, 
1989.” The words “on or about” in pleadings mean 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
5 
 
that “the government is not required to prove the 
exact date, if a date reasonably near  is estab-
lished.” United States v. Nersesian , [824 F.2d 
1294, 1323 (2d Cir. 1987)] (emphasis added); see 
United States v. Brown, [34 M.J. 105, 110 (C.M.A. 
1992)]. Here the evidence of record established 
that the offense of rape occurred within 3 weeks of 
October 20, 1989, the date the rape was reported. 
Id. Recognizing this holding, this Court routinely has cited 
Hunt as standing for the proposition that the phrase “on or 
about” a date covers a range of dates reasonabl y near the 
stated date. See, e.g. , Simmons, 82 M.J. at 139 ( quoting 
Hunt, 37 M.J. at 347, for the proposition that “[t]he words 
‘on or about’ in pleadings mean that ‘the government is not 
required to prove the exact date [of an offense], if a date 
reasonably near is established.’ ” (alterations in original)); 
United States v. Barner, 56 M.J. 131, 137 (C.A.A.F. 2001) 
(same); United States v. Williams, 40 M.J. 379, 382 (C.M.A. 
1994) (same). 
The passage in Hunt  addressing prejudice appears in 
the opinion after th e Court’s holding regarding the mean-
ing of “on or about” and is best read as  dicta. The Court 
stated that even “assuming a material variance occurred,” 
the variance would not require reversal absent prejudice.  
Hunt, 37 M.J. at 347. This statement was not necessary to 
the Court’s decision given that the Court had already de-
cided that a period of three weeks was “on or about” the 
date alleged in the specification. The Court was merely ad-
dressing a hypothetical situation. 
What a court says in dicta is not always wrong, but the 
dicta in Hunt was poorly supported. The only military jus-
tice case that the Court cited to support the dicta was 
United States v. Lee, 1 M.J. 15 (C.M.A. 1975). Hunt, 37 M.J. 
at 347. In Lee, the Court conducted a variance analysis af-
ter the court-martial had made findings of guilty by excep-
tions and substitutions. 1 M.J. at 15-18 (holding that a sub-
stitution of  “ ‘marijuana in the form of three growing 
marijuana plants’ ” for “ ‘marijuana in hashish form’ ” was 
not a fatal variance). Lee did not address the question 
whether a CCA could apply a variance analysis when a 
court-martial had not made findings by exceptions and 
substitutions. Lee therefore was not on point. 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
6 
 
In addition, even if the dicta in Hunt  at one time 
properly stated the law, the new rule that the Court derives 
from it now stands at odds  with several of the well -estab-
lished principles applied by the AFCCA.  For example, the 
new rule largely undercuts the principle that the term “on 
or about” encompasses a range of dates separated by days 
or weeks, but not months or years.  Under the new rule, 
whether the evidence establishes that an accused’s conduct 
occurred within days or weeks of a date alleged in a speci-
fication is no longer determinative.  The test now is  effec-
tively one of prejudice. So long as there is no prejudice, the 
dates pled in a specification do not matter, and a discrep-
ancy of any length is permissible. 
The Court’s new rule also renders largely nugatory the 
principle that a CCA may not modify the words of a speci-
fication to alter the offense. Under the new rule, it does not 
matter whether a CCA may revise the words of a specifica-
tion because the CCA may affirm a finding of guilty even if 
the dates proved do not match the dates alleged in the spec-
ification. In this case, for example, the  new rule would al-
low the AFCCA on remand to affirm a finding that Appellee 
committed child abuse  “between on or about 1 April 2016 
and on or about 30 April 2016, ” even though the CCA has 
determined that convincing evidence shows otherwise. Is it 
not worse for a CCA to affirm a finding of guilty  that is 
incorrect in fact than to allow the CCA to correct the inac-
curacy? 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the Court’s new 
rule conflicts with the text of the applicable version of Ar-
ticle 66(d), UCMJ. This provision states unambiguously 
that a CCA “may affirm only such findings of guilty . . . as 
the Court finds correct in . . . fact.” Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ 
(emphasis added). The new rule, however, will allow a CCA 
to affirm some findings of guilty that the CCA  finds to be 
incorrect in fact. Indeed, the Court’s remand order directs 
the AFCCA to consider doing exactly that. 
In pointing out these problems with the new rule  an-
nounced by the Court , I am not suggesting that the new 
rule is unworkable or will necessarily produce bad results. 
Indeed, federal appellate courts outside of the military jus-
tice system long have used  a prejudice test similar to the 
United States v. Kershaw, No. 25-0177/AF 
Judge MAGGS, with whom HARDY, J., joins dissenting 
7 
 
new rule. See, e.g., United States v. Cochran, 697 F.2d 600, 
604-05 (5th Cir. 1983) (upholding a conviction where “ ‘on 
or about November 1, 1981’ ” was alleged, and September 
1981 was proven, because there was no prejudice to the de-
fendant). Those federal appellate courts, however, are not 
bound by Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ, which expressly directs a 
CCA to affirm only findings of guilty that are correct in 
fact. Whether the CCAs should have powers similar to 
other federal appellat e courts is a policy question that is 
best left to Congress. 
Some might criticize a system that would allow the 
AFCCA to set aside a finding that the accused is guilty of 
a serious offense like child abuse merely because of an er-
ror in the dates stated in the specification.  Those making 
such a criticism, however, should remember that the whole 
problem of discrepancies between facts alleged and facts 
proved is largely in the hands of the government. The gov-
ernment drafts the specifications and is therefore in control 
of everything in the charge sheet. Therefore, if the govern-
ment includes facts in a specification that the government 
cannot prove, that is  ultimately a problem of the g overn-
ment’s own making. In addition, the government has many 
tools at its disposal—including seeking exceptions and sub-
stitutions at trial—for dealing with discrepancies between 
the evidence admitted and the specifications. 
III. Conclusion 
For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals. 