This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jamal X. WASHINGTON, First Lieutenant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0044 
Crim. App. No. 39761 
 
Argued November 18, 2025—Decided April 13, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Christopher M. Schumann 
 
For Appellant: Robert Feldmeier , Esq. (argued); 
Captain Trevor N. Ward (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Major Vanessa Bairos (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel  
Jenny A. Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
and Judge HARDY joined. Judge MAGGS filed a 
dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Appellant was charged with one specification of abusive 
sexual contact in violation of Article 120(d), Uniform Code 
of Military Justice ( UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920(d) (2012), 
among other  offenses. During trial, t he military judge 
concluded that portions  of Appellant’s direct examination 
testimony implicated the prohibition against “other sexual 
behavior” under Military Rule of Evidence  (M.R.E.) 
412(a)(1) (2019 ed.)1 and “sexual predisposition” under 
M.R.E. 412(a)(2). We granted review to determine whether 
the military judge abused his discretion by striking those 
portions of Appellant’s testimony. United States v. 
Washington, 85 M.J. 408, 409 (C.A.A.F. 2025)  (order 
granting review). We hold that the military judge abused 
his discretion because Appellant’s testimony  described 
surrounding circumstances that were  inextricably 
intertwined with the charged offense and  a conversation 
that did not implicate the victim’s sexual predisposition . 
Therefore, this evidence was  outside the scope of M.R.E. 
412. Moreover, the military judge’s instruction directing 
the panel to disregard Appellant’s testimony about those 
surrounding circumstances as well as any testimony from 
Appellant that made any suggestion or reference to the 
victim’s sexual orientation constituted  an extraordinary 
remedy outside the range of reasonable choices supported 
by the facts or law. Accordingly, we reverse the decision of 
the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
(AFCCA) as to Charge I and its specification.  
I. Background 
In February 2018, authorities began investigating 
Appellant for conduct that occurred during a temporary 
duty assignment to Camp Gurnsey, Wyoming . As part of 
the investigation, authorities interviewed CP, a company 
grade officer who was shadowing Appellant at the time. CP 
 
1 Unless otherwise noted, all references in this opinion to the 
Rules for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) and Military Rules of 
Evidence (M.R.E.) are to the Manual for Courts-Martial, United 
States (2019 ed.). 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
informed authorities that after a night of drinking, he went 
to Appellant’s hotel room where Appellant kissed him and 
grabbed his genitals  twice without CP ’s consent. As a 
result, Appellant was charged with one specification of  
abusive sexual contact under Article 120(d), UCMJ. 
Prior to trial, the defense moved to admit CP ’s 
statement to Appellant, made in the hotel room, disclosing 
CP’s prior homosexual experiences . The defense had no 
plan to explore CP ’s prior homosexual experiences but  
argued that if the Government were to suggest  that CP’s 
heterosexuality precluded him from engaging in 
consensual homosexual acts, that would “open the door” to 
an evidentiary hearing on the matter.  The military judge 
agreed and instructed the parties to request an Article 
39(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 839(a) (2018), session if any such 
evidence potentially implicating M.R.E. 412 arose. 
Testifying for the Government, CP said that Appellant 
kissed him on the hotel room  bed, and then reached down 
his pants and touched CP’s penis. CP told Appellant, 
“[S]orry. I’m not into you. I’m not into that or anything like 
that.” Appellant responded with something to the effect of, 
“[Y]ou have a girlfriend.  I have a girlfriend. It doesn’t 
matter. . . . [l]et me suck you off,” as he kissed CP and put 
his hand down CP’s pants again. The defense did not object 
under M.R.E. 412 to CP’s testimony.  
During the defense’s case, Appellant  testified that he 
and CP had a “lasting” hug as they sat at the foot of the bed 
talking. They laid down and began discussing their dating 
lives. According to Appellant, the conversation was about 
“who we’re dating at the time. And then, he mentions that 
he has a girlfriend and so do I.” Appellant then reached 
over and touched  CP’s thigh, which Appellant felt was a 
natural next step in their consensual , sexualized 
interaction. Appellant began to testify, “At that time we’re 
talking about different preferences. He relates to me that 
he and his girlfriend—”  when defense counsel interjected, 
instructing Appellant not to “get into details of what’s 
going on in the details of [ CP’s] personal life.” Appellant 
testified that CP said “he had had men and women come 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
on to him  before.” CP’s Special Victims’ Counsel (SVC) 
objected pursuant to M.R.E. 412, but withdrew the 
objection after assurances the defense did not intend to 
introduce M.R.E. 412 evidence. The Government did not 
object. 
Resuming direct examination, defense counsel 
instructed Appellant not to repeat  specific words from his 
conversation with CP . Appellant testified that after a 
while, CP objected to Appellant touching his thigh.  
Appellant stopped touching him  and they continued 
talking for some time before CP eventually left the room.  
Appellant denied ever touching CP ’s genitals. At the 
conclusion of Appellant’s direct examination, the  SVC 
requested a closed session as a precaution to discuss what 
the Government  intended to ask Appellant during 
cross-examination.  
At the start of the closed hearing, the military judge 
expressed concern that  Appellant’s testimony about the 
events leading up to the charged conduct—consensual 
hugging, lying down  together, touching CP’s thigh, and 
CP’s objection to the touching of his thigh (hereinafter, the 
“uncharged conduct”)—described “matters that are clearly 
covered under M.R.E. 412” but had not been noticed by the 
defense. The defense countered that the uncharged conduct 
was not past sexual behavior or predisposition, but rather  
res gestae of the offense, offered to show that Appellant and 
CP “may have engaged in some behavior with each other in 
a generally consensual manner .” The Government 
explained that it sought to cross-examine Appellant about 
what CP said  that made Appellant believe CP was 
consenting, “[t]he idea being that what [CP] told 
[Appellant] is offered by the prosecution to explain the facts 
and circumstances of the offense, or as his testimony kind 
of unfolded, the lack of an offense.” Later, the Government 
added that it w ould offer Appellant’s testimony “that CP 
relayed to him a sexual discussion between him and his 
girlfriend. . . . to prove that [Appellant] was told of a sexual 
discussion and . . . that is sexual behavior, period dot.”  
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
The military judge concluded that Appellant’s 
testimony created a “ [c]lear implication  . . . that the 
encounter with [CP], including any sexualized nature of 
that encounter, was consensual which implicated [CP]’s 
sexual orientation.” According to t he military judge , the 
uncharged conduct —“ what the defense  . . . described as 
facts and circumstances surrounding the charged 
offense”—was other “ sexualized conduct” evidence . 
Alternatively, Appellant’s testimony that they talked about 
girlfriends, sexual preferences, and CP’s claim that men 
and women had come on to him amount ed to sexual 
predisposition evidence because it implied CP consented to 
the uncharged conduct, which in turn implied  he may be 
homosexual. As such , this evidence should have  been 
noticed and addressed in an M.R.E. 412 setting.  
To give the Government the opportunity to challenge 
Appellant’s testimony that the uncharged conduct was 
consensual, the military judge gave the defense two 
options: (1) Appellant could submit to cross-examination in 
a closed session in accordance with M.R.E. 412 , or (2) the 
military judge  would instruct the members to disregard 
Appellant’s testimony regarding the uncharged conduct as 
well as any testimony from Appellant “that made any 
suggestion or reference to [CP]’s sexual orientation.”  
Appellant refus ed to testify in a closed hearing. 
Accordingly, the military judge instructed the panel to 
disregard Appellant’s testimony  that he believed the 
uncharged conduct “was consensual in nature and may 
have implicated [CP]’s sexual orientation.”  The military 
judge stated that the panel must, however, consider 
aspects of the testimony wherein Appellant denied the  
specific charged conduct. Two members of the panel had 
questions following the military judge’s instructions. One  
member asked the military judge to repeat the instruction 
and then asked for time to review his notes. Another  
member asked in part whether they were “supposed to 
disregard that it was consensual or just disregard the 
portion of sexual orientation?”  The military judge 
responded, “Both.”  
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
Prior to the close of evidence, the defense moved to 
strike CP’s testimony that he told Appellant  he was “not 
into things like that,” implying “a heterosexual sexual 
orientation.” The defense argued that the Government 
failed to provide M.R.E. 412 notice of the statement and 
kissing to which CP testified. While the defense viewed this 
evidence as res gestae of the charged conduct, the military 
judge had ruled otherwise with respect to Appellant’s 
testimony about the uncharged conduct and CP’s 
statements to Appellant during the charged conduct . 
Therefore, the defense argued Appellant was entitled to the 
same remedy the military judge provided to the 
Government after concluding  that Appellant’s testimony 
was M.R.E. 412 evidence . The military judge denied the 
motion. 
The members found Appellant guilty , contrary to his 
pleas, of one specification of abusive sexual contact in 
violation of  Article 120 (d), UCMJ , as well as one 
specification of conduct unbecoming an officer in violation 
of Article 133, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 933 (2012), and five 
specifications of fraternization in violation of  Article 134, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2012), for conduct irrelevant to the 
instant appeal. The military judge sentenced Appellant to 
dismissal from the service. 
In an unpublished opinion, with each of the three judges 
writing separately,  the AFCCA affirmed the findings of 
guilty for abusive sexual contact  and conduct unbecoming 
an officer. United States v. Washington , No. ACM 39761, 
2021 CCA LEXIS 379, at * 2-3, 2021 WL 3239903, at * 1 
(A.F. Ct. Crim. App. July 30, 2021) (unpublished) .
2 We 
granted review of the following issue: 
 
2 The AFCCA dismissed the five Article 134, UCMJ, 
fraternization specifications, four of which with prejudice , set 
aside the sentence, and authorized a rehearing as to one of the 
fraternization specifications and the sentence. Washington, 2021 
CCA LEXIS 379, at *2 -3, 2021 WL 3239903 at *1. Appellant 
petitioned this Court for a grant of review which was “denied 
without prejudice to Appellant’s right to raise the matters 
asserted during the normal course of appellate review.” United 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Whether the original military judge abused his 
discretion when he struck a portion of Appellant’s 
testimony. 
Washington, 85 M.J. at 409. For the following reasons, we 
answer the granted issue in the affirmative. Therefore, we 
reverse the decision of the AFCCA  as to Charge I and its 
specification and set aside the guilty finding as to Charge I 
and its specification and the sentence. 
II. Standard of Review 
We review a military judge’s decision to admit evidence 
pursuant to M.R.E. 412 for an abuse of discretion.  United 
States v. Wilson , 84 M.J. 383, 390 (C.A.A.F. 2024).  
“Military judges abuse their discretion (1) if the findings of 
fact upon which they predicate their ruling are not 
supported by the evidence of record; (2) if they use incorrect 
legal principles ; or (3) if their application of the correct 
legal principles to the facts is clearly unreasonable.” Id . 
While a military judge’s findings of fact are reviewed for 
clear error, the threshold question of whether evidence 
falls within the scope of M.R.E. 412 is “one of law, reviewed 
de novo .” United States v. Yammine, 69 M.J. 70, 73 
(C.A.A.F. 2010).  
 
States v. Washington , 82 M.J. 30 (C.A.A.F. 2021) ( order). The 
convening authority determined a rehearing on the 
fraternization specification was impractical and dismissed the 
specification. United States v. Washington , No. ACM 39761, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 342, at *3, 2024 WL 3886239, at *2 (A.F. Ct. 
Crim. App. Aug. 20, 2024) (unpublished). The convening 
authority ordered a sentencing rehearing for the Article 120, 
UCMJ, and Article 133, UCMJ,  violations. Id., 2024 WL 
3886239, at *2 . At the rehearing, Appellant was sentenced to 
nine months of confinement, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, 
and a reprimand. Id ., 2024 WL 3886239, at *2 . Following writ 
petitions that were denied by both the AFCCA and this Court, 
the AFCCA considered nine issues. Id . at * 4-5, 2024 WL 
3886239, at *2. Finding multiple prejudicial errors, the AFCCA 
reassessed the sentence, declining to affirm the confinement or 
reprimand. Id. at *85, 2024 WL 3886239, at *31. This Court then 
granted review. Washington, 85 M.J. at 409. 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
III. Applicable Law 
Pursuant to the  Privacy Protection for Rape Victims 
Act,3 the Federal Rules of Evidence were amended in 1978 
to include Fed. R. Evid.  412, which generally bars 
admission of evidence of a victim’s other sexual behavior or 
sexual predisposition in cases involving sexual misconduct 
except under limited circumstances . See United States v. 
Miller, 86 M.J. 188, 191 (C.A.A.F. 2025 ). In creating the 
rule, Congress sought  to protect victims of sexual 
misconduct from being discredited based on unrelated 
sexual acts or behavior. 4 Fed. R. Evid.  412’s military 
counterpart, M.R.E. 412, incorporated the same principles 
into court-martial procedures. Miller, 86 M.J. at 191.  
M.R.E. 412(a) provides that evidence of a victim’s other 
sexual behavior or sexual predisposition is generally 
inadmissible in a proceeding involving  an alleged sexual 
offense. The rule outlines three exceptions  where such 
evidence may be admitted , including evidence of specific 
instances of sexual behavior by the victim (1) to prove 
someone other than the accused was the source of injury or 
other physical evidence, (2) to prove consent, and 
(3) evidence the exclusion of which would violate the 
accused’s constitutional rights. M.R.E. 412(b)(1); Miller, 86 
M.J. at 191.  The rule prescribes procedures for admitting 
evidence pursuant to one of the exceptions. M.R.E. 
412(c)(1)-(3). Notably, a military judge must conduct a  
closed hearing pursuant to Article 39(a), UCMJ , to 
determine whether the proffered evidence should be 
admitted under the relevant exception. M.R.E. 412(c)(2). If 
the military judge determines that the evidence falls  
 
3 Pub. L. No. 95-540, § 1, 92 Stat. 2046, 2046-47 (1978). 
4 United States v. Savala , 70 M.J. 70, 72 (C.A.A.F. 2011); 
United States v. Roberts, 69 M.J. 23, 24 (C.A.A.F. 2010); Privacy 
of Rape Victims: Hearings on H.R. 14666 and Other Bills to 
Amend the Federal Rules of Evidence to Provide for the 
Protection of the Privacy of Rape Victims Before the Subcomm. 
on Crim. Just. of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 94 th Cong. 2 
(1976) (statement of Rep. Elizabeth Holtzman, Member, H. 
Subcomm. on Crim. Just.). 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
within one of the exceptions and the probative value of the 
evidence outweighs its prejudicial effect, then the evidence 
may be admitted. M.R.E. 412(c)(3). This balancing test 
does not apply to evidence that is admissible under the 
rule’s constitutional exception. United States v. Gaddis, 70 
M.J. 248, 250 (C.A.A.F. 2011). 
IV. Discussion 
Over the defense’s objection, the military judge ordered 
a closed M.R.E. 412 hearing and subsequently instructed 
the panel to disregard a substantial portion of Appellant’s 
testimony because he refused to submit to cross -
examination outside the presence of the members . The 
military judge relied  on a determination that those 
portions of Appellant’s testimony fell squarely within the 
plain language of M.R.E. 412. We conclude  that the 
military judge applied an erroneous view of M.R.E. 412 as 
to both the uncharged conduct  evidence and Appellant’s 
testimony about CP’s statements. Therefore, we hold that 
the military judge abused his discretion . Further, the 
military judge’s remedy of striking Appellant’s testimony 
violated Appellant’s Sixth Amendment right to testify in 
his own defense  and the Government has failed to show 
such error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
A. The uncharged conduct was not 
“other sexual behavior” 
Appellant’s testimony concerning the uncharged 
conduct— consensual hugging, lying down together, 
touching CP’s thigh, and CP’s objection to the touching of 
his thigh—did not constitute evidence of “other sexual 
behavior” because it described surrounding circumstances 
that were intrinsic  to, not separate from,  the charged 
conduct. Therefore, this evidence was not barred under 
M.R.E. 412 and the military judge erred in instructing the 
panel to disregard Appellant’s testimony about the 
uncharged conduct. 
M.R.E. 412(a)(1) provides that evidence offered to prove 
a victim’s “other sexual behavior” is generally inadmissible 
in any proceeding involving alleged sexual offenses. Other 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
sexual behavior “includes any sexual behavior, not 
encompassed by the alleged offense.” M.R.E. 412(d).  
The Advisory Committee Note to Fed. R. Evid. 412, on 
which M.R.E. 412 was modeled, explains that “ [t]he word 
‘other’ is used to suggest some flexibility  in admitting 
evidence ‘intrinsic’ to the alleged sexual misconduct.” Fed. 
R. Evid. 412, Advisory Committee Note (1994)  (citing 
Advisory Committee Note to 1991 amendment to Fed. R. 
Evid. 404(b)). An act is intrinsic to the charged conduct 
when it is “(1) an uncharged offense which arose out of the 
same transaction or series of transactions as the charged 
offense, (2) necessary to complete the story of the crime, or 
(3) inextricably intertwined with the  evidence regarding 
the charged offense.” United States v. Edouard , 485 F.3d 
1324, 1344 (11th Cir. 2007) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted) ; see also  United States v. 
Ingram, 556 F. App’x 203, 210 (4th Cir. 2014) (per curiam) 
(unpublished). “If the evidence is  intrinsic, it is 
not other bad acts evidence at all, but rather additional 
facts surrounding the charge at issue. ” United States v. 
Lockhart, 844 F.3d 501, 512 (5th Cir. 2016). This is because 
those acts “are part of a single criminal episode.” United 
States v. Barnes, 49 F.3d 1144, 1149 (6th Cir. 1995).  
Fed. R. Evid. 412 is consistent with Fed. R. Evid. 404(b), 
the rule regulating the admissibility of character evidence 
and other crimes or wrongful acts, in treating intrinsic 
evidence “as part and parcel of the charged offense.” United 
States v. Green , 617 F.3d 233, 245 (3d Cir. 2010) . This 
Court has similarly found evidence of conduct intrinsic to 
the charged conduct to be admissible under M.R.E. 404. See 
United States v. Peel , 29 M.J. 235, 239 (C.M.A. 1989) 
(concluding that evidence the appellant threw coins at the 
victim before the charged assault “was probably admissible 
[under M.R.E. 403 and M.R.E. 404 ] as ‘part of the same 
transaction as the’ assault,” but even if error it wa s 
harmless); United States v. Thomas, 11 M.J. 388, 392- 93 
(C.M.A. 1981)  (recognizing a distinction between 
admissible “uncharged misconduct which is inextricably 
related in time and place to the offenses charged and 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
uncharged misconduct which lacks this nexus” and may be 
inadmissible under M.R.E. 404(b)). 
Just as intrinsic conduct is not “other” conduct subject 
to exclusion under M.R.E. 404(b) , conduct that is intrinsic 
to the charged conduct is not “ other sexual behavior” 
subject to exclusion under M.R.E. 412. Thus, the service 
courts have held that conduct  which is “inexorably 
intertwined with the alleged offense” is not inadmissible 
“other sexual behavior” under M.R.E. 412. United States v. 
Gaddy, No. ARMY 20150227, 2017 CCA LEXIS 179, at 
*4-5, 2017 WL 1097058, at *2 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 20, 
2017) (unpublished) (holding that “highly sexualized 
dancing” “immediately preceding the alleged assault . . . . 
was admissible as part of the same transaction  as the 
assault” (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted)); United States v. Key, 71 M.J. 566, 569 (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. 2012) (concluding that words spoken by a 
victim “shortly before” an assault were “encompassed by 
several of the alleged offenses” and thus, not barred by 
M.R.E. 412).  
The uncharged conduct to which Appellant testified in 
this case  was intrinsic to the charged conduct  and not 
“other sexual behavior” prohibited by M.R.E. 412. 
Although Appellant denied touching CP’s penis, he 
described an escalating,  consensual, intimate interaction  
with CP that culminated in  the charged conduct. 
Appellant’s testimony regarding an extended hug, and 
lying on the bed with CP, his hand on CP’s thigh, as they 
talked about girlfriends, sexual preferences, and sexual 
experiences, provided context for CP’s allegation that 
Appellant touched his penis without c onsent. As such, the 
uncharged conduct w as both “necessary to complete the 
story” of the hotel room encounter and “inextricably 
intertwined with the evidence regarding the charged 
offense” of touching CP’s penis. Edouard, 485 F.3d at 1344 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted). 
The Government’s argument to the contrary is not 
persuasive. The Government argues the “allegedly 
consensual hug, thigh touch, and lying on the bed were not 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
encompassed by the offense described on the charge sheet: 
touching CP’s genitals.” The Government’s narrow view of 
the scope of the offense  is inconsistent with Article 
120(g)(8)(C), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920(g)(8)(C) (2012),5 which 
provides that “[a]ll the surrounding circumstances are to 
be considered in determining whether a person gave 
consent.” See, e.g., United States v. Casillas, 86 M.J. 94, 101 
(C.A.A.F. 2025) ( holding that the military judge properly 
declined to give an instruction prohibiting the panel 
members from considering all of the surrounding 
circumstances to determine consent ). Alleged c onsensual 
touching that is intrinsic to  the charged conduct is 
precisely the “surrounding circumstances”  that must be 
considered in determining whether a person gave consent. 
United States v. Mendoza, 85 M.J. 213, 222 (C.A.A.F. 2024).  
B. Appellant’s testimony was not “sexual 
predisposition” evidence 
Evidence offered to prove a victim’s “sexual 
predisposition” is generally inadmissible. M.R.E. 412(a)(2). 
“Sexual predisposition” is defined as  a “victim’s mode of 
dress, speech, or lifestyle that does not directly refer to 
sexual activities or thoughts but that may have a sexual 
connotation for the fact finder.” M.R.E. 412(d).  
Appellant testified that on the night in question, 
immediately prior to the charged conduct, he and CP  
discussed CP’s relationship with his girlfriend and CP told 
him that both men and women had flirted with CP before. 
For the reasons stated below, we conclude that n either of 
these statements qualifies as sexual predisposition 
evidence.  
First, the parties agreed that the fact CP  was in a 
relationship was not covered by M.R.E. 412 , and the 
military judge had previously ruled that evidence of  the 
 
5 The Military Justice Act of 2016 renumbered this provision 
without changing the language. National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2017, Pub. L. No. 114-328, § 5430(a), (b), 130 
Stat. 2000, 2949 (2016).  It is now codified at Article 120(g)(7), 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920(g)(7) (2024).  
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
existence of the relationship was permissible. “Evidence of 
a relationship, even a romantic or dating relationship, 
absent more is insufficient to create a reasonable inference 
of either sexual behavior or sexual predisposition that 
would trigger Mil. R. Evid. 412’s exclusions.” United States 
v. Alston, 75 M.J. 875, 883 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2016). Here, 
during its case -in-chief and without objection , the 
Government introduced evidence that CP was in a 
relationship during the charged time  frame through the 
testimony of CP’s then girlfriend before Appellant testified 
for the defense . Therefore, this evidence was properly 
before the factfinder. Moreover , when Appellant began to 
describe what CP said about his girlfriend and 
“preferences,” defense counsel cut his testimony short.
6 As 
a result, there is no evidence, sexualized or other, about the 
relationship, or CP’s preferences, because  Appellant did 
not testify to the content of the conversation. Accordingly, 
even if the existence of a relationship might otherwise 
relate to a victim’s lifestyle, Appellant’s limited testimony 
is not evidence of sexual predisposition because Appellant 
did not testify to CP’s preferences beyond acknowledging 
the relationship’s existence.  
Second, CP’s statement that men and wom en have 
flirted with him in the past does not  describe anything he 
said or did. It describes actions that others took  toward 
him. It does not shed light on CP’s sexual orientation 
because it does not signify anything about his “mode of 
dress, speech, or lifestyle.” M.R.E. 412(d); see, e.g., United 
States v. Erikson , 76 M.J. 231, 235 n.2 (C.A.A.F. 2017) 
(questioning “whether M.R.E. 412 actually applies in this 
case,” where the defense sought to admit evidence of the 
victim’s prior accusation of sexual assault against another 
soldier, and noting, “We fail to see how the sexual assault 
of a victim relates to that victim’s ‘sexual behavior’ or 
‘sexual predisposition’ ”).  
 
6 Appellant stated, “At that time we’re talking about 
different preferences. He relates to me that he and his 
girlfriend— [interrupted by question from Defense Counsel].”  
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
Additionally, we reject the AFCCA’s conclusion that 
evidence CP consented to the uncharged conduct was 
impermissible sexual propensity evidence. According to the 
AFCCA, “[t]he inference . . . was clear: CP consented to the 
conduct in Appellant’s hotel room because he was either 
gay or bisexual.” Washington, 2021 CCA LEXIS 379, at 
*98, 2021 WL 3239903 at *34.  However, “sexual 
predisposition” as defined by the rule does not apply to 
evidence that “directly refer[s] to sexual activities or 
thoughts.” M.R.E. 412(d). Because evidence CP consented 
to specific uncharged acts leading up to the charged 
conduct “directly refer[s] to sexual activities or thoughts,” 
it is not evidence of his sexual predisposition.  
We do not suggest that uncharged conduct that is 
intrinsic to the charged offense could never constitute 
impermissible sexual propensity evidence. For example, in 
Stephens v. Miller,  an appellant charged with attempted 
rape claimed he and the victim engaged in consensual sex. 
13 F.3d 998, 1000 (7th Cir. 1994)  (en banc). He sought to 
introduce his statements to the victim during the charged 
offense, “ ‘[d]on’t you like it like this? . . . Tim Hall said you 
did,’ ” as well as something to the effect of “ switching 
partners,” to bolster his account that the sex was initially 
consensual, but his statements were so offensive that she 
asked him to leave. Id. at 1000-01 (alterations in original). 
The state trial judge excluded the statements under 
Indiana’s rape shield statute. Id. at 1000. In an appeal from 
the denial of his federal habeas corpus petition,
 a plurality 
of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh 
Circuit rejected the a ppellant’s argument that his  
statements were intrinsic  to the alleged offense, noting 
that “criminal defendants could always circumvent rape 
shield statutes by claiming that they said something near 
in time and place to the alleged rape.” Id. at 1003.  
However, such concerns are not present where, as here, 
the statement at issue does not qualify as sexual 
predisposition. Unlike t he statements in Stephens  
pertaining to the victim’s preferred sexual positions, the 
statement made by CP  that men and women have flirted 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
with him does not pertain to the behavior of the victim . It 
merely describes the behavior of  others who flirted with 
him. 
The Government’s failure to object to the statements 
referencing CP’s relationship with his girlfriend and his 
statement regarding men and women having flirted with 
him in the past supports the conclusion they did not state 
or imply improper sexual predisposition  or sexual 
orientation evidence because it suggests the Government 
did not view them as implicating M.R.E. 412. Only the SVC 
objected—an objection that was withdrawn after the 
defense disavowed any intention to introduce M.R.E. 412 
material. Under t he circumstances, we hold that  the 
statements do not qualify as sexual predisposition evidence 
under M.R.E. 412(a)(2).  
Finally, we note  that even if  Appellant’s testimony 
implicated M.R.E. 412, the Government’s proactive 
introduction of evidence concerning CP ’s heterosexuality 
opened the door to Appellant’s introduction of contrary 
evidence.
 On direct examination, CP testified that he told 
Appellant, “I’m not into you. I’m not into that or anything 
like that.” “This Court has not. . . . prevent[ed] evidence of 
homosexuality from being used against an accused. And we 
see no principled reason to prevent an accused from using 
this same type of evidence to potential advantage .  . . .” 
United States v. Collier, 67 M.J. 347, 355 (C.A.A.F. 2009). 
Lower military courts  have reached the same conclusion , 
noting “[w]here the Government uses sexual orientation in 
a way that implies the impossibility of consent  . . . the 
defense must be allowed to rebut that inference. To do 
otherwise denies the appellant his right to mount a 
defense.” United States v. Villanueva, No. NMCCA 
201400212, 2015 CCA LEXIS 90, at *9, 2015 WL 1305782, 
at *3 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 19, 2015) (unpublished).  
Here, the military judge faulted the defense for failing 
to object to evidence of CP ’s heterosexuality, but this 
neglects the context. The defense’s argument was always 
that this evidence was  res gestae evidence of consent,  not 
M.R.E. 412 evidence. Therefore, the defense had no reason 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
to object to evidence that they planned on eliciting in some 
manner later in the trial. In fact, objecting to the 
Government’s testimony would have provided grounds for 
the Government to prohibit Appellant from testifying to 
these facts. The defense could not have anticipated that the 
military judge would insist on an interpretation of M.R.E. 
412 that neither the Government nor the defense adopted 
or argued.  
Despite the defense’s efforts to adapt its strategy to the 
military judge’s ruling classifying Appellant’s testimony as 
M.R.E. 412 evidence, the ruling was not applied equally to 
both parties.  The military judge struck Appellant’s 
testimony about CP’s relationship, but he denied 
Appellant’s motion to strike CP’s testimony about the same 
relationship. The military judge’s disparate application of 
M.R.E. 412 was error and an abuse of discretion.  
C. The military judge’s remedy 
M.R.E. 301(e) provides that a witness who has waived 
the right against self -incrimination “may be required to 
answer questions relevant  to the disclosure.” M.R.E. 
301(e)(1) grants military judges the discretion to strik e a 
witness’s direct examination testimony if the witness 
invokes the right against self- incrimination during cross -
examination. An appellant’s Sixth Amendment rights can 
be violated where “a military judge’s application of the rule 
infringes upon a weighty interest of the accused and is 
arbitrary or disproportiona te to the purposes the rule is 
designed to serve.” United States v. Maebane, 86 M.J. 173, 
179 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (citation modified); see also Rock v. 
Arkansas, 483 U.S. 44, 55-56 (1987). 
The military judge’s decision to strike Appellant’s 
testimony was an abuse of discretion. When Appellant 
refused to submit to cross -examination in a closed M.R.E. 
412 session , the military judge  crafted a  remedy that 
applied to both  the uncharged conduct and Appellant’s 
testimony about CP’s statements which the military judge 
concluded implicated CP’s sexual orientation. The remedy 
was overbroad for two reasons. First, no party had objected 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
to the uncharged conduct evidence . And second, with 
respect to CP’s statements, the military judge had 
previously ruled that the existence of CP’s relationship 
with his girlfriend was admissible. Accordingly, e ven 
assuming that some of the evidence was covered by M.R.E. 
412, a proportionate remedy would cover only the supposed 
sexual orientation testimony .7 Here, the military judge 
rejected less serious remedies for a perceived violation of 
M.R.E. 412 and opted for a drastic remedy. Such was not a 
reasonable choice within the range of options arising from 
the facts and law , and it was “disproportionate to the 
purposes [the rule is] designed to serve.” Maebane, 86 M.J. 
at 179 (alteration in original) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted). Therefore, the military judge’s 
remedy was an abuse of discretion. 
The military judge’s ruling also violated Appellant’s 
Sixth Amendment right to testify in his own defense and 
present a complete defense by eliminating Appellant’s 
ability to argue mistake of fact as to consent .
8 In cases of 
constitutional error, the g overnment “must show that the 
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt to obviate a 
finding of prejudice.” United States v. Tovarchavez, 78 M.J. 
458, 462 (C.A.A.F. 2019). The military judge’s ruling struck 
crucial testimony for the panel to evaluate the credibility 
of CP and Appellant and thereby make a determination 
about consent. This conclusion is supported by the record, 
which reflects the panel’s attempt to reconcile  the 
instruction with the evidence.  
 
7 To be clear, Appellant never specifically testified to the 
victim’s “preferences.” Defense counsel cut Appellant off before 
he could speak to the “preferences ,” and the remainder of 
Appellant’s direct examination did not probe the contents of his 
conversation with CP.  
8 As noted above, one panel member asked, “ So we’re 
supposed to disregard that it was consensual or just disregard 
the portion of sexual orientation?” The military judge responded, 
“Both.” 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
At least two members of the panel had questions about 
the military judge’s instructions that showed they were 
grappling with the issue over a male -on-male alleged 
sexual offense where Appellant’s version of events implied 
there was consent  to some touching . Under these 
circumstances, where Appellant’s core defense to the 
charged acts came down to a credibility contest between 
the victim and the accused, striking Appellant’s testimony 
severely impacted his ability to present a complete defense. 
It also materially affect ed the panel’s ability to assess 
credibility, thereby prejudicing Appellant. As such, the 
Government cannot prove the error was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt. The conviction must be set aside. 
V. Judgment  
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is set aside  as to Charge I and its 
specification and the sentence. The finding of guilty with 
respect to Charge I and its s pecification is set aside . We 
affirm the lower court with respect to all other findings. 
The record of trial is returned to the Judge Advocate 
General of the Air Force for remand to the  Court of 
Criminal Appeals. That court may either dismiss Charge I 
and its specification and reassess the sentence, or it may 
order a rehearing. Thereafter, Article 67, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 867 (2024), will apply.  
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting.
Appellant testified in his own defense against a charge 
of abusive sexual contact . Some of Appellant’s testimony 
touched upon the victim’s past interactions with other men 
and women . Because of this testimony,  a concern arose 
about trial counsel ’s prospective cross-examination of Ap-
pellant. The concern was that Appellant’s answers to some 
cross-examination questions might be inadmissible under 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 412(a) (2019 ed.), which 
generally makes evidence of an alleged victim’s “other sex-
ual behavior” and “sexual predisposition” inadmissible.  
To determine whether Appellant’s answers to cross-ex-
amination questions would or would not fall within the 
scope of M.R.E. 412(a), the military judge ordered a closed 
hearing.1 At this hearing, the military judge stated that he 
could accept a proffer from counsel as to what they thought 
Appellant’s answers would be. As an alternative, he stated 
that he could allow trial counsel to question  Appellant in 
the closed hearing to determine what Appellant’s answers 
would be. Defense counsel did not make a proffer and fur-
ther insisted that Appellant could not be compelled to tes-
tify in the closed hearing. In response , the military judge 
struck some of the testimony that Appellant  had provided 
on direct examination and  instructed the members to dis-
regard it. 
The sole granted issue is “ [w]hether the original mili-
tary judge abused his discretion when he struck a portion 
of Appellant’s testimony.” The Government makes two ar-
guments for concluding that the military judge did not 
abuse his discretion. First, the Government contends that 
the stricken testimony on direct examination was itself 
within the scope of M.R.E. 412 and was therefore inadmis-
sible. The Court rejects this argument, and I do not address 
it here. Second, the Government asserts that the  military 
judge properly struck Appellant’s testimony because 
 
1 The closed hearing transcript was sealed pursuant to 
M.R.E. 412(c)(2) and Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1113. The 
transcript remains sealed and any discussion of sealed material 
in this opinion is limited to that which is necessary for the anal-
ysis. See R.C.M. 1113. 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
2 
 
Appellant refused to testify at the closed hearing and thus 
blocked the Government from cross -examining him about 
his direct examination testimony . Unlike the Court, I am 
persuaded by this second argument. 
In my view, as explained more fully below, the military 
judge acted properly under Brown  v. United States , 356 
U.S. 148 (1958),  and M.R.E. 301(e)(1). In Brown, the Su-
preme Court held that a witness’s privilege against self-in-
crimination does not permit the witness to refuse to answer 
questions about matters that he or she has put into dispute 
in direct testimony . Brown, 356 U.S. at 155- 56. M.R.E. 
301(e)(1) implements Brown by providing: “If a witness as-
serts the privilege against self -incrimination on cross -ex-
amination, the military judge . . . may strike the direct tes-
timony of the witness in whole or in part .” Based on these 
authorities, I would affirm  the judgment of the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA).2 Be-
cause the Court reaches a different conclusion, I respect-
fully dissent. 
I. Background 
The specification of Charge I accused Appellant of abu-
sive sexual contact in violation of  Article 120(d), Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920(d) (2012), 
by touching C.P.’s genitals through his clothing without his 
consent. Testifying in his own defense, Appellant stated 
that he had engaged in some consensual  physical contact 
with C.P., but he denied that he  had touched C.P.’s geni-
tals. At one point in his testimony, Appellant stated that 
C.P. had “talked about, [how] he had had men and women 
come on to him before.”  Following this statement, trial 
counsel notified the military judge that he “intend[ed] to 
 
2 The AFCCA rendered its final judgment, affirming the find-
ings and the sentence, as reassessed, in United States v. Wash-
ington, No. ACM 39761 (reh), 2024 CCA LEXIS 342, at *85, 2024 
WL 3886239, at * 31 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 20, 2024)  (un-
published). The AFCCA earlier addressed the striking of Appel-
lant’s testimony in United States v. Washington (Washington I), 
No. ACM 39761, 2021 CCA LEXIS 379, at * 72-105, 2021 WL 
3239903, at *24 -36 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. July 30, 2021) (un-
published). 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
3 
 
ask questions that would delve into M.R.E. 412 territory on 
cross-examination” with regard to C.P. “ based on [Appel-
lant]’s testimony so far.” After Appellant’s direct examina-
tion ended, the military judge ordered  a closed hearing to 
discuss M.R.E. 412. 
At th e closed hearing, trial counsel told the military 
judge that in cross-examining Appellant, he “intend[ed] to 
ask questions of the witness of the specifics told to him by 
[C.P.] during this period of time.” The military judge asked 
trial counsel to make a proffer of Appellant’s testimony but 
trial counsel told the military judge that he could not make 
a proffer because he had not interviewed Appellant and did 
not know what he would say. The military judge did not 
specifically ask defense counsel to make  a proffer and de-
fense did not make a proffer.  The military judge  decided 
that he could not rule on whether Appellant’s testimony in 
response to cross-examination questions would be inadmis-
sible under M.R.E. 412 without knowing what Appellant 
might say.  
In response, the military judge decided that “the most 
appropriate way to address [ the issue] is to simply [ have 
trial counsel ask Appellant questions] here in the [M.R.E.] 
412 session.” Appellant, however, was unwilling to submit 
to examination at the closed hearing . Defense counsel as-
serted that the Government “can never compel the accused 
to do so.” Although defense counsel did not specifically cite 
the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination, 
both parties and the military judge appear to ha ve under-
stood th at defense counsel was relying on this right. In-
deed, before this Court, Appellant maintains that he had a 
“right to remain silent at the [M.R.E.] 412 hearing because 
he did not testify at that hearing.” 
The military judge discussed the matter with counsel at 
length. In so doing, the military judge emphasized four  
points. First, the military judge recognized that Appellant 
should not be able to present evidence supporting a defense 
theory without the Government being able to challenge the 
evidence. Second, the military judge acknowledged  the 
Government’s need for “further examination of M.R.E. 412 
matters on this issue ” before cross-examining Appellant, 
which could have been accomplished had Appellant not 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
4 
 
refused to testify at the closed hearing . Third, speaking to 
both trial counsel and defense counsel , the military judge 
said that “one thing I could do is I could certainly accept a 
proffer from counsel as to what you think the answers are 
going to be and let you explore that.” Fourth, the military 
judge asserted that “the accused holds the keys” to solving 
this problem. 
Trial counsel ultimately argued that the military judge 
should strike portions of Appellant’s testimony on direct 
examination because Appellant was unwilling to submit to 
questioning at the closed hearing. Trial counsel stated: 
[I]f the accused is not willing to subject himself to 
cross-examination, that might tend to impeach his 
credibility as to his conclusion that it was a con-
sensual encounter. Then, we believe that the mat-
ters concerning his conclusion that it was a con-
sensual encounter, [and] all matters about that 
conclusion, must be stricken. 
The military judge agreed with this argument and sub-
sequently gave the following instruction to the members: 
Members of the court, you heard testimony from 
the accused that he believed the contact between 
himself and [C.P.] occurring prior to the charged 
conduct alleged in the Specification of Charge I, 
was consensual in nature and may have impli-
cated [C.P.]’s sexual orientation. You are to disre-
gard this portion of the accused’s testimony. How-
ever, you must consider testimony by the accused 
wherein he denied the specific allegations, the 
specific charged conduct alleged in the Specifica-
tion of Charge I. 
On appeal to the AFCCA, two judges concluded that the 
military judge had not abused his discretion in striking Ap-
pellant’s testimony. Washington I, 2021 CCA LEXIS 379, 
at *105, 2021 WL 3239903,  at *36. One judge dissented, 
reasoning in part that the military judge should only have 
“stricken those portions of Appellant’s testimony related to 
[C.P.]’s sexual predisposition .” Id. at * 139, 2021 WL 
3239903, at *48 (Meginley, J., concurring in part, dissent-
ing in part, and dissenting in the result in part). 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
5 
 
II. Discussion 
As mentioned previously, the Supreme Court addressed 
the problem of a witness testifying on direct examination 
and then asserting the Fifth Amendment privilege against 
self-incrimination in Brown . 356 U.S. at 155-56. The 
Supreme Court held that a witness “ cannot reasonably 
claim that the Fifth Amendment gives him not only [the 
choice not to testify] but, if he elects to testify, an immunity 
from cross-examination on the matters he has himself put 
in dispute. ” Id. The Supreme Court reasoned: “ The 
interests of the other party and regard for the function of 
courts of justice to ascertain the truth become relevant, and 
prevail in the balance of considerations determining the 
scope and limits of the privilege against self -
incrimination.” Id. at 156. In Brown , the Supreme Court  
therefore decided that a trial judge properly held a witness 
in contempt for refusing to testify on cross-examination. Id. 
at 157. The Court also indicated that striking the witness’s 
testimony on direct examination would be a  possible 
remedy. Id. at 156 n.5. 
Federal courts following Brown  generally have con-
cluded that an accused who testifies on direct examination 
waives the right to assert the privilege against self-incrim-
ination on cross-examination but that “the waiver extends 
only to matters ‘reasonably related’ to the accused’s testi-
mony on direct examination.” 28 Wright & Miller’s Federal 
Practice & Procedure § 6166 (2d ed. 2025); accord 1 McCor-
mick on Evidence § 129 (9th ed. 2025) (“[A] defendant who 
testifies should have no right to invoke the privilege re-
garding cross -examination questions that the trial 
court . . . determines are necessary to provide the prosecu-
tion with a reasonable opportunity to test the defendant ’s 
assertions on direct. ”). Federal courts further agree that  
under Brown a trial judge has discretion to strike the rele-
vant parts of the defendant’s direct testimony if the defend-
ant cannot be cross-examined because he refused to testify 
on cross-examination. 28 Wright & Miller’s Federal Prac-
tice & Procedure § 6166. 
M.R.E. 301(e)(1) implements Brown  by stating: “If a 
witness asserts the privilege against self- incrimination on 
cross-examination, the military judge, upon motion, may 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
6 
 
strike the direct testimony of the witness in whole or in 
part, unless the matters to which the witness refuses to 
testify are purely collateral.” 
The Government argues on the basis of Brown that the 
Fifth Amendment privilege against self -incrimination did 
not afford Appellant a right to refuse to answer question s 
concerning matters with which he had testified on direct 
examination. The Government further argues on the basis 
of both M.R.E. 301(e)(1) and federal court precedent that 
the military judge acted well within his discretion in strik-
ing some of Appellant’s testimony. 
I am persuaded by the Government’s argument. Appel-
lant’s assertion of his privilege again st self-incrimination 
after his testimony on direct examination  prevented the 
military judge from making a ruling under M.R.E. 412 and 
thus prevented the Government from cross-examining him. 
Importantly, the military judge never made an M.R.E. 412 
ruling because Appellant refused to comply with the man-
dated procedures of M.R.E. 412. The military judge found 
“that what the defense has described as facts and circum-
stances surrounding the charged offense,  . . . constituted 
M.R.E. 412 matters that needed to be appropriately ad-
dress[ed] in an M.R.E. 412 hearing .” (Emphasis added.)  
The purpose of the M.R.E. 412 hearing was to ensure “that 
the matters [could] be fully explored, so that the [military 
judge could] determine whether an exception to M.R.E. 412 
applies.” But because those mandated procedures could not 
be executed and the Government therefore could not cross-
examine Appellant, the military judge found striking those 
portions of Appellant’s testimony the only other option. 
If the military judge had not stricken Appellant’s testi-
mony on direct examination, Appellant would have accom-
plished exactly what the Supreme Court said was imper-
missible: “ withdraw[ing] from the cross -fire of 
interrogation before the reliability of his testimony ha [d] 
been fully tested” and thus “putting before the trier of fact 
a one-sided account of the matters in dispute.” Brown, 356 
U.S. at 155. I therefore would hold that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion in this case. 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
7 
 
Appellant makes several counter arguments to this con-
clusion. His primary contention is that he did not actually 
assert the privilege against self-incrimination “on cross-ex-
amination” as both Brown and M.R.E. 301 (e)(1) contem-
plate. Rather, he asserted the privilege only at  the closed 
hearing. He emphasizes that he “did not refuse to be cross-
examined in open court.” 
I am unpersuaded by this argument.  I see no basis for 
concluding that when Brown and M.R.E. 301(e)(1) use the 
phrase “on cross -examination,” the phrase mean s only 
“when seated in the witness chair and being asked cross -
examination questions.” If that is all that “on cross-exami-
nation” means, then a witness could always escape the ap-
plication of the principle  in Brown. The witness, who of-
fered testimony under direct examination, could  simply 
refuse to take the stand for cross -examination and refuse 
to submit to any cross -examination questions. This inter-
pretation, accordingly, would render Brown a “dead letter,” 
and is therefore not reasonable.  United States v. Cas-
tleman, 572 U.S. 157, 178 (2014)  (Scalia, J., concurring in 
part and in the judgment) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (quoting United States v. Hayes, 555 U.S. 415, 427 
(2009)). It is also inconsistent with federal practice. E. g., 
United States v. Mikhel , 889 F.3d 1003, 1040 (9th Cir. 
2018) (striking the testimony of a witness who “testified on 
direct for three days but refused to be cross -exam-
ined. . . . and . . . refused to appear in court thereafter”). 
I understand the phrase “on cross -examination” in 
Brown and in M.R.E. 301(e)(1) not to mean the actual ask-
ing of questions of the witness on the witness stand but in-
stead to mean the “period after direct examination ” when 
cross-examination takes place.  This temporal meaning is 
evident in Brown itself. The Supreme Court, for example, 
spoke of how the trial court directed the witness “to answer 
pertinent questions on cross-examination,” 356 U.S. at 152 
(emphasis added), meaning that she was required to an-
swer questions during the period for cross-examination. 
So understood, Appellant’s argument that he did not as-
sert the privilege against self-incrimination on cross-exam-
ination is incorrect. Appellant asserted his privilege 
against self-incrimination during the period after his direct 
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
8 
 
examination when the Government had a right to cross-ex-
amine him. And because his assertion of the privilege 
thwarted the Government’s expressed desire to cross -ex-
amine him, striking his testimony was a permissible sanc-
tion under both Brown and M.R.E. 301(e)(1). 
Appellant also argues  that requiring him to testify at 
the M.R.E. 412 hearing was unnecessary because trial 
counsel could have made a proffer of his expected testi-
mony. He states: “Trial counsel could easily have done this 
because [Appellant] had already testified on direct and es-
tablished the relevance and admissibility of the res gestae.”  
But this argument is contradicted by trial counsel’s state-
ment that he could not make a proffer because he had never 
interviewed Appellant and did not know what Appella nt 
might say. The military judge, in my view, did not abuse 
his discretion in accepting trial counsel’s position. 
Appellant argues in addition that his testimony at the 
closed hearing was not necessary because “ trial counsel 
need[ed] only [to] establish the relevance and admissibility 
of the subjects of questioning he wishe[d] to pursue in order 
to satisfy [M.R.E.] 412.” But this statement is not fully cor-
rect. A military judge must determine whether the evi-
dence is within the ambit of M.R.E. 412(a) , whether it fits 
within an exception under M.R.E. 412(b) , and whether its 
probative value outweighs the danger of unfair prejudice to 
the victim’s privacy. M.R.E. 412(c)(3). The military judge 
further must issue an order that “specifies evidence that 
may be offered.” Id. The military judge acted well within 
his discretion in deciding that he could not do that without 
having either a proffer or Appellant’s testimony. 
A final concern is that even if the military judge  could 
strike some of Appellant’s testimony, the scope of the in-
struction to the members  may have been  excessive. As 
noted above, one judge at the AFCCA expressed this view. 
Having considered the record carefully, I am persuaded 
that the military judge did not abuse his discretion in de-
termining what to strike.  M.R.E. 301(e)(1) provides that 
“the military judge . . . may strike the direct testimony of 
the witness in whole or in part.” In every case, the military 
judge will have to decide how much to strike. This decision 
will depend on a  prediction of the testimony cross -
United States v. Washington, No. 25-0044/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
9 
 
examination would likely produce.  The military judge’s 
prediction that the cross -examination would have ad-
dressed Appellant’s testimony that “he believed the contact 
between himself and [C .P.] . . . was consensual in nature 
and may have implicated [C .P.]’s sexual orientation” was 
not unreasonable. Indeed, to this day, we have no way of 
knowing what Appellant would have said. The military 
judge therefore did not abuse his discretion. 
III. Conclusion 
For these reasons, I would affirm the judgment of the 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals. 