This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Zachary R. BRAUM, Captain 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0046 
Crim. App. No. 40434 
 
Argued October 8, 2025—Decided April 8, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Mark F. Rosenow (pretrial)  
and Shad R. Kidd (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Scott Hockenberry , Esq. (argued); Daniel 
Conway, Esq.  (on brief) ; Captain Samantha M. 
Castanien. 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Heather R. Bezold  (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. 
Liabenow, Major Jocelyn Q. Wright , and Mary Ellen 
Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Amicus Curiae for Appellant: Vivian Bolen (law student) 
(argued); John J. Korzen, Esq. (supervising attorney) (on 
brief) — Wake Forest University School of Law Appellate 
Advocacy Clinic. 
 
Judge SPARKS announced the judgment of the Court, in 
which Judge MAGGS joined. Judge HARDY filed a 
separate concurring opinion, in which Judge JOHNSON 
joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS announced the judgment of the Court. 
This appeal concerns whether the military judge erred 
in finding the government can properly refuse to disclose 
evidence it has physical possession, custody, or control over 
when it may not, as a matter of law, access that evidence. 
Resolution of this  issue would require this Court to 
determine whether a victim’s constitutional right to 
privacy under the Fourth Amendment supersedes an 
accused’s statutory discovery rights under R ule for 
Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 701.1 And this issue also bears on 
whether denying an accused evidence on this basis violates 
his or her constitutional right to a fair trial.  
However, we need not determine whether the military 
judge erred if we determine that the error, if any, was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  Like the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA), we hold 
that even assuming the military judge erred, any error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  United States v. 
Braum, No. ACM 40434, 2024 CCA LEXIS 419, at *17, 
2024 WL 4458537, at *6 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Oct. 10, 2024) 
(unpublished). Therefore, we affirm the CCA.  
I. Background 
The Government charged Appellant with multiple 
offenses arising from his sexual abuse of his then fiancé e 
BE2 and related conduct. Appellant and BE engaged in 
“BDSM”3 during their relationship.  The defense’s main 
theory at trial was that BE voluntarily consented to these 
BDSM activities. But this theory was largely unsuccessful, 
and a general court-martial composed of officer members  
convicted Appellant of three specifications of rape, three 
 
1 All citations to the R.C.M. in this opinion refer to the 
Manual for Courts -Martial, United States (2019 ed.), unless 
otherwise noted. 
2 To preserve BE’s privacy, this opinion presents her name 
as a pseudonym. 
3 “BDSM” is an abbreviation meaning “bondage, discipline, 
sadism, and masochism.” 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
specifications of sexual assault, one specification of abusive 
sexual contact, and three sp ecifications of domestic 
violence in violation of Articles 120 and 128b, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (U CMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 920, 928b 
(2018).
4  
This appeal focuses on an issue which arose before trial: 
BE’s meeting with the Newton Police Department (NPD) 
and the Air Force Office of Special Investigation (OSI) to 
report Appellant’s misconduct. During this meeting, BE 
repeatedly referred to her phone while responding to 
questions. This led law enforcement to ask BE whether she 
would consent to their extracting limited location-related 
data from her phone. An “NPD  officer explained that the 
entire contents of the phone would be downloaded but that 
the search would be limited to the location-related 
information, in accordance with BE’s consent.” BE agreed, 
and NPD kept the complete extraction of her phone on a 
flash drive.  
The Government later provided the defense with the 
limited location-related data that BE had authorized law 
enforcement to access. It did not turn over the full 
extraction. The defense moved to compel the Government 
to turn over the entire extraction under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)
5 
 
4 Appellant was also convicted of one specification of reckless 
operation of an aircraft in violation of Article 113, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 913 (2018). The members found Appellant guilty by 
excepting the language “on divers occasions” for one of the 
domestic violence convictions and  made findings by exceptions 
and substitutions for another domestic violence offense. The 
language “on divers occasions” was excepted by the military 
judge pursuant to R.C.M. 917 for one of the sexual assault 
convictions. Appellant was found not guilty of two specifications 
of sexual assault and two specifications of assault consummated 
by battery.  
5 R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A)(i) provides, in part, that “the 
Government shall,” upon defense request, “permit the defense to 
inspect any books, papers, documents, data, photographs, 
tangible objects, buildings, or places, or copies of portions of 
these items, if the item is within the possession, custody, or 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
because the extraction was in the Government’s physical 
“possession, custody, or control,” or in the alternative, to 
produce the entire extraction under R.C.M. 703(e)(1)6 as it 
was “relevant and necessary” to Appellant’s defense.  
Specifically, Appellant possessed ninety -one pages of text 
exchanges between him  and BE from his own phone “in 
which BE sent pictures of women in bonds, sexual 
paraphernalia, and messages indicating willing 
participation in the use of that paraphernalia.” According 
to the defense, the full extraction was thereby necessary to 
corroborate these messages  and contradict BE’s 
anticipated testimony that she never requested or sought 
BDSM activities with Appellant, and relatedly, did not 
purchase sex toys or BDSM items to engage in said 
activities. 
The Government responded, arguing that R.C.M. 
701(a)(2) did not apply because although it  physically 
possessed the full extraction, it was not legally “within the 
control of military authorities, as accessing that data would 
be a violation of [BE’s] Fourth Amendment constitutional 
rights.” As to the defense’s R.C.M. 703(e)(1) contention, the 
Government averred that production of the full extraction 
was unnecessary for the defense to “hunt through all of the 
data on [BE’s phone] for potential ammunition ,” because 
the defense “offere[d] no factual basis or analysis of any 
kind” to support its assertion  that BE’s remaining phone 
data contained exculpatory evidence.  
The military judge began with the defense’s R.C.M. 
701(a)(2) argument and observed that this “issue turns on 
whether physical possession, custody, or control suffices 
[under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A),] or if ‘legal’ possession, 
custody, or control, though not stated in [R.C.M.] 
701(a)(2)(A), is necessarily implied.” The military judge 
determined it was the latter and found the Government’s 
 
control of military authorities  and . . . the item is relevant to 
defense preparation.” (Emphasis added.) 
6 R.C.M. 703(e)(1) states that “[e]ach party is entitled to the 
production of evidence which is relevant and necessary.”  
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
discovery obligations under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) were not 
triggered because it could not “legally” access any data 
beyond BE’s consent.  
The military judge then turned to the defense’s R.C.M. 
703(e)(1) argument, opining this “issue turns on whether 
the evidence exists and whether it is relevant and 
necessary.” In pertinent part, the military judge explained 
that: 
The defense argues that access to the parts of BE’s 
phone to which she did not consent being searched 
is necessary because the pictures BE purportedly 
sent must have come from somewhere on BE’s 
phone, reasoning the phone would contain 
evidence of receipt of, searches for, or downloads 
of the images. The evidence provided by the 
defense does not establish that such evidence 
exists in the copy of BE’s phone, though it does 
suggest it might. More importantly, the defense 
has not demonstrated this evidence is n ecessary. 
The defense already has evidence that BE had the 
pictures, sent them to [Appellant], and sent the 
messages to [Appellant]. Evidence that BE sent 
the pictures carries with it the logical inference, 
as the defense argues, that she had them on her 
phone, from which it can be argued that they were 
sent to her or sought and downloaded by her.  
Additional evidence of how BE obtained the 
pictures that may or not be on the forensic copy of 
the phone adds little, if anything, to the effect of 
the evidence the defense already has with regard 
to undermining or contradicting BE ’s claims of 
lack of consent, that she never requested sex toys 
or BDSM items, and that she never requested 
BDSM activities and never brought it up with 
[Appellant]. 
Accordingly, the military judge denied Appellant’s request 
to produce the complete extraction, finding that the defense 
had not shown it to be relevant and necessary. 
In relevant part, Appellant appealed to the CCA 
arguing that the military judge erred in denying his motion 
to compel  under R.C.M. 701(a)(2) . Braum, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 419, at *15, 2024 WL 4458537, at *5. Appellant did 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
not appeal the military judge’s R.C.M. 703 determination. 
The CCA avoided the question of whether the military 
judge properly interpreted and applied R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) 
and found that even assuming the military judge erred, 
any error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.  Id. at 
*17, 2024 WL 4458537, at * 6. In reaching this conclusion, 
the CCA found that it was “highly speculative” the full 
extraction contained “helpful information” considering the 
defense “already had the evidence that was likely to be 
found on the phone that would be helpful to them in the 
form of the pictures and the 91 pages of text messages 
exchanges” in addition to the limited location-related data. 
Id., 2024 WL 4458537, at *6. 
This Court then granted review of the following issue: 
Can the Government properly refuse to disclose 
relevant, non -privileged data in its possession, 
custody, and control on the basis that the witness 
who provided the data gave limited consent with 
respect to its use? If not, is relief warranted?  
United States v. Braum , 85 M.J. 370, 370- 71 (C.A.A.F. 
2025) (order granting review).  
II. Discussion 
The granted issue highlights the tension  between a 
victim’s constitutional right to privacy under the Fourth 
Amendment and the accused’s statutory right to discovery 
under the R.C.M. And while not argued in this case, we are 
cognizant that  “in the military justice system, both the 
right to a trial that is fair, and the right to a trial that is 
objectively seen to be fair, have constitutional dimensions 
sounding in due process.” United States v. Boyce, 76 M.J. 
242, 249 n.8 (C.A.A.F. 2017). Had it been raised,  the 
granted issue may also present  the tension between a 
victim’s constitutional right to privacy and  an accused’s 
constitutional right to a fair trial. This appeal presents an 
open and unresolved question of whether , or when,  a 
victim’s constitutional privacy rights may supersede an 
accused’s discovery rights  and, potentially, his 
constitutional right to a fair trial.  While we recognize the 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
significance of the granted issue, we resolve this case on 
the narrower grounds of harmless error. 
“Our review for prejudice is de novo.” United States v. 
Sigrah, 82 M.J. 463, 467  (C.A.A.F. 2022) (citing United 
States v. Clark , 79 M.J. 449, 455  (C.A.A.F. 2020) ). This 
Court has established two categories of disclosure error: 
(1) “cases in which the defense either did not make a 
discovery request or made only a general request for 
discovery”; and (2) cases in which the defense made a 
specific request for the undisclosed information. United 
States v. Roberts, 59 M.J. 323, 32 6-27 (C.A.A.F. 2004). 
Because Appellant requested the cell phone extraction, the 
second category applies to this case.
7 “[And f]or cases in the 
second category, [this Court] appl[ies] the heightened 
constitutional harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard.” United States v. Coleman , 72 M.J. 184, 187 
(C.A.A.F. 2013) ( citations omitted). Under this standard, 
the Government has the burden to show  that any error 
made was  harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. United 
States v. Gonzalez, 62 M.J. 303, 306 (C.A.A.F. 2006). 
“Harmless beyond a reasonable doubt is a high 
standard, but it is not an impossible standard for the 
Government to meet.” Id. The failure to “disclose requested 
material favorable to the defense is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt if the undisclosed evidence might have 
affected the outcome of the trial.” Coleman, 72 M.J. at 187. 
This Court’s prejudice determination is based on the entire 
record. United States v. Morris, 52 M.J. 193, 197 (C.A.A.F. 
1999). 
We agree with the  CCA that any error was harmless 
considering the defense “already had the evidence that was 
likely to be found on the phone that would be helpful to 
them in the form of the pictures and the 91 pages of text 
messages.” Braum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 419, at *17, 2024 WL 
4458537, at *6. As a party to the communications 
 
7 The parties also agree this case falls into the second 
category. 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
Appellant possessed the evidence necessary to contradict 
BE’s claims that she never sought out BDSM activities and 
paraphernalia. And at trial, the defense effectively 
cross-examined BE using these pages of text message 
exchanges and pictures to make this very argument. Thus, 
the evidence Appellant sought was  cumulative and would 
have only reinforced what the members already knew. Put 
differently, the full extraction was merely cumulative of 
other impeachment evidence—substantial in volume and 
weight—alread y available to the defense.  
Appellant takes the position that he was prejudiced 
because having access to the full data on BE’s phone could 
have cast doubt on her general credibility and shown that 
she actively participated in BDSM activities.  As noted in 
Appellant’s brief: 
Having the complete extraction of BE’s phone 
might have demonstrated the text messages 
presented by the defense were not inaccurate or 
misleading, supporting the defense case that BE 
was a much more active participant in the charged 
activities than she represented in her accusations, 
and less oning [sic] BE’s credibility by 
undercutting her attempt to explain away her 
inconsistent actions by accusing Appellant and his 
defense counsel of manipulating evidence.  
We are not persuaded. To be sure, impeachment 
evidence or evidence otherwise undermining the credibility 
of the Government’s key witness is more likely to be 
material than that related to other witnesses . But the 
evaluation of whether potential evidence might have 
affected the trial outcome must be based  on the entire 
record and not merely assumed. Morris, 52 M.J. at 197. In 
this case, the full extraction would not have provided the 
members with a substantially different basis for assessing 
BE, as the defen se effectively cross- examined her using 
evidence that was qualitatively the same.  
Moreover, it ignores that the defense made inroads in 
challenging BE’s credibility, and more broadly, her 
character for truthfulness. Indeed, BE’s character for 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
truthfulness was undermined by even a friendly witness—
her best friend—who testified  BE was “untruthful.” When 
considered in the context of the entire record, the marginal 
effect of additional impeachment or evidence merely 
reinforcing other evidence already presented by the 
defense is relatively small and unlikely to have affected the 
outcome of trial.  
Appellant also argues that he was prejudiced by not 
having access to the data on BE’s cell phone because “BE’s 
testimony cast doubt on the veracity of the text messages 
BE sent to Appellant” and because the  Government 
magnified the harm when it “criticized the defense in 
closing for asking BE to provide her phone data as 
evidence.” However, we disagree with Appellant’s 
characterization of the record. In our view, BE’s testimony 
did not directly challenge the veracity of the entirety of the 
text messages presented by the defense when considering 
the questions asked by trial defense c ounsel. And the 
vagueness of the brief remarks she did make belie any 
claim that they affected the outcome of the trial. Moreover, 
the point of trial counsel’s closing argument was not to 
criticize the defense for seeking her phone records but 
instead to encourage the panel members to consider 
whether BE had a motive to lie. Accordingly, we find these 
arguments are without merit. 
At most, what Appellant speculates would have been on 
the full extraction amounted to largely cumulative 
impeachment evidence that would have added little weight 
to the defense’s attack on BE’s credibility. The marginal 
effect of additional impeachment is relatively small and 
unlikely to have affected the outcome.  
III. Conclusion 
We conclude that even if the military judge erred, the 
error was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The 
decision of the United States Air Force Court of Criminal 
Appeals is affirmed.  
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, con-
curring in the judgment. 
The question presented in this case is whether the mil-
itary judge erred when he denied Appellant’s motion to 
compel the Government to produce all  the extracted data 
from the victim’s (BE’s) cell phone under Rule for Courts-
Martial (R.C.M.) 701. As Judge Sparks notes in his opinion, 
this Court has long held that when the government errone-
ously fails to provide information pursuant to a specific de-
fense request, that error implicates the accused’s Fifth 
Amendment due process right to prepare a defense. United 
States v. Hart, 29 M.J. 407, 409-10 (C.A.A.F. 1990) (citing 
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S.  83 (1963)). Because such an 
error is constitutional in nature, this Court  assumes that 
the error materially prejudiced the substantial rights of the 
accused and will grant relief  unless the g overnment can 
prove that the error was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Id. at 410; see also United States v. Roberts, 59 M.J. 
323 (C.A.A.F. 2004). 
Like the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Ap-
peals (AFCCA) below, Judge Sparks assumes—without de-
ciding—that the military judge erred  by denying Appel-
lant’s motion to compel  and concludes that no relief is 
warranted because the error was harmless beyond a rea-
sonable doubt. I agree that Appellant’s finding of guilt and 
sentence should be affirmed, but I come to that conclusion 
because I do not believe that the military judge erred. Ac-
cordingly, I agree that the AFCCA should be affirmed. 
I. Appellant’s Motion to Compel 
During the Government’s investigation into the crimi-
nal allegations lodged by BE against Appellant, law en-
forcement agents asked BE if they  could review the data 
from her cell phone to corroborate her statements. A spe-
cial agent from the Air Force Office of Special Investigation 
(AFOSI) and an officer from the local civilian police depart-
ment presented BE with a consent form that —in its origi-
nal and unaltered form—would have granted law enforce-
ment BE’s consent to search her cell phone “including any 
or all digital content therein.” BE refused to consent to the 
search of  all the data on her cell phone but agreed  to 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
2 
 
provide law enforcement with location-related information. 
BE and the agents modified the consent form, crossing out 
the words “including any and all digital content therein”  
and replacing them with “location information.” A police of-
ficer explained to BE t hat the entire contents of her cell  
phone would be downloaded bu t that the Government’s 
search would be limited to the location-related information 
in accordance with her  signed consent form . Accordingly, 
another police officer extracted the data from BE’s cell 
phone and returned the cell phone to BE. The police officer 
copied the extracted data to a flash drive that the police 
retained as evidence. 
Prior to trial, Appellant’s defense counsel and the Gov-
ernment engaged in a lengthy discovery process.  During 
that process, the defense requested production of any ex-
tracted cell phone data . The Government eventually dis-
closed the existence of the extract ed data from BE’s cell 
phone. The Government declined, however, to provide the 
defense with all the data from BE’s phone, and instead only 
provided the defense with the location data.  The Govern-
ment justified the limited production by explaining  that 
BE’s consent was restricted to location data and that  the 
Government’s review of the extract ed data was similarly 
restricted to location data.  
Seeking production of all the data from BE’s cell phone, 
Appellant filed a motion to compel the Government to pro-
vide the defense with all the extracted data. Appellant pri-
marily argued that the Government was obligated to pro-
duce the cell phone  data under R.C.M.  701, because the 
data was “squarely within the possession of the govern-
ment.” Appellant later clarified in a supplement to his mo-
tion that if the military judge determined that all of the 
extracted data from B.E.’s cell phone was not in the posses-
sion or control of the Government, the defense moved for 
production of that data under R.C.M. 703 because the data 
was relevant and necessary to the preparation of Appel-
lant’s defense. 
The military judge denied Appellant’s motion to compel. 
In his ruling , the military judge conceded that BE’s cell 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
3 
 
phone data was within the “physical” possession, custody, 
or control of the Government, but he concluded that 
R.C.M. 701 did not apply because the cell phone data  was 
not within the Government’s “legal” possession, custody, or 
control. The military judge acknowledged that the require-
ment for “ legal” possession, custody, or control was not 
stated in the text of R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A), but he concluded 
that it was “necessarily implied.” The military judge rea-
soned that because BE had “specifically and explicitly lim-
ited the consent she  gave to location data,” she  had not 
waived her privacy interests or legal protections for the re-
maining data from her cell phone . For these reasons, the 
military judge held that the remaining data was not dis-
coverable by the defense under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A). 
Turning to R .C.M. 703, the military judge concluded 
that Appellant failed to establish that the evidence was rel-
evant and necessary to his defense. The military judge first 
noted that Appellant already had access to any text mes-
sages or pictures sent from BE to Appellant  from Appel-
lant’s own cell phone. The military judge described Appel-
lant’s arguments about other evidence from BE’s cell phone 
as speculative and concluded that —even if that evidence 
did exist—Appellant had failed to demonstrate that it was 
necessary considering the other evidence available to the 
defense. 
Before the AF CCA, Appellant challenged the mil itary 
judge’s ruling with respect to R.C.M. 701, but not with re-
spect to R.C.M.  703, arguing that the Government could 
not “refuse to disclose relevant, non -privileged data in its 
possession, custody, or control on the basis that the witness 
who provided the data gave limited consent with respect to 
its use .” The A FCCA decline d to determine  whether 
R.C.M. 701 required the Government to produce all the ex-
tracted data from BE’s cell phone , concluding instead 
that—even assuming error —the nondisclosure of that data 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
II. Standard of Review 
The interpretation of a  provision of the Rules for 
Courts-Martial is a question of law that this Court reviews 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
4 
 
de novo. H.V.Z. v. United States , 85 M.J. 8, 13 (C.A.A.F. 
2024). This Court reviews a military judge’s discovery rul-
ings for an abuse of discretion. United States v. Stellato, 74 
M.J. 473, 480 (C.A.A.F. 2015). An abuse of discretion occurs 
“when [the military judge’s] findings of fact are clearly er-
roneous, the court’s decision is influenced by an erroneous 
view of the law, or the military judge’s decision on the issue 
at hand is outside the range of choices reasonably arising 
from the applicable facts and the law.” United States v. Mil-
ler, 66 M.J. 306, 307 (C.A.A.F. 2008). 
III. Discussion 
R.C.M. 701 governs discovery in courts-martial, includ-
ing the handling of electronic data collected from cell 
phones. As relevant in this case, R.C.M.  701(a)(2)(A) re-
quires the Government, upon request of the defense, to per-
mit the defense to inspect and copy data that “is within the 
possession, custody, or control of military authorities,” if 
that data is relevant to the preparation of the accused’s de-
fense. The novel issue presented by this case is what to do 
when the Government has relevant cell phone data within 
its possession, custody, or control, but has no legal author-
ity to search that data because the owner of the data with-
held her consent.  
The military judge resolved this issue by concluding 
that R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) only applies when the government 
has “legal” possession, custody, or control of the data. The 
military judge acknowledged that the text of the rule im-
poses no such requirement, but he concluded that it was 
“necessarily implied” and was needed  to protect BE’s 
Fourth Amendment privacy rights.  Although I agree with 
the military judge’s ultimate conclusion, I arrive at that re-
sult through slightly different reasoning. 
First, I agree with the military judge that BE preserved 
her Fourth Amendment rights over the non- location data 
on her cell phone. I n the initial ruling on Appellant’s mo-
tion to compel, the military ju dge found: (1) that BE “spe-
cifically and explicitly ” limited her consent to search her 
cell phone to location data; and (2) that the law enforce-
ment officers had a greed that their search would be 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
5 
 
“limited to the location-related information, in accordance 
with BE’s consent.” Based on these findings, the military 
judge concluded that BE had not waived her privacy inter-
ests in her remaining cell phone data or waived the  legal 
protections over that data. 
That conclusion was indisputably  correct. Imagine if 
law enforcement had disregarded the signed consent form 
and the assurances that they provided to BE, searched the 
remainder of BE’s cell phone  data, found evidence of a 
crime, and brought charges against BE  based on that evi-
dence. There can be no doubt that evidence would have 
been suppressed as an illegal search that violated BE’s rea-
sonable expectations of privacy. In United States v. Black, 
this Court recognized that the owner of a cell phone can 
restrict her consent to specific parts of the phone when she 
gives a third-party access to the phone, rejecting the argu-
ment that the owner has assumed the risk that the third  
party will access the entire phone. 82 M.J. 447, 452- 53 
(C.A.A.F. 2022). So too here. BE granted the Government 
access to her location data, but “specifically and expressly” 
refused to give the Government access to the remainder of 
her data. 
Appellant argues that BE waived or extinguished her 
Fourth Amendment rights when she allowed the Govern-
ment to download the data from her cell  phone and that 
she could no longer maintain a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the data when the Government had access to it. 
This argument disregards the fact that the “touchstone of 
the Fourth Amendment is reasonableness. ” Florida. v. 
Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248, 250 (1991) (citing Katz v. United 
States, 389 U.S. 347, 360 (1967)). The standard for meas-
uring the scope of consent under the Fourth Amendment is 
that of “objective” reasonableness—what would the typical 
reasonable person have understood by the exchange with 
law enforcement? Id . at 251 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citations omitted). Given the signed consent form 
and the police officer’s assurances to BE that the Govern-
ment’s search of her cell phone data would be restricted in 
accordance with her consent, it would be completely 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
6 
 
reasonable for BE to believe that her non-location data was 
legally protected. Conversely, it would be completely un-
reasonable for the Government to believe that it could uni-
laterally disregard those assurances and disclose BE’s data 
to a third party without judicial approval. 
Second, I agree with the military judge that the ex-
tracted data from BE’s cell phone was in the Government’s 
“physical” possession, custody, or control. As noted by Ap-
pellant, the data was sitting on a flash drive presumably in 
a police evidence locker.  This case is unlike United States 
v. Secord, where the government had physical possession 
of a locked cell phone  but no ability to access any of the 
electronic data that might have been on the phone. 86 M.J. 
56, 58 (C.A.A.F. 2025). Here, Appellant is correct that the 
Government had the ability (if not the legal right) to search 
and distribute the entire digital contents of BE’s cell phone. 
My agreement  with the military judge on these two 
points underscores the novel legal issue presented by this 
case: the Government had possession, custody, or control of 
the data from BE’s cell phone, but that data was still pro-
tected by BE’s Fourth Amendment rights.  The military 
judge resolved this issue by concluding that R.C.M. 701 did 
not apply because the Government did not have “legal” pos-
session, custody, or control of the extracted  data. Here, I 
part ways with the military judge because I agree with Ap-
pellant that R.C.M.  701 imposes no such requirement.  In 
my view, R.C.M. 701 applied to t he extracted data  from 
BE’s cell phone because that data was in the Government’s 
possession, custody, or control.  
I would resolve this apparent conflict between what the 
plain language of R.C.M.  701(a)(2) required (disclosure of 
all the extracted data to Appellant) and what the Fourth 
Amendment prohibited the Government from doing 
(searching and disclosing the remaining data from BE’s cell 
phone) by applying the hierarchy of laws. When a Rule for 
Courts-Martial conflicts with the requirements of the Con-
stitution, the rule must yield. See Marbury v. Madison , 5 
U.S. 137, 177 (1803) (recognizing the Constitution as the 
“fundamental and paramount law of the nation”). E ven 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
7 
 
when exercising the authority delegated from Congress via 
Article 36, UCMJ,1 the President does not have the power  
to promulgate a procedural rule that orders  law enforce-
ment officers to violate a civilian’s  Fourth Amendment 
rights without seeking authorization to use compulsory 
process from a judge .2 Cf. United States v. Scheffer, 523 
U.S. 303, 31 1 n.7 (1998) (noting that it would be an odd 
inversion of our hierarchy of laws if the interpretation of a 
military rule of evidence worked a corresponding change in 
the meaning of the Constitution).  Accordingly, despite the 
plain language of R.C.M. 701, the military judge did not err 
when he concluded that Appellant was not entitled to pro-
duction of all the extracted data from BE’s cell phone.  
Of course, this does not mean that Appellant had no re-
course or alternative means of obtaining relevant evidence 
that was necessary for the preparation of his defense. Even 
when R.C.M. 701 does not apply, R.C.M. 703(a) grants both 
the government and the defense an equal opportunity to 
obtain evidence, including the benefit of compulsory pro-
cess. Thus, even if BE’s Fourt h Amendment rights pre-
vented the Government from unilaterally providing Appel-
lant with BE’s cell phone data, the military judge had the 
authority to grant Appellant access  to that data under 
R.C.M. 703(e) if Appellant could establish the relevance of 
the data and its necessity to his defense. 
But in his order denying Appellant’s motion to compel, 
the military judge expressly ruled that the defense had  
failed to demonstrate that the evidence was necessary, par-
ticularly considering the evidence already available to the 
defense. Appellant declined to appeal this aspect of the mil-
itary judge’s ruling, either before the AFCCA or before this 
Court. Thus, we need not consider whether the military 
 
1 See 10 U.S.C. § 836 (authorizing the President to prescribe 
procedural rules for courts-martial). 
2 Of course, there are many exceptions to this general state-
ment that might apply in specific circumstances, but Appellant 
does not argue that any such exceptions apply here. 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Johnson, J., joins, 
concurring in the judgment 
 
8 
 
judge abused his discretion in denying Appellant’s request 
for production under R.C.M. 703. 
IV. Conclusion 
The military judge did not abuse his discretion when he 
denied Appellant’s motion to compel the production of all 
the extracted data from BE’s cell phone pursuant to 
R.C.M. 701. Because the military judge did not err, I agree 
that the decision of the United States A ir Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals should be affirmed. 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting. 
The lead opinion concludes that any error committed by 
the military judge in this case was harmless beyond a rea-
sonable doubt.1 I disagree. For the reasons stated below, I 
conclude that the Government failed to meet its heavy bur-
den under this onerous standard of review  and that this 
Court should therefore set aside the findings and sentence. 
Because the lead opinion reaches a different result , I re-
spectfully dissent. 
Appellant, an Air Force pilot, and the complainant, BE, 
had a long-term relationship that included marriage plans. 
The day after their relationship soured, however, BE went 
to local law enforcement in Kansas and accused Appellant 
of sexually assaulting her. Specifically, BE alleged that on 
a number of occasions Appellant forced her to participate 
in BDSM (bondage, discipline, sadism, and masochism) ac-
tivities without her consent. Appellant was court -mar-
tialed, convicted of a number of sexual offenses and physi-
cal acts of domestic violence  involving BE, and sentenced 
to forfeiture of all pay and allowances , dismissal, a repri-
mand, and a total of nine years of confinement. 
At trial, Appellant did not contest that he and BE had 
engaged in BDSM activities. Rather , he argued that the 
sexual acts were consensual or at least that he reasonably 
believed they were consensual . In support of his position, 
the defense introduced material from Appellant’s cell  
phone seemingly demonstrating BE’s acquiescence to the 
acts. For example, BE sent Appellant explicit images de-
picting women in sexually submissive pos itions with a 
man. Further, when Appellant texted a reference  to a 
Snapchat photo by saying, “I didn’t see that snap coming,” 
BE texted back, “I got tired of waiting, I wanted to try the 
butt plug.” Moreover, BE’s own Amazon account reflected 
the purchase of an “anal hook,” a stuffed leather gag, “butt 
 
1 The lead opinion declines to substantively address whether 
the military judge erred in this case. Instead, the lead opinion 
assumes without deciding that there was error and then 
proceeds to a prejudice analysis. Because of the approach taken 
by the lead opinion, I too shall focus on the prejudice issue rather 
than on the underlying granted issue. 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
 
2 
 
plugs,” and rope. In fact, BE texted Appellant a screenshot 
of the Amazon listing for the anal hook on the same day of 
the purchase. And when Appellant made a reference to us-
ing the back door to BE’s home, BE texted back that her 
“back door” was for “hooks and clubs only.” In addition, the 
defense produced as a witness BE’s former best friend who 
testified that BE had a reputation for not being truthful. 
When the defense confronted BE with the material from 
Appellant’s cell phone prior to trial , BE sought to deflect 
the questions and to minimize the import  of the material 
by claiming that the text messages being shown to her were 
“incomplete” and “cherry picked” and therefore “mislead-
ing.” This situation played out in the following manner at 
trial:  
Q: Ma’am, when I asked you about these text 
messages, and I said, “What are these,” you said, 
“I do not remember them.” That’s all of my ques-
tion. 
A: Yeah, I was having a hard time remember-
ing the full conversation because it feels like this 
is very choppy and cherry picked.  
When t he defense sought to obtain  from BE her cell 
phone’s version of the materials , however, BE refused to 
grant access to them. And when Appellant moved to compel 
their production, the military judge denied the defense 
motion. 
The lead opinion takes the position that because the de-
fense was able to cross-examine BE using the materials re-
trieved from Appellant’s phone, the evidence from BE’s 
phone “was cumulative and would have only reinforced 
what the members already knew.” United States v. Braum, 
__ M.J. __, __ ( 8) (C.A.A.F. 2026) (plurality opinion). I re-
spectfully suggest, however, that this misses the point.    
To be sure, in typical cases, text messages of this nature 
would indeed be cumulative. But what was unusual about 
the instant case was that the victim refused to turn over 
her copy of the  texts because she indicated she wanted to 
“shield” her privacy interests, but then she used the de-
fense’s need to rely solely on Appellant’s version of the texts 
as a “sword” to allege that the defense was misleadingly 
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
 
3 
 
cherry-picking those texts. In essence  then, BE was al-
lowed to convey to the panel members that they should dis-
count what the text messages showed  about her willing  
participation in the BDSM activities because the defense 
was confronting her  with a  supposedly incomplete set of 
texts—but the only way the defense could rebut BE’s claim 
was to have access to BE’s copy of the text messages, which 
BE herself blocked. The colloquial term  for BE’s approach 
is “chutzpah”; the legal term for the military judge’s denial 
of the defense motion to compel product ion of BE’s text 
messages is “prejudicial.”     
At bottom, this case hinged on BE’s credibility. And as 
the lead opinion itself concedes, the evidence impeaching  
BE’s credibility was “substantial in volume and weight.” Id. 
(emphasis added) . Moreover, the lead opinion goes on to 
note that “the defense made inroads in challenging BE’s 
credibility, and more broadly , her character for truthful-
ness. Indeed, BE’s character for truthfulness was under-
mined by even a friendly witness—her [former] best 
friend—who testified BE was ‘untruthful.’ ” Id. at __ (8-9).  
By pointing to the evidence adduced at trial that amply 
demonstrated BE’s lack of credibility, the lead opinion 
implicitly acknowledges just how tenuous Appellant’s 
conviction really was . And i n United States v. Coleman , 
this Court held that the failure to “disclose requested 
material favorable to the defense is not harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt  if the undisclosed evidence might have 
affected the outcome of the trial.” 72 M.J.  184, 187 
(C.A.A.F. 2013). Here, BE used her leverage over the text 
messages to buffer the impact of the defense’s cross -
examination. If the military judge had properly allowed the 
defense to obtain access to BE’s version of the text 
messages, BE’s allegations against the defense would have 
been prevented or rebutted, thereby making the defense’s 
cross-examination of BE even more effective. In light of  
these circumstances, I cannot agree that the Government 
has met its burden of demonstrating that any error made 
by the military judge in this case was harmless  beyond a 
reasonable doubt. See id.   
United States v. Braum, No. 25-0046/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
 
4 
 
I conclude that the findings and sentence in this case 
should be set aside. Because this Court reaches a different 
result, I respectfully dissent. 