This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jorge A. HURTADO, Cadet 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0212 
Crim. App. No. 20240609 
 
Argued December 9, 2025—Decided March 23, 2026 
 
Military Judges: William C. Ramsey 
 
For Appellant: Captain Jessica A. Adler (argued); Lieutenant 
Colonel Kyle C. Sprague and Jonathan F . Potter, Esq. (on 
brief); Colonel Philip M. Staten and Major Robert W. 
Rodriguez. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Clare M. Murphy  (argued); Colonel 
Richard E. Gorini and Major Isaac J. Dickson (on brief). 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge MAGGS and Judge JOHNSON  
joined. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a dissenting 
opinion, in which Judge HARDY joined. 
_______________ 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Appellant was charged with ten specifications of 
abusive sexual contact, two specifications of sexual assault, 
and one specification of indecent exposure in violation of 
Articles 120 and 120c, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 920, 920c.  Before trial, the military 
judge granted Appellant’s motion to suppress his 
statement to law enforcement  because Appellant had 
unequivocally invoked his right to counsel  prior to 
questioning. The Government appealed that ruling to the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals pursuant 
to Article 62, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 862(a)(1)(A).  The lower 
court granted the appeal and vacated the military judge’s 
ruling. United States v. Hurtado, No. ACM 20240609, 2025 
CCA LEXIS 136, at * 7-8, 2025 WL 946397, at *3 (A . Ct. 
Crim. App. Mar. 25, 2025) (unpublished). 
We granted review to determine whether the military 
judge abused his discretion in concluding  that Appellant’s 
statement, “I mean, I would like to speak to a lawyer, but 
um, yeah,” was an unequivocal invocation of his right to 
counsel.
1 For the reasons set forth  below, we hold  that 
Appellant’s statement would be understood by a 
reasonable law enforcement officer as a clear request for 
counsel and therefore constitutes an unequivocal 
invocation of the right to counsel. Accordingly, the military 
 
1 We granted review of the following issues: 
I. Whether the military judge’s ruling was not 
an abuse of discretion. 
 
II. Whether the military judge made clearly 
erroneous factual findings and the Army 
Court’s “mere disagreements” justify 
deviating from the standard this Court 
mandates under Article 62. 
United States v. Hurtado, __ M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025) 
(order granting review). 
 
 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
judge did not abuse his discretion in granting Appellant’s 
motion to suppress his statements to law enforcement, and 
we reverse the decision of  the Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals.  
Background 
On January 23, 2024, Appellant was questioned by the 
United States Army Criminal Investigative Command 
(CID). During the interview, Special Agent (SA) NL  asked 
Appellant whether Appellant had “ever requested a lawyer 
after being read [his rights] .” Appellant replied, “[n]o this 
is the first time.” SA NL next asked, “ [d]o you want a 
lawyer at this time? ,” to which Appellant responded,  “I 
mean, I would like to speak to a lawyer, but um, yeah.” SA 
NL replied, “Okay,” before reasking: “So you want a lawyer 
at this time?” SA NL then explained to Appellant what the 
process would be if he invoked his right to counsel.  
Appellant ultimately made various admissions to the 
charged offenses. 
In relevant part, Appellant moved to suppress these 
statements, arguing that the investigators ignored his 
invocation of his right to counsel.  In ruling on Appellant’s 
motion, the military judge found  pursuant to Edwards v. 
Arizona, 451 U.S. 477, 484- 85 (1982), that if a suspect 
invokes his right to counsel, law enforcement must 
immediately cease questioning him until an attorney is 
present. Citing Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452, 452  
(1994), the military judge explained that “[t]he Edwards  
rule serves the prophylactic purpose of preventing officers 
from badgering a suspect into waiving his previously 
asserted Miranda rights, and its applicability requires 
courts to determine whether the accused actually invoked 
his right to cou nsel.” Further citing to Davis, the military 
judge found that “[t]his is an objective inquiry, requiring 
some statement that can reasonably be construed to be an 
expression of a desire for an attorney’s assistance.”  
Ultimately, the military judge concluded that Appellant’s 
statement, “I mean, I would like to speak to a lawyer, but 
um, yeah” was an unequivocal invocation of his right to 
counsel and, therefore, suppressed any statement s 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
Appellant made to law enforcement after that point in the 
interview.  
The Government appealed the military judge’s decision 
under Article 62, UCMJ. The  Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals found that the word “but” in the middle of 
Appellant’s statement rendered his request  for counsel  
inherently equivocal.  Hurtado, 2025 CCA LEXIS 136, at 
*6, 2025 WL 946397, at *3.  In the lower court’s view , 
Appellant’s expressed desire to speak to a lawyer, 
immediately followed by “but” signaled a contradictory 
intent. Id. at *7, 2025 WL 946397, at *3. Applying a de novo 
review, the lower court concluded that  the military judge 
erred in finding that  Appellant unequivocally invoked his 
right to counsel. Id., 2025 WL 946397, at *3. 
Standard of Review 
“In an Article 62, UCMJ, appeal, this Court reviews the 
military judge’s decision directly and reviews the evidence 
in the light most favorable to the party which prevailed at 
trial,” which in this case is Appellant . United States v. 
Becker, 81 M.J. 483, 488 (C.A.A.F 2021) (quoting United 
States v. Pugh, 77 M.J. 1, 3 (C.A.A.F. 2017)). “On matters 
of fact with respect to appeals under Article 62, UCMJ, we 
are bound by the military judge ’s factual determinations 
unless they are unsupported by the record or cl early 
erroneous.” Pugh, 77 M.J. at 3 (citing United States v. Gore, 
60 M.J. 178, 185 (C.A.A.F. 2004)). We review a military 
judge’s ruling on the suppression of evidence for an abuse 
of discretion. United States v. Freeman , 65 M.J. 451, 458 
(C.A.A.F. 2008). On mixed questions of law and fact, such 
as this one, we examine the military judge’s findings of fact 
for clear error and review his conclusions of law de novo.  
United States v. Rodriguez,  60 M.J. 239, 246 (C.A.A.F.  
2004). 
Discussion 
The Fifth Amendment protects a person from being  
“compelled in any criminal case to be a witness  against 
himself.” U.S. Const. amend. V. In Miranda v. Arizona, the 
Supreme Court held  that, “the prosecution may not use 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
statements, whether exculpatory or inculpatory, stemming 
from custodial interrogation of the defendant unless it 
demonstrates the use of procedural safeguards effective to 
secure the privilege against self -incrimination.” 384 U.S. 
436, 444 (1966). It further held that “[ p]rior to any 
questioning, the person must be warned that he has a right 
to remain silent, that any statements he does make may be 
used as evidence against him, and that he has a right to 
the presence of an attorney, either retained or appoi nted.” 
Id.  
Supreme Court precedent is clear “that when an 
accused has invoked his right to have counsel present 
during custodial interrogation, a valid waiver of that right 
cannot be established by showing only that he responded 
to further police-initiated custodial interrogation even if he 
has been advised of his rights.” Edwards, 451 U.S. at  484 
(citations omitted).  
To effectively invoke the right to counsel and trigger the 
Miranda/Edwards protections, “the suspect must 
unambiguously request counsel.” Davis, 512 U.S. at 459.  
Whether a suspect has done so “is an objective inquiry.” Id. 
at 458-59 (citing Connecticut v. Barrett, 479 U.S. 523, 529 
(1987)). Thus, the  suspect must “articulate his desire to 
have counsel present sufficiently clearly that a reasonable 
police officer in the circumstances would understand the 
statement to be a request for an attorney.” Id. at 459. Once 
a suspect unambiguously invokes the  right to counsel, 
authorities must immediately cease questioning. Michigan 
v. Mosely , 423 U.S. 96, 104 (1975); Military Rule of 
Evidence 305(c)(4).  However, s hould that statement 
ultimately be  ambiguous, indicating that “ the suspect  
might be invoking the right to  counsel, [Supreme Court] 
precedents do  not require the cessation of  questioning.” 
Davis, 512 U.S. at 459. 
This appeal turns on whether Appellant’s statement to 
SA NL that “I mean, I would like to speak to a lawyer, but 
um, yeah” would be understood by a reasonable law 
enforcement officer as a request for counsel. Neither party 
disputes the military judge’s factual finding as to the words 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
Appellant actually used.2 The Government instead argues 
that the military judge applied an incorrect legal standard 
by failing to apply the Davis “reasonable officer” test. 
The military judge ’s written ruling does not explicitly 
recite the “reasonable officer” test. Nonetheless, military 
judges are presumed to know and correctly apply the law 
absent clear evidence to the contrary. See United States v. 
Erickson, 65 M.J. 221, 225 (C.A.A.F. 2007)  (noting that 
“[m]ilitary judges are presumed to know the law and to 
follow it absent clear evidence to the contrary ”). Here, the 
military judge expressly cited Davis, which sets out the 
reasonable police officer standard, and nothing in the 
record overcomes the presumption that he applied the 
proper test. 
The Government further contends that Appellant’s use 
of “like,” “but,” and “um” rendered his statement equivocal. 
As noted above, t he determination of whether an 
invocation is unambiguous (requiring the agents to 
immediately terminate the questioning) or ambiguous 
(permitting further clarifying questions) is an objective 
inquiry based upon how a “reasonable police officer” would 
view the comments.  Davis 512 U.S. at 459. The military 
judge found that Appellant unequivocally invoked his right 
to counsel when he stated, “I mean, I would like to speak 
to a lawyer, but um, yeah.”  Viewing the evidence  in the 
light most favorable to Appellant,  a reasonable law 
 
2 With respect to the second granted issue, the Government 
and the Army c ourt take issue with various factual findings 
made by the military judge after he found  that Appellant 
unequivocally invoked his right to counsel. This issue is moot 
based on our ultimate holding that the military judge did not 
abuse his discretion  in finding that Appellant unequivocally 
invoked his right to counsel. Once Appellant invoked his right to 
counsel, the interview should have ceased . Mosley, 423 U.S. at 
104. Thus, any statements occurring thereafter do not affect the 
outcome. Moreover, because this Court reviews the military 
judge’s ruling directly in Article 62, UCMJ, appeals, we need not 
address whether the lower court ’s factual findings were 
appropriate. Becker, 81 M.J. at 488. 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
enforcement officer would understand  “I would like to 
speak to a lawyer” as a clear request for counsel, and the 
intervening filler phrase “but um ,” followed by the 
affirmative “yeah,” does not change that meaning.3 
In ordinary speech, filler words such as “but um,” often 
serve as conversational hesitations rather than signaling a 
retraction of the speaker’s expressed intent, particularly in 
a stressful custodial interview.  See Sessoms v. Grounds , 
776 F.3d 615, 629 (9th Cir. 2015) (“Context and 
circumstances matter .”). That Appellant’s statement 
included such filler words does not render his request 
ambiguous, especially where he both began by expressing 
a desire to speak with a lawyer and ended with an 
affirmative “yeah.” See United States v. McLaren , 38 M.J. 
112, 115 (C.M.A. 1993) (“While the words, ‘I think,’ used by 
appellant in this case, could render a request for counsel 
equivocal, they are not in themselves dispositive. The 
language of appellant’s comment must be evaluated in the 
context of the circumstances in which it was spoken.”).  A 
reasonable law enforcement officer hearing Appellant’s 
statement would therefore understand it as a request for 
an attorney, triggering the obligation to cease questioning. 
Applying de novo review to the military judge’s legal 
conclusion, we find no error.  The military judge correctly 
determined that Appellant unequivocally invoked his right 
 
3 In their dissent, our colleagues contend  that Appellant’s 
use of the word “but” injects ambiguity into his request for 
counsel and that the phrase “um, yeah,” immediately following 
“but,” may confirm doubt about whether he wanted an attorney 
rather than relate back and reaffirm his earlier request for 
counsel. United States v . Hurtado , __ M.J. __  (1-3) (C.A.A.F. 
2026) (Ohlson, C.J., with whom Hardy, J., join ed, dissenting). 
The dissent cautions that there is no “tie-goes-to-the-runner” 
canon under which Appellant may seek shelter and that any 
plausible ambiguity, doubt, or alternative reading necessarily 
renders the statement not “unambiguous.” Id. at __ (3). We need 
not and do not rely on such a canon because we conclude that 
Appellant’s statement was not ambiguous. As we explain, a 
reasonable law enforcement officer hearing Appellant’s 
statement would understand it was a request for an attorney. 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
to counsel , and once he did so, law enforcement was 
required to cease questioning.  Because CID continued 
questioning Appellant after that invocation, the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion in suppressing 
Appellant’s subsequent statements. 
Decision 
The decision of the United States Army  Court of 
Criminal Appeals is reversed. The case is returned to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Army  for remand to the 
military judge for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom Judge HARDY joins, 
dissenting. 
The issue in this case is simple —whether Appellant’s 
statement “I mean, I’d like to speak with an attorney, but 
um, yeah,” was an unequivocal and unambiguous invoca-
tion of his right to counsel. Given Appellant changed his 
mind twice in the same sentence, t he answer is also sim-
ple—No. Because the majority concludes  otherwise, I re-
spectfully dissent. 
The Supreme Court has made it clear that the onus is 
on an accused to invoke his or her right to counsel . And 
importantly, the Supreme Court also has made it clear that 
an accused’s request for counsel must  be unequivocal and 
unambiguous. This means that an invocation must be “suf-
ficiently clear[] that a reasonable police officer in the cir-
cumstances would understand the statement to be a re-
quest for an attorney.” Davis v. United States, 512 U.S. 452, 
459 (1994). If an accused’s statement is not an unequivocal 
and unambiguous request for counsel, the interviewing of-
ficers “have no obligation to stop questioning him.” Id.  at 
461-62.
1  
Appellant’s response started off clear: “I mean, I’d like 
to speak with an attorney.  . . .” This part of Appellant’s 
statement articulates a desire to have counsel present. Ex-
cept Appellant then changes course mid- sentence, saying 
“but, um.” His use of “but” necessarily raises the question—
“but” what? See United States v. Hampton , 675 F.3d 720, 
727 (7th Cir. 2012)  (holding “ ‘Yeah, I do, but you  . . .’ ” in 
response to law enforcement asking if accused would like a 
lawyer was ambiguous “because [accused]’s reference to a 
lawyer used the hedge word ‘ but’ ”).
2 Appellant then 
 
1 When an accused does invoke his right to counsel, he “ is 
not subject to further questioning until a lawyer has been made 
available or the suspect himself reinitiates conversation.” Davis, 
512 U.S. at 458. 
2 Of course, “but” need not make an invocation ambiguous in 
all instances. Where an accused says, “I want a lawyer, but can’t 
afford one,” invocation would be satisfied. See Vaughn v. State, 
281 S.E.2d 594, 595 (Ga. 1981) (finding no ambiguity where an 
accused “told the sheriff he wanted to talk to a lawyer but 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
2 
 
vaguely ended his statement with “yeah”—maybe chang-
ing his mind for the  second time and reaffirming his re-
quest for counsel, or maybe indicating nothing at all. I do 
not find this muddled, inconsistent statement to be a clear 
assertion of the right to counsel.   
Appellant urges against interpreting “but” as equivoca-
tion here because no explicit invalidation of his request ac-
tually followed. The majority similarly casts “but” as a 
mere “filler phrase” which “serve[d] as [a] conversational 
hesitation[] rather than signaling a retraction of the 
speaker’s expressed intent.” United States v. Hurtado, __ 
M.J. __, __ ( 7) (C.A.A.F. 2026). But this approach disre-
gards the Supreme Court’s requirement of a “clear asser-
tion of the right to counsel.” Davis, 512 U.S. at 460. The 
Supreme Court expressl y recognized that this  rule might 
disadvantage a suspect who —“ because of fear, intimida-
tion, lack of linguistic skills, or a variety of other reasons—
will not clearly articulate their right to counsel although 
they actually want to have a lawyer present,” but the Court 
explained that the strict rule was necessary for clarity and 
ease of application. Id . at 461. Thus, the question isn’t 
whether there was an express retraction within the state-
ment, nor whether Appellant’s use of the word “but” was a 
mere verbal tic. Rather, the question is whether the words 
uttered by Appellant were objectively unambiguous.  
In deciding this issue, what transpired in  Davis is in-
structive. There, the Supreme Court held that the state-
ment “Maybe I should talk to a lawyer” was not unequivo-
cal. 512 U.S. at  462 (emphasis added) . Here, Appellant’s 
use of the word “but” similarly injected doubt into his state-
ment, opening the door for the interviewing officer to ask 
clarifying questions . See But, Merriam Webster Una-
bridged Dictionary , https://unabridged.merriam-web-
ster.com/unabridged/but (last visited Mar. 18, 2026) (defin-
ing “but” as introducing a phrase or clause “contrary” to or 
 
couldn’t afford one”). There are no magic words which are per se 
sufficient or deficient and thus a contextual analysis is needed. 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
3 
 
“in opposition” with what has already been stated (empha-
ses added)). 
Moreover, the fact that Appellant’s use of the word “but” 
is followed by “um, yeah” does not bear the weight which 
the majority ascribe s to it. The majority argues that the 
“um, yeah” relates back and “affirm[s]” the supposed prior 
expression of a desire for a lawyer. Hurtado, __ M.J. at __ 
(7). However, the phrase “um, yeah” could as easily be un-
derstood as affirming the word “but”; that is, as affirming 
Appellant’s doubt, hesitation, or equivoca tion as to 
whether he wanted a lawyer  or not. This interpretation is 
particularly plausible because “um, yeah” immediately fol-
lows the word “but.” Or perhaps “um, yeah” simply has no 
semantic value at all. Accordingly, Appellant’s invocation 
of that phrase does nothing to resolve the ambiguity  pre-
sent in his statement.  
Simply put, a “statement either is . . . an assertion of 
the right to counsel or it is not.” Davis, 512 U.S. at 459 (in-
ternal quotation marks omitted) . There is no “tie-goes-to-
the-runner” canon of interpretation under which Appellant 
may seek shelter. Any plausible ambiguity, doubt, or alter-
native interpretation necessarily means the statement is 
not “unambiguous.” And when three judges of the United 
States Army Court of Criminal Appeals and two judges of 
this Court see Appellant ’s statement as being ambiguous, 
it is hard to fault the investigating  agent for also viewing 
the statement as being ambiguous and then simply seeking 
clarification from Appellant about whether he wanted a 
lawyer or not.  
When a suspect makes an ambiguous or equivocal state-
ment, the Davis Court advised that it would be “good police 
practice” for interviewing officers to ask clarifying ques-
tions. Id. at 461. The investigating agent here did exactly 
that: she sought clarification about whether or not Appel-
lant actually wanted an attorney. And Appellant’s re-
sponse to those questions provided that clarity: “I want to 
know what I’m here for, first.” The Supreme Court has rec-
ognized that clarifying questions help prevent “judicial sec-
ond-guessing as to the meaning of the suspect’s statement 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
4 
 
regarding counsel.” Id. Here, we need not second-guess Ap-
pellant’s ambiguous statement because the investigating 
agent followed “good police practice” and resolved the am-
biguity for us.  
Even had Appellant’s statement somehow sufficed as an 
invocation, the majority misreads the law when it  asserts 
that “any statements occurring thereafter do not affect the 
outcome” of their analysis because “ the interview should 
have ceased.” Hurtado, __ M.J. at __ n.2 (6 n.2). This Court 
has recognized that “[t]here is no blanket prohibition 
against a comment or a statement by a police officer after 
an invocation of rights. Edwards[ v. Arizona, 451 U.S. 477 
(1981)] is designed to prevent the police from badgering a 
suspect.” United States v. Young , 49 M.J. 265, 267 
(C.A.A.F. 1998); accord Edwards, 451 U.S. at 484 (noting 
“when an accused has invoked his right to have counsel 
present . . . a valid waiver of that right cannot be estab-
lished by showing only that he responded to further police-
initiated custodial interrogation” (emphases added)). 
In response to Appellant’s ambiguous statement, the in-
vestigating agent in this case merely sought to clarify if Ap-
pellant wanted a lawyer. She then provided an anodyne —
and correct—explanation of what would happen if Appel-
lant did or did not invoke his right to counsel . The agent’s 
explanation included no questions, was neutral and profes-
sional, and was not reasonably likely  to elicit an incrimi-
nating response.
3 And importantly, the agent’s questions 
about the underlying facts of the case only began after  
 
3 See Hampton, 675 F.3d at  728 (“Even if [the accused]’s 
statement ‘Yeah, I do, but you . . .’ was definite enough to 
constitute an unambiguous request for counsel . . . . the record 
reflects that what happened next was not an interrogation at all 
but an effort to clarify [his] intent.”). But see United States v. 
Hunter, 708 F.3d 938, 947 (7th Cir. 2013) (noting a desire “to 
encourage officers to clarify whether a suspect wants an 
attorney, but only if the suspect makes an ambiguous statement” 
and finding the questioning  following invocation was 
“reasonably likely to elicit an incriminating response” (internal 
quotation marks omitted)). 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
5 
 
Appellant responded by indicating his desire to “know 
what I am here for, first.” 
The scenario presented here is not the evil which Ed-
wards was designed to prevent. Rather, the “fundamental 
purpose” of Edwards is to “prevent[] police from badgering 
a defendant into waiving his previously asserted  Mi-
randa rights.” Maryland v. Shatzer, 559 U.S. 98, 106 
(2010) (internal quotation marks omitted) . There was no 
badgering here and the majority does not suggest other-
wise. In fact, what occurred in the instant case  lacks even 
the “subtle compulsion” found allowable in Rhode Island v. 
Innis.4 Rather, as the military judge correctly recognized, 
the investigating agent was not coercive and did not over-
bear Appellant’s will. 
Consequently, even if Appellant did unambiguously in-
voke his right to counsel, he relinquished  that right when 
he stated his desire to “know what I am here for, first,” and 
then proceeded to talk about the facts of the case . See 
Berghuis v. Thompkins, 560 U.S. 370, 385 (2010)  (“[T]he 
law can presume that an individual who, with a full under-
standing of his or her rights, acts in a manner inconsistent 
with their exercise has made a deliberate choice to relin-
quish the protection those rights afford. ”); Shatzer, 559 
U.S. at 108 (“Uncritical extension of Edwards to this situ-
ation would not significantly increase the number of genu-
inely coerced confessions excluded ,” but would “increase[] 
its costs: the in-fact voluntary confessions it excludes from 
trial, and the voluntary confessions it deters law enforce-
ment officers from even trying to obtain.”).  
 
4 446 U.S. 291, 303 (1980). There, two officers transporting a 
suspect had a conversation between themselves “concerning [a] 
missing shotgun ” used in the crime  and their worry given a 
school for “handicapped children” was in the area. Id. at 294. The 
suspect “then interrupted the conversation, stating that the 
officers should turn the car around so he could show them where 
the gun was located.” Id. at 295. The Supreme Court concluded 
that though “the officers’ comments struck a responsive chord,” 
this did not constitute “interrogation.” Id. at 303. 
United States v. Hurtado, No. 25-0212/AR 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
6 
 
Appellant made the choice to continue speaking with in-
vestigators and, regretting the consequences, now seeks 
another bite at the suppression apple. This Court obliges 
Appellant by granting relief without adequately address-
ing the legal issues which preclude his request.  
In sum, the burden is on an accused to unambiguously 
invoke his or her right to counsel. Here, Appellant failed to 
do so. And even if he had, his subsequent action  relin-
quished that right . Specifically, Appellant freely chose to 
continue his discussion with the investigating agent  and 
provided voluntary statements  that were incriminating . 
Despite this, he now gains suppression of these  voluntary 
statements. Because this windfall is unwarranted, I re-
spectfully dissent.  