This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Zachary C. ROCHA, Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0157 
Crim. App. No. 40134 
 
Argued October 22, 2025—Decided  March 16, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Colin P. Eichenberger 
 
For Appellant:  Major Kate E. Lee  (argued); Colonel 
Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. 
Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Major Megan R. Crouch (argued); Megan P. 
Marinos, Esq. 
 
Amicus Curiae: Philip D. Cave, Esq., Brenner M. Fissell, 
Esq., and Franklin D. Rosenblatt, Esq. (on behalf of the 
National Institute of Military Justice) (on brief).  
 
Judge HARDY announced the judgment of the Court and 
the opinion of the Court with respect to Part IV, in which 
Judge MAGGS and Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge 
HARDY also delivered an opinion with respect to Parts I 
through III, in which Judge JOHNSON joined . Judge 
MAGGS filed a separate opinion concurring in part and 
in the judgment. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate 
dissenting opinion, in which Judge SPARKS joined. 
_______________
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court-martial convicted Appellee of violating 
the General Article, Article 134, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2018), for committing in-
decent conduct by “engaging in sexual acts with a sex doll 
with the physical characteristics of a female child.” In a 
previous case, this Court held that “the presidentially enu-
merated elements and definitions of Article 134 provide 
fair notice to servicemembers of ordinary intelligence that 
engaging in sexual acts with a lifelike child s ex doll falls 
squarely within the President’s definition of indecent con-
duct.” United States v. Rocha (Rocha II), 84 M.J. 346, 352 
(C.A.A.F. 2024).
1 We then remanded the case to the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) for 
consideration of the remaining issues raised by Appellee, 
including Appellee’s claim that he had a constitutionally 
protected right under Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 
(2003), to engage in the charged conduct. Id. 
On remand, the AFCCA held that Appellee had a “con-
stitutionally protected liberty interest to privately engage 
in sexual activities with his doll.”  United States v. Rocha  
(Rocha III), No. ACM 40134 (rem), 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at 
*4, 2025 WL 211261, at *2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 15, 
2025) (unpublished) (emphasis added) . The AFCCA also 
found Appellee’s conviction factually insufficient, sta ting 
that it was “not convinced of [Appellee’s] guilt beyond a rea-
sonable doubt.” Id. at *30, 2025 WL 211261, at *12. Accord-
ingly, the AFCCA set aside the findings and dismissed the 
specification with prejudice. Id.  at *30 -31, 2025 WL 
211261, at *12. 
 
1 In Rocha II, we reviewed the lower court’s opinion setting 
aside the findings and sentence and dismiss ing the charge and 
specification with prejudice. See United States v. Rocha  (Ro-
cha I), No. ACM 40134, 2022 CCA LEXIS 725, 2022 WL 
17730741 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Dec. 16, 2022) (unpublished). 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
After the AFCCA issued its second opinion, The Judge 
Advocate General of the Air Force (TJAG) certified the case 
back to this Court, specifying two issues: 
I. Did the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals fail 
to follow this Court’s remand instruction by ana-
lyzing the purported Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 
558 (2003), liberty interest as “masturbation in 
solitude, in secret, and in private,” instead of “pri-
vately engag[ing] in sexual activity with a child-
like sex doll”? 
II. Did the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
err in its application of Lawrence v. Texas , 539 
U.S. 558 (2003) and United States v. Marcum , 60 
M.J. 198 (C.A.A.F. 2004) to find Appellee’s convic-
tion factually insufficient? 
For the reasons explained below, we answer both certified 
questions in the negative and affirm the decision of the 
AFCCA. 
I. Background  
During a morale  and welfare inspection, a sergeant 
found a short, anatomically  correct, silicone doll with fe-
male physical characteristics in Appellee’s barracks dorm 
room. Appellee’s first sergeant described the doll as “very 
life like,” and an agent from the Air Force Office of Special 
Investigations (AFOSI) stated that the doll “kind of looked 
like a child.” During an interview with two AFOSI agents, 
Appellee agreed that the doll looked like a child and admit-
ted to owning “basically what is a child sex doll.” Appellee 
further admitted to masturbating by penetrating the doll’s 
vaginal and anal orifices with his penis on three occasions. 
Appellee clarified, however, that he never ejaculated in the 
doll because “it got too real.” Appellee explained: “I thought 
to myself, what if this was a life, what if this was real, and, 
yeah, it’s sad, so I stopped.” 
When an agent asked whether there was ever a time 
when Appellee pictured the doll “as being a real child and 
enjoyed it for any amount of time,” Appellee responded 
“No.” Asked the question a second time, Appellee again 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
responded, “Real as in like real child, somebody’s daughter. 
No. No.” 
As relevant here , the Government charged Appellee 
with one specification of violating Article  134, UCMJ, for 
committing indecent conduct by “engaging in sexual acts 
with a sex doll with the physical characteristics of a female 
child, and that said conduct was of a nature to bring dis-
credit upon the armed forces.”
2 A general court -martial 
composed of officer members convicted Appellee, contrary 
to his pleas, of one specification of indecent conduct in vio-
lation of Article 134, UCMJ. The military judge sentenced 
Appellee to a bad-conduct discharge, ninety days of confine-
ment, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and reduction to 
the grade of E-1. 
On appeal before the AFCCA, Appellee raised numer-
ous challenges to his conviction. Concluding that Appellee 
“did not have fair notice that his alleged conduct was pun-
ishable as indecent conduct” under Article 134, UCMJ, the 
AFCCA set aside the findings and sentence and dismissed 
the charge and specification with prejudice. Rocha I, 2022 
CCA LEXIS 725, at *1 9, 2022 WL 17730741, at *8. The 
AFCCA did not address Appellee’s other claims, including 
whether his conduct was constitutionally protected. 
Exercising his authority under Article 67(a)(2), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 867(a)(2), TJAG certified the AFCCA’s decision 
to this Court, and we reversed and remanded, finding that 
the presidentially enumerated Article  134 offense of inde-
cent conduct did  “provide fair notice that Appellee’s con-
duct was criminally sanctionable.” Rocha II, 84 M.J. at 352. 
On remand, we instructed the AFCCA to do two things: 
(1) “determine whether Appellee had a constitutionally 
protected liberty interest under Lawrence v. Texas . . . to 
privately engage in sexual activity with a childlike sex 
doll;” and (2) “address any other issues previously raised 
 
2 The Government also charged Appellee with an unrelated 
specification of receiving child pornography in violation of Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ. The members acquitted Appellee of that specifi-
cation. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
by Appellee before the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals that were mooted by the lower court’s 
prior decision to overturn the conviction.” Id. 
As to this Court’s first instruction, the AFCCA found 
that Appellee had a “constitutionally protected liberty in-
terest to privately engage in sexual activities with his doll.” 
Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *4, 2025 WL 211261, at 
*2 (emphasis added).
3 And as to this Court’s se cond in-
struction, the AFCCA found Appellee’s conviction factually 
insufficient, stating that it was “not convinced of [Appel-
lee’s] guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at *30, 2025 WL 
211261, at *12. 
After the AFCCA issued its second opinion, TJAG certi-
fied this case back to this Court for a second time, specify-
ing the two issues listed above. The Government argues 
that both questions should be answered in the affirmative 
because the AFCCA erred in two ways. First, the Govern-
ment argues that the AFCCA failed to adhere to our man-
date on remand by mischaracterizing the purported liberty 
interest in question as “masturbation in private and in sol-
itude” rather than to “privately engage  in sexual activity 
with a childlike sex doll.” Second, the Government argues 
that the AFCCA erred in its factual sufficiency analysis by 
misapplying this Court’s precedent in United States v. 
Marcum, 60 M.J. 198 (C.A.A.F. 2004). We address each ar-
gument in turn. 
 
3 In reaching this conclusion, the AFCCA stated that they  
“echo Judge Johnson’s conclusion [in Rocha II] about the consti-
tutionally protected liberty interest in this case.” Rocha III, 2025 
CCA LEXIS 10, at * 19 n.13, 2025 WL 211261, at * 7 n.13. The 
AFCCA concurred with Judge Johnson that “Appellee’s private, 
sexual conduct with an inanimate object in his single-occupancy 
dorm room in a military barracks was constitutionally protected 
conduct, in a place deserving of constitutional protection.” Id., 
2025 WL 211261, at *7 n.13 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Rocha II, 84 M.J. at 358 (Johnson, J., dissenting)). 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
II. Standard of Review 
“Only the court issuing [a remand] order can ultimately 
decide if its order has been complied with.” United States 
v. Hawkins, 11 M.J. 4, 6 (C.M.A. 1981). Accordingly, we re-
view the question whether the AFCCA complied with this 
Court’s remand order de novo. 
Under the version of Article 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866, 
applicable to Appellee’s case,
4 the AFCCA has an “awe-
some, plenary, de novo power” to complete its own factual 
sufficiency review. United States v. Cole, 31 M.J. 270, 272 
(C.M.A. 1990). In exercising this power, the AFCCA must 
weigh the evidence in the record of trial, making allow-
ances for not having personally observed the witnesses, 
and then determine whether they “are themselves con-
vinced of the accus ed’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
United States v. Thompson , 83 M.J. 1, 4 (C.A.A.F. 2022) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States 
v. Turner, 25 M.J. 324, 325 (C.A.A.F. 1987)). This Court 
lacks the authority to ma ke its own findings of fact or to 
conduct its own factual sufficiency review, but “we retain 
the authority to review factual sufficiency determinations 
of the CCAs for the application of ‘correct legal principles,’ 
but only as to matters of law.” Id.  (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Clark , 75 M.J. 
298, 300 (C.A.A.F. 2016)). 
III. The AFCCA Complied with the Remand Order 
At every stage of this case, Appellee has challenged his 
conviction on the grounds that he had a constitutionally 
protected liberty interest to engage in the charged conduct 
under the Supreme Court’s decision in Lawrence. Because 
the AFCCA set aside the findings of guilt and sentence on 
other grounds in its first decision, the AFCCA had not 
 
4 Congress amended Article 66, UCMJ, in the National De-
fense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-81, 
§ 539E(d), 135 Stat. 1541, 1703 (2021). Those amendments do 
not apply to this case because Appellee’s offense occurred prior 
to December 27, 2023, the effective date of those amendments.  
Id. § 539E(f), 135 Stat. 1541, 1706. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
addressed Appellee’s constitutional claim when TJAG cer-
tified this case to this Court the first time. We therefore 
remanded the case back to the AFCCA so that it could de-
termine—in the first instance —whether Appellee’s con-
duct was constitutionally protected. 
On remand, the AFCCA concluded that Appellee’s con-
duct was protected under Lawrence, but the Government 
argues that the AFCCA erred in that conclusion because it 
deviated from this Court’s remand mandate by analyzing a 
different question than the one we ordered it to consider. 
The Government points to two aspects of the AFCCA’s sec-
ond opinion in support of its argument. First, the Govern-
ment notes the apparent disagreement between this Court 
and the AFCCA about whether Appellee’s doll qualifies as 
“childlike.” Second, the Government asserts that the 
AFCCA erred by mischaracterizing Appellee’s conduct as 
“masturbation, in solitude, in secret, and in private living 
quarters,” which is materially different than this Court’s 
order to “determine whether Appellee had a constitution-
ally protected liberty  interest . . . to privately engage in 
sexual activity with a childlike sex doll.” We are not con-
vinced that these issues—either alone or in combination —
justify a second remand to the AFCCA. 
With respect to the Government’s first point, we do not 
find the AFCCA’s resistance to this Court’s description of 
Appellee’s doll as “childlike” to be legally meaningful.
5 The 
record contains multiple photographs of the doll as well as 
firsthand descriptions of the doll from various witnesses. 
The AFCCA repeatedly noted in both of its opinions that 
multiple witnesses believed that the doll resembled a child, 
that Appellee a dmitted that it was basically “a child sex 
doll,” and that the panel found Appellee guilty of “engaging 
in sexual acts with a sex doll with the physical 
 
5 The AFCCA expressly declined to decide whether or not the 
sex doll was “childlike,” but never disputed the language in the 
specification— that the doll had “the physical characteristics of a 
female child.” Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *7-8, 2025 WL 
211261, at *3. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
characteristics of a female child.” Whether or not the 
AFCCA agrees that Appellee’s doll was “childlike” (a 
subjective designation that carries no specific legal 
significance in this case), we have no doubt that the 
AFCCA had an accurate understanding of the doll’s 
objective appearance. 
As to the Government’s second point, we agree that a 
remand would be necessary if the AFCCA had failed to 
comply with our remand order. And we also agree that the 
question whether a servicemember has a constitutional 
right to “masturbat[e], in solitude, in secret, and in private 
living quarters” is a materially different one from whether 
a servicemember has a right to engage in sexual activity 
with a childlike sex doll. Nevertheless, when examining the 
AFCCA’s second decision in full, we believe that the 
AFCCA answered the most critic al question asked by this 
Court on remand: whether Appellee had a constitutional 
right to engage in the specific conduct with which he was 
charged and convicted. The AFCCA answered that ques-
tion when it stated: “We find [Appellee] had a constitution-
ally protected liberty interest to privately engage in sexual 
activities with his doll.” Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at 
*4, 2025 WL 211261, at *2 (emphasis added); see also id. at 
*17, 2025 WL 211261, at *7 (concluding that Appellee’s 
conduct was constitutionally protected even considering 
the “ostensibly childlike appearance of the doll”). Accord-
ingly, we conclude that the AFCCA complied with this 
Court’s remand order. 
IV. Factual Insufficiency Due to 
No Aggravating Circumstance 
The Government charged Appellee with indecent con-
duct under Article 134, UCMJ. This Court has long held 
that private consensual sexual activity is not punishable 
under Article 134, UCMJ, as an indecent act absent aggra-
vating circumstances. United States v. Goings, 72 M.J. 202, 
205 (C.A.A.F. 2013); see also  United States v. Snyder , 1 
C.M.A. 423, 426, 4 C. M.R. 15, 18 (1952) (noting that Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ, “is not intended to set up a moral standard 
for the conduct of an individual’s affairs in private—
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
provided, at least, that the questioned conduct does not in-
terfere with the performance of military duties”).6 Thus, to 
secure a conviction in this case, the Government was re-
quired to establish the existence of at least one aggravating 
circumstance. The presence or absence of an aggravating 
circumstance is a question of fact to be resolved by the fact-
finder. United States v. Castellano , 72 M.J. 217, 2 18-19 
(C.A.A.F. 2013) (citing In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 364 
(1970), and Apprendi v. New Jersey , 530 U.S. 466, 490 
(2000)). 
Prior to trial  and consistent with this Court’s decision 
in Goings, the military judge emailed counsel from both 
parties asking what aggravating circumstance the Govern-
ment intended to prove to establish that the charged con-
duct was indecent under Article  134, UCMJ. The Govern-
ment responded that several aggravating circumstances 
applied, including that th e acts took place in Appellee’s 
barracks room, and that the conduct was service discredit-
ing. A few days later, Appellee filed a motion to dismiss the 
specification at issue in this appeal for failure to state an 
offense. In that motion, Appellee argued that his “alleged 
conduct with the doll [was] entirely a private sexual act, 
specifically masturbation with a doll, and does not meet the 
required aggravation. . . . In the absence of an aggravating 
circumstance, private sexual activity including 
 
6 Our predecessor court’s holding in Snyder long predates the 
Supreme Court’s holding in Lawrence and was not based on any 
specific liberty interest guaranteed by the Constitution. See 
Snyder, 1 C.M.A. at 426, 4 C.M.R. at 18. Thus, whether or not 
Appellee’s conduct was protected under Lawrence, it still quali-
fies as “private consensual sexual activity” that cannot be pun-
ished as indecent conduct under Article  134, UCMJ, unless the 
Government proves an aggravating circumstance. Although the 
AFCCA concluded that Appellee’s conduct was protected by 
Lawrence, the requirement for the Government to prove an ag-
gravating factor would be the same either way. Accordingly, this 
Court need not decide whether Appellee had a constitutionally 
protected liberty interest to engage in the charged conduct to re-
view the AFCCA’s factual sufficiency determination.  
 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
masturbation is not punishable as indecent conduct.” The 
military judge denied the motion the next day. 
After the conclusion of the Government’s case, Appellee 
made an oral motion under Rule for Courts-Martial 917 for 
a finding of not guilty to the relevant specification arguing 
that the Government failed to present evidence of the re-
quired aggravating circumstance. In response, the Govern-
ment argued that four potential aggravating circumstances 
made Appellee’s conduct criminally sanctionable under Ar-
ticle 134, UCMJ. After further discussion, the military 
judge concluded that the only potential aggravating fa ctor 
raised by the evidence was whether Appellee “engaged in 
sexual acts with a sex doll with the physical characteristics 
of a female child in order to simulate sexual acts with a 
minor.” 
Consistent with this holding, the military judge gave 
the following instruction to the panel, without objection 
from either party: 
[Indecent conduct in violation of Article 134, 
UCMJ] is not intended to regulate wholly private 
consensual sexual activity. In the absence of an 
aggravating circumstance, private consensual 
sexual activity, including masturbation with or 
without any nonliving object, is not punishable as 
indecent conduct. The government has asserted 
the existence of the following aggravating circum-
stance to prove the alleged conduct is indecent: the 
accused engaged in sexual acts with a sex doll with 
the physical characteristics of a female child, to 
simulate sexual acts with a minor. 
(Emphasis added.) This was the only aggravating circum-
stance presented to the panel. 
Before the AFCCA, Appellee  challenged the legal and 
factual sufficiency of his conviction. As part of its factual 
sufficiency review, the AFCCA concluded that it was not 
convinced that Appellee, when he was engaged in the 
charged conduct, was either pretending he was having sex-
ual intercourse with a child or simulating sexual acts with 
a minor, and thus, there was no aggravating circumstance. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *25-26 & n.15, 2025 WL 
211261, at *1 0 & n.15. In support of this conclusion, the 
AFCCA noted that Appellee disclaimed any sexual interest 
in children, and that he stated that he stopped his sexual 
conduct with the doll when the thought of it being a real 
person came to mind. The AFCCA also ap peared to credit 
Appellee’s explanation that he chose a small doll because 
he thought a larger doll would be bulky and hard to move 
in a small dorm room. 
In addition to rejecting the specific aggravating circum-
stance presented to the panel, the AFCCA also considered 
and rejected the “other Government-asserted Marcum fac-
tors.”
7 These included : (1) whether the doll was legal to 
possess; (2) whether the doll qualified as child pornogra-
phy; (3) the absence of any dormitory regulations prohibit-
ing Appellee’s conduct ; (4) whether Appellee’s behavior 
tended to normalize sex between adults and children ; 
(5) the potentially service discrediting nature of Appellee’s 
conduct; (6) and the fact that the conduct charged occurred 
in a military barrack subject to inspection and regulation. 
Because the AFCCA did not find any aggravating circum-
stance beyond a reasonable doubt, it found Appellee’s con-
viction to be factually insufficient.
8 
 
7 In Marcum, this Court identified factors that— if present—
would make otherwise constitutionally protected conduct under 
Lawrence criminally sanctionable under Article 134, UCMJ. 60 
M.J. at 206-07. We presume, without deciding, that those factors 
would also qualify as aggravating circumstances under Goings, 
72 M.J. at 204-05, that would make any private consensual sex-
ual activity sanctionable under Article 134, UCMJ. 
8 The AFCCA also concluded that “the evidence does not sup-
port all the elements, including that [Appellee’s] conduct was 
both indecent and, under the circumstances, of a nature to bring 
discredit upon the armed forces.” It is not clear to what extent 
these additional grounds for finding Appellee’s conviction to be 
factually insufficient were based on the AFCCA’s conclusion that 
Appellee’s conduct was constitutionally protected under Law-
rence. Because the lack of an aggravating circumstance alone es-
tablishes a sufficient and independent basis for the AFCCA’s 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
Review of the factual sufficiency of the evidence in a 
court-martial is a special power and duty  that Congress  
conferred only on the Courts of Criminal Appeals. Thomp-
son, 83 M.J. at 3. Because this Court lacks the authority to 
make its own findings of fact or to conduct its own factual 
sufficiency review, we cannot reassess the AFCCA’s factual 
determinations. Id. at 4. Thus, whether the evidence is fac-
tually insufficient because the Government failed to prove 
an aggravating circumstance beyond a reasonable doubt is 
a determination “solely for the AFCCA to make.” Id. at 5. 
Here, the AFCCA concluded that the Government failed to 
prove the existence of any aggravating circumstance be-
yond a reasonable doubt. 
Our ability to review that determination is limited to 
examining whether the AFCCA applied incorrect legal 
principles. Id. at 4. As discussed above, the AFCCA cor-
rectly recognized that the Government was required to 
prove the presence of an aggravating circumstance to con-
vict Appellee for his private consensual sexual activity un-
der Article 134, UCMJ. Goings, 72 M.J. at 205. Because the 
AFCCA correctly applied this requirement, we find no mis-
application of legal principles that would justify setting 
aside t he AFCCA’s determination that Appellee’s convic-
tion was factually insufficient. 
V. Conclusion 
The judgment of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
 
factual insufficiency determination, we need not consider the 
AFCCA’s additional conclusions. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment. 
A general court -martial consisting of officer members 
found Appellee, Airman Zachary C. Rocha, guilty of one 
specification of indecent conduct in violation of Article 134, 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 
(2018). The specification alleged that Appellee:  
[d]id, within the continental United States, on 
divers occasions between on or about 24 April 
2019 and on or about 20 May 2019, commit 
indecent conduct, to wit: engaging in sexual 
acts with a sex doll with the physical 
characteristics of a female child, and that said 
conduct was of a nature to bring discredit 
upon the armed forces. 
The United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
(AFCCA), in its most recent opinion, set aside th is finding 
for two reasons. United States v. Rocha, No. ACM 40134 
(rem), 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *30-31, 2025 WL 211261, at 
*12 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 15, 2025) (unpublished). One 
reason was that Appellee “had a constitutionally protected 
liberty interest to privately engage in sexual activities with 
his doll.” Id. at *4, 2025 WL 211261, at *2. The other reason 
was that the evidence was factually insufficient to prove 
“all the elements  [of the offense], including that [Airman 
Rocha’s] conduct was both indecent and, under the 
circumstances, of a nature to bring discredit upon the 
armed forces.” Id. at *30, 2025 WL 211261, at *12. 
As explained below, I am persuaded that the AFCCA’s 
judgment setting aside the findings and sentence must be 
affirmed because of the AFCCA’s largely unreviewable 
determination that the evidence was factually insufficient 
to sustain the findings.  If the evidence is factually 
insufficient to prove the offense, then the  constitutional 
question is moot. Escambia Cnty. v. McMillan, 466 U.S. 48, 
51 (1984) (per curiam) (“It is a well established principle 
governing the prudent exercise of  . . . jurisdiction that 
normally [a court] will not decide a constitutional question 
if there is some other ground upon which to dispose of the 
case.”). I therefore do not address the issue of whether 
Appellee’s conduct was constitutionally protected. 
United States v. Rocha, 25-0157/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
2 
 
Similarly, I do  not answer the certified question about 
whether the AFCCA followed this Court’s remand 
instructions in addressing the constitutional issue because 
this certified question is also moot. 
For these reasons, I respectfully concur in  Part IV of 
Judge Hardy’s opinion (which makes Part IV the majority 
opinion) and in the judgment. 
I. The AFCCA’s Factual Sufficiency Review 
Under the applicable version of Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 866(d)(1) (2018), the AFCCA “may affirm only 
such findings of guilty, and the sentence or such part or 
amount of the sentence, as the [AFCCA]  finds correct in 
law and fact and determines, on the basis of the entire 
record, should be approved.”  
Here, the AFCCA could affirm the finding that Appellee 
was guilty of indecent conduct only if the court  was 
convinced beyond a reasonable doubt  that the evidence  
proved (1) that Appellee  had engaged in the conduct 
alleged in the specification; (2) that the conduct was 
indecent; and (3) that, under the circumstances, the 
conduct was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed 
forces. Manual for Courts- Martial, United States  pt. IV, 
para. 104.b.(1)-(3) (2019 ed.) ( MCM) (listing the element s 
of the enumerated offense of indecent conduct). 
After reviewing the record in this case, the AFCCA held 
that the evidence was factually insufficient to prove that 
Appellee’s conduct was indecent and that it was of a nature 
to bring discredit upon the armed forces. Rocha, 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 10, at *30, 2025 WL 211261, at *12. 
This Court may review the AFCCA’s factual sufficiency 
determinations only for “the application of correct legal 
principles.” United States v. Thompson , 83 M.J. 1, 4 
(C.A.A.F. 2022)  (internal quotation  marks omitted)  
(citation omitted). Accordingly, this Court must affirm the 
AFCCA’s judgment setting aside the finding and sentence  
if the AFCCA followed correct legal principles in deciding 
that the evidence was factually insufficient with respect to 
either the “service discrediting” element or  the “indecent 
conduct” element. I am persuaded that, u nder this very 
United States v. Rocha, 25-0157/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
3 
 
deferential standard, the AFCCA’s conclusion that the 
evidence was factually insufficient must stand. 
A. The Service Discrediting Element 
Reasonable people may disagree with the AFCCA’s 
conclusion that the Government failed to prove that 
Appellee’s conduct was service discrediting. 1 But the 
Government has not persuaded me that the AFCCA  
applied incorrect legal principles when it reached this 
decision. The AFCCA quoted the governing rule that 
conduct is service discrediting when it “has a tendency to 
bring the service into disrepute or which tends to lower it 
in public esteem.” Rocha, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *22, 2025 
WL 211261, at *8 (quoting MCM pt. IV, para. 91.c.(3)). The 
AFCCA made no statement suggesting any different 
standard applie s. This Court therefore must affirm the 
AFCCA’s determination even i f others looking at the 
evidence might have reached a different conclusion. 
The Government  disagrees, arguing that this Court 
may set aside the AFCCA’s decision that the evidence was 
factually insufficient because “it seems probable that [the] 
AFCCA found Appellee’s conduct not to be indecent or 
service discrediting because [the] AFCCA (incorrectly) 
believed the conduct was constitutionally protected.” I am 
not persuaded by this argument  because it rests solely on 
speculation. 
The AFCCA’s opinion does not state that constitutional 
principles influenced its conclusion that the evidence was 
 
1 The finding of guilty at trial indicates that a t least three-
fourths of the members of his court-martial, all of whom were 
experienced Air Force officers, concluded that Appellee’s conduct 
was service discrediting. And when the case first came before the 
AFCCA, Senior Judge Posch also concluded that the 
Government had shown that Appellee’s conduct was service 
discrediting, reasoning that “[Appellee’s] furtive behavior is 
inferential evidence that a reasonable person would know that 
using [the doll] to simulate anal and vaginal intercourse with an 
actual child was service discrediting. ” United States v. Rocha , 
No. ACM 40134, 2022 CCA LEXIS 725, at * 26, 2022 WL 
17730741, at * 10 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Dec. 16, 2022) 
(unpublished) (Posch, S.J., dissenting) , rev’d, 84 M.J. 346 
(C.A.A.F. 2024). 
United States v. Rocha, 25-0157/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
4 
 
factually insufficient to prove the service discrediting 
element. On the contrary , the only link between  the 
AFCCA’s constitutional analysis and this element is the 
AFCCA’s statement : “[E]ven considering potential  
discredit to the service, we have found that Appellee ’s 
conduct—masturbation, in solitude, in secret, and in 
private—should warrant the [constitutional]  liberty 
protection” afforded by  the Supreme Court’s decision in 
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558 (2003). Rocha , 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 10, at *28, 2025 WL  211261, at *11 (emphasis 
added). In this statement, the AFCCA is not saying that 
Appellee’s conduct is not service discrediting because it is 
constitutionally protected. Instead,  the AFCCA is saying 
that even if Appellee’s conduct had a potential to be service 
discrediting, the conduct is still constitutionally protected 
under Lawrence.2 
The Government also argues that we should remand 
the case because the “AFCCA did not explain specifically 
why it found that Appellee’s behavior was  not . . . service 
discrediting.” I agree with the Government that the 
AFCCA offered no clear explanation for its conclusion that 
Appellee’s conduct was not service discrediting other than 
quoting the applicable legal standard from the MCM.  But 
this is not a proper reason  for setting aside the AFCCA’s 
decision. This Court has held that while it is “better 
practice” for a Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) to explain 
its reasons for finding the evidence to be factually 
insufficient, “a CCA is not required to identify the basis for 
its action.”  United States v. Nerad , 69 M.J. 138, 147 
(C.A.A.F. 2010). 
B. The Indecent Conduct Element 
The AFCCA’s holding that the evidence is factually 
insufficient to establish the service discrediting element is 
sufficient by itself to support its judgment that the finding 
and sentence must be set aside.  However, I do agree with 
Judge Hardy’s opinion, which affirms the AFCCA’s 
decision that the evidence is factually insufficient to 
 
2 Given that the AFCCA held that the conduct was not 
service discrediting, this statement is dicta and this Court need 
not consider whether it is correct. 
United States v. Rocha, 25-0157/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
5 
 
establish the “indecent conduct” element. I therefore 
concur in Part IV of Judge Hardy’s opinion (which makes 
Part IV the majority opinion). 
II. Other Issues 
The AFCCA concluded in its opinion that Appellee had 
a constitutionally protected liberty interest under 
Lawrence to engage in the charged conduct . Chief Judge 
Ohlson’s dissenting opinion raises serious questions about 
whether the AFCCA’s constitutional analysis is correct. 
However, b ecause the AFCCA determined that the 
evidence was factually insufficient to prove the alleged 
offense, I am persuaded that the question whether 
Appellee’s conduct is constitutionally protected is moot.  I 
therefore would not answer it based on the principle that a 
court generally should not decide a constitutional issue 
when it can decide a case solely on statutory gro unds. 
Escambia Cnty., 466 U.S. at 51. 
The Government has further argued that the AFCCA 
failed to adhere to this Court’s remand instructions  
because it broadly concluded that Appellee had a liberty 
interest in “masturbation in private and in solitude,” 
instead of answering the specific question posed by this 
Court: “[W]hether Appellee had a constitutionally 
protected liberty interest under Lawrence v. Texas, 539 
U.S. 558 (2003), to privately engage in sexual activity with 
a childlike sex doll.”  I conclude that this question is also 
moot. The Cou rt’s remand instructions  directed the 
AFCCA to “address any other issues previously raised by 
Appellee . . . that were mooted by [ the AFCCA’s] prior 
decision to overturn the conviction.”  One of those issues 
was whether the evidence was factually insufficient.  
Rocha, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *2, 2025 WL 211261, at *1. 
As explained above, the AFCCA’s decision that the 
evidence was factually insufficient  to establish two 
elements of the offense is an independent and sufficient 
ground for affirming the judgment that the finding and 
sentence must be set aside. 
III. Conclusion 
For these reasons, I concur in part and in the judgment. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom Judge SPARKS 
joins, dissenting.
Today a majority of this  Court affirms the judgment of 
the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals. By 
doing so, the majority lets stand the holding of the lower 
court that Appellee had a constitutional right while living 
in government quarters to insert his penis into the vaginal 
and anal openings of a sex doll —despite the fact that the 
evidence adduced at trial unequivocally demonstrated that 
this sex doll looked like  a child.
1 This egregious result is 
not compelled by law, logic, or precedent. Therefore, I 
dissent. 
I. Factual Background 
In order to comprehend the true nature of the lower 
court’s holding, it is important to highlight certain facts 
that are either not discussed or not sufficiently acknowl-
edged in either the lead  opinion or the opinion of the Air 
Force court. 
First, the trial evidence  unequivocally demonstrated 
that this doll, which the accused ordered from overseas and 
then surreptitiously brought onto a military base, was a sex 
doll. It had oral, anal, and vaginal openings; it had a fea-
ture where the user could cause the doll to emit sexual 
moans; and the doll vibrated.  
Second, this doll did not have the appearance of some 
blow-up gag gift from a novelty  shop. It was made of 
 
1 The judges affirming the judgment of the Air Force court 
state that they “need not decide whether Appellee had a consti-
tutionally protected liberty interest.” United States v. Rocha (Ro-
cha IV), __ M.J. __, __  n.6 (9 n.6) (C.A.A.F. 2026); see also id. at 
__ (1-2, 5) (Maggs, J., concurring in part  and in the judgment). 
However, this stance does not change the fact that they have 
failed to reverse the decision of the Air Force court. As a result, 
the decision of the lower court still stands as binding precedent 
for the Air Force and the Space Force, and the lower court ex-
plicitly states in its opinion: “We find Appell[ee] had a constitu-
tionally protected liberty interest to priva tely engage in sexual 
activities with his doll.” United States v. Rocha (Rocha III), No. 
ACM 40134 (rem), 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *4, 2025 WL 211261, 
at *2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 15, 2025) (unpublished). 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
2 
 
silicone, mimicking skin, and was obtained from a website 
which “specializes in anatomically correct dolls.” Further, 
Appellee admitted to investigators that he talked to this 
doll, showered with it, put baby powder on it, brushed its 
hair, slept with it, and gave it the name of a real girl he 
had known in middle school.  Indeed, Appellee’s first ser-
geant testified that when he went into Appellee ’s on-base 
living quarters to perform an inspection, “I thought there 
was a real child on the bed.” (Emphasis added.) 
Third, consistent with  the first sergeant’s testimony, 
this sex doll looked like a child. Every eyewitness who saw 
the doll said it looked like a child. Indeed, Appellee himself 
admitted to investigators that “I have, basically, what is a 
child sex doll,” and observed that this fact was “kind of ob-
vious.” (Emphases added. ) And importantly, after seeing 
the evidence the trial judge made a finding of fact  that it 
was “a childlike doll” and that the doll had “the appearance 
of a child.” (Emphases added.) Moreover, in convicting Ap-
pellee, the panel members (who inspected the doll) likewise 
agreed that it looked like a child.
2 
And fourth, Appellee did not just receive and possess 
this child sex doll. He admitted to investigators that on 
multiple occasions while living in dormitory-style military 
housing for enlisted airmen, he penetrated the vaginal and 
anal openings of this doll with his penis .
3 This conduct is 
 
2 The military judge instructed the panel members that in 
order to convict Appellee, they needed to find that “the accused 
engaged in sexual acts with a sex doll with the physical 
characteristics of a female child.” (Emphasis added.) 
3 In an attempt to minimize this behavior, the Air Force court 
makes the eyebrow-raising assertion that Appellee— who, mind 
you, was a member of the a rmed forces of the  United States—
was interacting with this child sex doll “mostly for his emotional 
support, not for sexual gratification.”  Rocha III , 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 10, at *18 n.11, 2025 WL 211261, at *7 n.11 (emphasis 
added). And oddly, but perhaps tellingly, the lower court seeks 
to promote a defense argument that Appellee’s sex doll (which, 
as noted, has anal and vaginal openings, moans, and vibrates) is 
little different from a Mattel “Skipper” doll, id. at *26, 2025 WL 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
3 
 
what led to his conviction for indecent conduct—that is, for 
“engaging in sexual acts with a sex doll with the physical 
characteristics of a female child” —in violation of Article 
134, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. §  934 
(2018). Appellee’s conviction was wholly justified in light of 
the facts cited above and the law discussed below. 
II. Lawrence v. Texas 
In its decision reversing Appellee’s conviction, the lower 
court relies heavily on the case of Lawrence v. Texas, 539 
U.S. 558 (2003). In that case, the Supreme Court held that 
state laws criminalizing sodomy between consenting adults 
are unconstitutional. Id. at 578-79. Contrary to the position 
taken by the lower court, however, there is nothing in Law-
rence—and importantly, nothing in any other precedent or 
any provision of the Constitution —that says a person has 
a constitutional right to stick his penis into a sex doll t hat 
looks like a child.  
To be clear, I recognize and respect the precedents of 
the Supreme Court and of this Court  holding that both ci-
vilians and members of our Armed Forces enjoy an expan-
sive and robust right to privacy when it comes to sexual 
activity among consenting adults. In no way do I seek to 
curtail this liberty interest as previously defined and un-
derstood. But there is no precedent for the position adopted 
by the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals that this right 
to privacy is so expansive as to protect the behavior for 
which Appellee was convicted.  It is important to under-
score that no federal court has ever held that Lawrence cre-
ates a constitutional right for a person to penetrate a child 
sex doll. And nothing in the language or logic of Lawrence  
serves to create such a right under the circumstances pre-
sented in the instant case. 
III. The Issue on Remand 
Our Court previously ordered the Air Force c ourt to 
examine on remand whether the  constitutional liberty 
 
211261, at *11—despite Appell ee’s concession to investigators 
that the doll was “not like Barbie.” 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
4 
 
interest identified in  Lawrence applied to Appellee’s 
conduct of “privately engag[ing] in sexual activity with a 
childlike sex doll.” United States v. Rocha  (Rocha II), 84 
M.J. 346, 352 (C.A.A.F. 2024) . However, the lower court 
instead chose to examine whether “Appell[ee’s] conduct—
masturbation, in solitude, in secret, and in private living 
quarters—should warrant the Lawrence liberty 
protection.” Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *17, 2025 
WL 211261, at *7.  
Notice the legal legerdemain at play here: the Air Force 
Court of Criminal Appeals was required  to address  the 
question of  whether Appellee’s act of inserting his penis 
into a child sex doll was constitutionally protected, and yet 
that court instead chose to address the question of whether 
private masturba tion is constitutionally protected . The 
lower court then reached the altogether unsurprising con-
clusion that the government has no right to regulate such 
intimately personal conduct when it is done “in solitude, in 
secret, and in private living quarters .” Id., 2025 WL 
211261, at *7. But that most assuredly was not the consti-
tutional issue the Air Force court was required to examine. 
Indeed, the lead opinion itself concedes that the question 
addressed by the lower court “is a materially different one 
from” what this Court ordered the lower court to address 
on remand. Rocha IV , __ M.J. at  __ (8). And yet, the lead 
opinion seems strangely unperturbed by this judicial trans-
gression and conspicuously ignores Supreme Court prece-
dent on this point. See Briggs v. Pennsylvania R.R. Co., 334 
U.S. 304, 306 (1948) (noting the longstanding rule that “an 
inferior court has no power or authority to deviate from the 
mandate issued by an appellate court”); see also Sibbald v. 
United States, 37 U.S. 488, 492 (1838)  (“The inferior court 
is bound by the decree as the law of the case; and must 
carry it into execution, according to the mandate. They can-
not vary it, . . . review it upon any matter decided on appeal 
for error apparent; or intermeddle with it, further than to 
settle so much as has been remanded.”).  
The lead opinion wanly tries to explain away this dis-
crepancy, averring that the lower court “answered the most 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
5 
 
critical question asked by this Court,” Rocha IV, __ M.J. at 
__ (8), when the lower court stated that “[Appellee] had a 
constitutionally protected liberty interest to privately en-
gage in sexual activities with his doll,” id. at __ (8) (internal 
quotation marks omitted)  (quoting Rocha III, 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 10, at *4, 2025 WL 211261, at *2). But in truth, the 
lower court’s conclusory statement did not  “answer” this 
Court’s mandate because it was  predicated on  the lower 
court’s faulty (re)definition of the liberty interest in issue.  
Accordingly, this Court should have remanded this case 
once again to the Air Force c ourt—to examine the correct  
constitutional issue  and, as discussed below, to examine 
the correct constitutional issue correctly. And yet a major-
ity of this Court has declined to take this necessary step. 
IV. United States v. Marcum 
If the judges on the Air Force court had properly com-
plied with our remand requirement and had correctly un-
derstood and applied Lawrence and our precedent in 
United States v. Marcum, they would have reached an en-
tirely different conclusion here.  60 M.J. 198 (C.A.A.F. 
2004). Marcum outlines a “ tripartite framework for ad-
dressing Lawrence challenges within the military context,” 
asking:  
First, was the conduct that the accused was found 
guilty of committing of a nature to bring it within 
the liberty interest identified by the Supreme 
Court? Second, did the conduct encompass any be-
havior or factors identified by the Supreme Court 
as outside  the analysis in Lawrence ? Third, are 
there additional factors relevant solely in the mil-
itary environment that affect the nature and 
reach of the Lawrence liberty interest? 
United States v. Stirewalt, 60 M.J. 297, 304 (C.A.A.F. 2004) 
(citation omitted) ( internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Marcum, 60 M.J. at 206-07). 
A. Marcum Prong One 
The initial question under Marcum essentially asks if 
the sexual conduct at issue is generally encompassed by the 
Supreme Court’s opinion in Lawrence.  60 M.J. at 206.  
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
6 
 
Lawrence—and this Court’s Marcum progeny—indicate 
that private sexual acts are constitutionally protected un-
less there are specific circumstances withdrawing th ose 
acts from the scope of that protection. Lawrence, 539 U.S. 
at 578; Marcum , 60 M.J. at 206; United States v. Goings, 
72 M.J. 202, 206-07 (C.A.A.F. 2013); United States v. Cas-
tellano, 72 M.J. 217, 221 (C.A.A.F. 2013). While some 
courts have narrow ly construed Lawrence  as being con-
cerned with sexual intimacy between individuals, see, e.g., 
Cook v. Gates, 528 F.3d 42, 56 (1st Cir. 2008), neither Law-
rence nor logic provide  a reason to protect private sexual 
activity between adults but not private sexual activity con-
ducted alone. Each implicates the same root concerns with 
individual autonomy and privacy. See Lawrence, 539 U.S. 
at 562 (“Liberty protects the person from unwarranted gov-
ernment intrusions into a dwelling or other private places. 
In our tradition the State is not omnipresent in the home.”); 
Goings, 72 M.J. at 206 (“No one disagrees that wholly pri-
vate and consensual sexual activity, without more, falls 
within Lawrence.”); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. Earle, 517 
F.3d 738, 744 (5th Cir. 2008) (framing Lawrence as involv-
ing “the individual’s substantive due process right to en-
gage in private intimate conduct of his or her choosing”).  
Consequently, t he same want of a legitimate govern-
ment interest in regulating sodomy ( absent other factors ) 
as provided for in Lawrence applies just as readily to a 
number of other sexual acts, including solo sexual activity 
(absent other factors). Thus, Marcum’s first prong —
whether the “conduct falls within the liberty interest iden-
tified by the Supreme Court”—is satisfied here. Stirewalt, 
60 M.J. at 304. 
B. Marcum Prong Two 
With prong one answered in the affirmative, the analy-
sis proceeds to Marcum’s second prong—whether the spe-
cific conduct at issue “encompass[es] behavior or factors 
outside the Lawrence analysis.” Id.  
This second prong looks at whether there are aggravat-
ing circumstances that give the government a legitimate 
basis for regulati ng the sexual activity at issue , thereby  
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
7 
 
withdrawing what would otherwise be protected conduct 
from the constitutional zone of privacy . Marcum, 60 M.J. 
at 205. The Lawrence opinion itself highlighted certain fac-
tors that should be considered, such as whether the sexual 
acts involved “minors,” “persons who might be injured or 
coerced,” or “public conduct or prostitution .” 539 U.S. at 
578. However, this list is non-exhaustive and merely pro-
vides some of the circumstances in which the government’s 
interest in regulation may be heightened. See, e.g., Lowe v. 
Swanson, 663 F.3d 258, 264 (6th Cir. 2011)  (upholding in-
cest ban in light of the state’s “paramount concern [of] pro-
tecting the family from the destructive influence of intra -
family, extra-marital sexual contact. This is an important 
state interest that the Lawrence Court did not invalidate”). 
Thus, “the door is held open for lower courts to address 
the scope and nature of the right identified in Lawrence, as 
well as its limitations, based on contexts and factors the 
Supreme Court may not have anticipated or chose not to 
address in Lawrence.” Marcum, 60 M.J. at 205; see also Ro-
cha II, 84 M.J. at 361 (Johnson, J., with whom Hardy, J., 
joined in part, dissenting) (noting “courts have upheld con-
victions for private sexual conduct where other aggravat-
ing factors involving animals and corpses were pre sent,” 
factors outside Lawrence’s text); Lofton v. Sec’y of Dep’t of 
Child. & Fam. Servs. , 358 F.3d 804, 817 (11th Cir. 2004)  
(noting the “[Supreme] Court itself stressed the limited fac-
tual situation it was addressing in Lawrence”). 
Here, the relevant Marcum factor is that Appellee con-
ducted his sexual acts with a childlike sex doll. Thus, the 
aggravating circumstance is the objective nature of the doll 
as a representation of a child, without any inquiry as to the 
subjective intent Appellee fostered while penetrating the 
child sex doll with his penis. Stated differently, the govern-
mental interest in prohibiting the use of childlike sex dolls 
does not depend on the intent of the actor to simulate sex 
with a real child—nor does it depend on  any other subjec-
tive belief or intent of the accused —in the same way that 
obscenity is not defined with respect to the individual’s per-
ception or purpose but rather the material’s objective 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
8 
 
nature. Cf. United States v. Amirault, 173 F.3d 28, 34 (1st 
Cir. 1999) (noting a focus on “a deviant’s subjective re-
sponse could turn innocuous images into pornography”). 
In this context , it is apparent that the lower court  
misunderstood and misapplied the law when it addressed 
the military judge’s instructions to the panel. The military 
judge told the panel  members that in order to convict 
Appellee they would need to find that “the accused engaged 
in sexual acts with a sex doll with the physical characteristics 
of a female child to simulate sexual acts with a minor.” 
(Emphasis added.) However, this italicized phrase was not 
one of the elements of the offense and did not appear on the 
charge sheet , and it improperly injected a subjective 
component into the requirements for a conviction.  The 
military judge’s misidentification of the Marcum factor was 
thus legal error.  Castellano, 72 M.J. at 219 n.6 (It is “the 
military judge’s duty to present the law and identify 
through appropriate instructions those facts or factors that 
may, if found by the trier of fact, place the conduct outside 
the liberty interest identified in Lawrence and recognized 
by Marcum.”). 
The Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals should have  
noted the error by the military judge  but then concluded 
that this mis step was not prejudicial  to Appellee because  
in defining the Marcum  factor in this way, the military 
judge was placing a higher  burden of proof on the Govern-
ment than was actually required as a matter of law. Rocha 
III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, at *25, 2025 WL 211261, at *10. 
Stated differently, b ecause the military judge i nstructed 
the panel members that the Government needed to show 
both the objective nature of the doll and Appellee’s subjec-
tive intent when he penetrated that doll , the lower court 
should have recognized  that by convicting Appellee , the 
panel members necessarily made a finding that both  re-
quirements were met . This distinguishe s what occurred 
here from those situations where “a jury is instructed on 
alternative theories of guilt and returns a general verdict 
that may rest on a legally invalid theory .” Skilling v. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
9 
 
United States , 561 U.S. 358, 414 (2010) (citing Yates v. 
United States, 354 U.S. 298 (1957)).  
Nevertheless, the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
used this error by the military judge as a springboard to 
attack the legitimacy of Appellee’s conviction by proclaim-
ing: “[W]e ourselves are not convinced [Appellee] was sim-
ulating acts with a minor.” Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, 
at *25 n.15, 2025 WL 211261, at *10 n.15. But a s just 
shown, this issue was irrelevant. Therefore, even standing 
alone this misunderstanding of the law by the lower court 
merits a remand of this case for further proper analysis.4   
 It also is clear that the lower court did not find Appel-
lee’s conviction factually insufficient on the basis of the ob-
jective nature of the doll. First, as acknowledged in the lead 
opinion, the lower court “expressly declin ed to decide 
whether or not the sex doll wa s ‘childlike.’ ” Rocha IV, __ 
M.J. at __ n.5 (7 n.5). Instead, the lower court prevaricated 
by stating it was “not convinced the only rational interpre-
tation of the evidence in this case is that the doll resembled 
a child and not a young -looking adult.” Rocha III , 2025 
CCA LEXIS 10, at *25, 2025 WL 211261, at *10.5  
 
4 The lower court’s misunderstanding of this area of the law 
is further demonstrated by a hypothetical it poses in an attempt 
to justify its decision in this case . Specifically, the lower court 
asks: “What if the doll looked like an adult, but the user 
fantasized that it was a child?” Rocha III, 2025 CCA LEXIS 10, 
at *26, 2025 WL 211261, at *11. This query appears to be  an 
attempt to convince the reader that the government must not be 
allowed to regulate a person’s sexual activity with a child sex 
doll because then the government will also be allowed to regulate 
a person’s sexual fantasies. However, that line of reasoning is 
transparently fatuous. As explained above, it is objective actions 
and not subjective thoughts that are  at play here , and 
hypotheticals that revolve around the latter point are both 
pointless and misleading. 
5 Because the objective nature of the doll was central to the 
charged conduct and Marcum factor, the lead opinion  is 
mistaken when it states that “childlike” constitutes “a subjective 
designation that carries no specific legal significance.” Rocha IV, 
__ M.J. at __ ( 8). And although it states that it has  “no doubt 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
10 
 
The equivocal nature of this pronouncement is striking. 
The lower court does not say that it has concluded that the 
sex doll looked like “a young-looking adult” rather than a 
child and that it has therefore concluded that the second 
Marcum factor has not been met here. Rather, the lower 
court merely says that it is “not convinced the only rational 
interpretation” was that the doll looked like a child—but  it 
does not state which of these various “rational interpreta-
tion[s]” it actually has adopted as being factually supported 
by the record of trial. Id., 2025 WL 211261, at *10 (empha-
ses added). The ambiguity of this key point calls out for a 
remand by this Court in order to gain clarity regarding this 
critical determination. And I submit that upon remand the 
Air Force court would be hard- pressed indeed to squarely 
state that the sex doll in this case look ed like a “young-
looking adult” when all the evidence at trial demonstrated 
the opposite. As noted at the outset of this opinion, every 
eyewitness who saw the doll said it looked like a child, the 
trial judge made a factual finding that the doll looked like 
a child, and Appellee himself admitted to investigators that 
“I have, basically, what is a child sex doll,” observing that 
this fact was “kind of obvious .” (Emphases added.) And it 
must not go uncommented upon that when the Govern-
ment made a motion to show the actual sex doll to the 
judges on  the Air Force c ourt so that they could see for  
themselves that it looked like a child, the members of that 
court denied the motion . This denial further brings into 
question the basis upon which the lower court, on remand, 
could justify a conclusion that the sex doll looked like a 
“young-looking adult.”  
Second, there is a technical point that needs to be made 
here. The lower court’s pronouncement that it was “not con-
vinced the only  rational interpretation of the evidence in 
this case was that the doll resembled a child and not a 
 
that the [Air Force court] had an accurate understanding of the 
doll’s objective appearance,” id., this does not demonstrate that 
the lower court made any express finding that the doll was not  
childlike, as would be necessary to find factual insufficiency for 
failure to prove the (correct) Marcum factor. 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
11 
 
young-looking adult” was stated in the context of an anal-
ysis of whether Appellee “was pretending he was having 
sexual intercourse with a child .” Rocha III , 2025 CCA 
LEXIS 10, at *25- 26, 2025 WL 211261, at *10.  By placing 
their markedly equivocal observation in the context of  the 
subjective question of what may have been going through 
the mind of Appellee when he penetrated the sex doll with 
his penis, this sentence did not constitute factfinding by the 
lower court regarding  the objective characteristics of  the 
doll (i.e., whether the proverbial “reasonable person” would 
objectively conclude that the sex doll looked like a child or 
a young looking adult). As a result, the lower court’s state-
ment should in no way serve as a basis to affirm in this 
case. 
C. Marcum Prong Three 
Although the Air Force court’s legal errors in regard to 
its analysis of the second Marcum  factor are sufficient in 
themselves to mandate a further  remand here, it is im-
portant to note that the lower court also erred in its analy-
sis of Marcum  prong three . This prong  looks at whether 
unique considerations of the military environment militate 
in favor of limiting the privacy rights that individuals hold 
in the civilian world.  Marcum, 60 M.J. at 207- 08. The Air 
Force court did recognize that “a determination that the 
conduct was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed 
forces could satisfy the Marcum  factors.” Rocha III, 2025 
CCA LEXIS 10, at *27, 2025 WL 211261, at *11 (citing Go-
ings, 72 M.J. at 207). However, in balancing the interests 
of the  Government and  Appellee, the lower court  then 
wrongly weighed whether the “potential discredit to the 
service” was outweighed by Appellee’s privacy interest in 
being able to masturbate “in solitude, in secret, and in pri-
vate.” Id. at *28, at *28, 2025 WL 211261, at *11. 
Though it is true that private masturbation by a mem-
ber of the military without some aggravating circumstance 
would not  discredit the armed services, the Air Force 
court’s sanitized version of what actually happened in this 
case flagrantly ignores the childlike nature of the sex doll 
which Appellee used during his sexual activity . In other 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
12 
 
words, the lower court’s analysis and conclusion proceeded 
from an incorrect definition of the Government’s interests 
here. It is universally acknowledged that conduct by mem-
bers of the Armed Forces may be service discrediting de-
pending on “(1) the time, (2) the place, (3) the circum-
stances, and (4) the purpose for” an  act, but  a proper 
analysis of this issue can only  proceed from a  legitimate 
characterization of the true nature of the underlying act . 
United States v. Guerrero, 33 M.J. 295, 298 (C.M.A. 1991).  
Further, in deciding whether his conduct was service 
discrediting, I note that the Air Force c ourt did not even 
acknowledge Appellee’s own admission that “it’s obvious 
it’s not good to have something like [a child sex doll] on a 
military base.” At trial the panel members found Appellee’s 
conduct to be service discrediting, and the lower court’s de-
cision to overturn this determination was groundless. 
The Air Force c ourt’s determination regarding the 
proper balancing of the opposing interests in this case ar-
guably constituted a legal determination, and as such , le-
gal error. However, even if construed as a factual determi-
nation, the lower court’s analysis was intertwined with a 
mischaracterization of the Lawrence interest and the con-
duct at issue, and consequently, reversal and remand of 
this case is not only warranted but required. 
It is evident that the Air Force Court of Criminal Ap-
peals failed to comply with this Court’s mandate on remand 
and failed to apply correct legal and constitu tional princi-
ples when reviewing Appellee’s conviction. Therefore, this 
Court clearly should have vacated the lower court’s deci-
sion and remanded the case once again for a proper factual 
sufficiency review. 
V. Conclusion 
The Court’s affirmance of the lower court  reverberates 
beyond this particular case.  It must be underscored that 
the Air Force Court  of Criminal Appeals centers its 
decision in this case on constitutional grounds and glibly 
declares: “At most, the conduct involves a lifelike sex doll 
that may resemble a child.” Rocha III , 2025 CCA LEXIS 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
13 
 
10, at *30, 2025 WL 211261, at *12. By doing so, the judges 
of the lower court bring into question not only their own 
probity but also the constitutionality of any statute 
criminalizing the possession of child sex dolls, such as 
those already enacted in eleven states.
6 At the very least, 
any general order on this topic applicable to Air Force and 
Space Force personnel will be unenforceable as long as  
Rocha remains intact.  
And so, hundreds of thousands of service members who 
serve in the Air Force and Space Force are now authorized 
to penetrate with their penis the anal and vaginal openings 
of child sex dolls while on base and at their leisure. This 
result is indefensible. Moreover,  one can surmise that in 
the civilian world, internet forums and chat rooms dedi-
cated to such topics will boast that even the military justice 
system now recognizes that the unabashed sexualization of 
children is acceptable. And thus—to use a phrase  coined by 
the eminent social theorist and United States Senator Dan-
iel Patrick Moynihan—this decision of the Air Force Court 
of Criminal Appeals will regrettably ensure that the pro-
cess of “defining deviancy down” will proceed apace.
7 
The decision by a majority of this Court to gloss over the 
reversible errors of the Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
 
6 See Ariz. R ev. S tat. Ann. § 13 -1429 (2023); Fla. S tat. 
§ 847.011(5) (2022); Haw. R ev. S tat. § 712- 1216.5 (2021); Ky. 
Rev. Stat. Ann. § 531.365 (2024); La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 14:81.6 
(2024); N.C. Gen. Stat. § 14-190.17A (2024); S.D. Codified Laws 
§ 22-24A-3.1 (2021); Tenn. Code Ann.  § 39-17-910 (2019); Tex. 
Penal Code Ann.  § 43.231 (West 2025);  Utah Code Ann. 
§ 76-5c-209 (West 2025); Wis. Stat. § 944.19 (2024). Legislation 
has also been introduced in Congress and state legislatures. See 
CREEPER Act 2.0, H.R.  1186, 119th Cong. (2025); H.R. 1647, 
2025 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Pa. 2025). 
7 In a famous essay entitled “Defining Deviancy Down,” Sen-
ator Moynihan chronicled the normalization of, and desensitiza-
tion to, behaviors previously considered aberrant.  Daniel Pat-
rick Moynihan, Defining Devianc y Down , 62 Am. Scholar  17 
(1993). 
 
United States v. Rocha, No. 25-0157/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom 
Judge SPARKS joins, dissenting 
 
14 
 
and decline to vacate the lower court’s opinion and remand 
the case for a proper analysis consistent with the relevant 
facts and the applicable law  is profoundly puzzling and 
flatly wrong. Therefore, I dissent. 