This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Salvador JACINTO, 
Aviation Structural Mechanic First Class  
United States Navy, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0144 
Crim. App. No. 201800325 
 
Argued January 29, 2025—Decided February 2, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Roger E. Mattioli (trial), Ryan J.  
Sears (DuBay hearing), and Michael F.  
Whitican (DuBay hearing) 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Jesse B. Neumann, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Major Colin W. Hotard, USMC. 
 
For Appellee : Lieutenant Lan T.  Nguyen, JAGC, 
USN (argued);  Major Candace G. White, USMC, 
Captain Jacob R. Carmin , USMC, Lieutenant  K. 
Matthew Parker, JAGC, USN , and Brian K. Keller, 
Esq. (on brief); Colonel Joseph M. Jennings, USMC, 
and Commander John T. Cole, JAGC, USN. 
 
Amicus Curiae on Behalf of E.B. and in Support of 
Appellee: Peter Coote, Esq. (on brief). 
 
_______________ 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
PER CURIAM. 
Procedural History 
Appellant was charged with, among other offenses, 
sexually abusing E.B., his minor stepdaughter. On the eve 
of Appellant’s 2018 trial, the defense received  E.B.’s 
medical records which the defense  had been seeking  
throughout the pretrial proceedings . These records  
indicated that when E.B. was hospitalized for in -patient 
mental health treatment shortly after accusing Appellant 
of sexual abuse, she may have been experiencing psychotic 
agitation, and she may have been prescribed Thorazine, an 
antipsychotic drug.  Despite this late disclosure  of what 
Appellant’s counsel referred to as a “bombshell ,”1 the 
military judge denied a defense motion for a continuance.  
At trial, a  court-martial panel convicted Appellant , 
contrary to his pleas, of one specification of rape of a child 
(E.B.) and three specifications of sexual abuse of a child 
(also E.B.), in violation of Article 120b, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920b (2012).
2 The 
panel sentenced Appellant to a bad-conduct discharge and 
confinement for eight years.  The convening authority  
approved the sentence and granted Appellant three days of 
confinement credit. The United States Navy-Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) then affirmed the 
findings and sentence. United States v. Jacinto (Jacinto I), 
79 M.J. 870, 875 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. 2020) , set aside in 
part by United States v. Jacinto ( Jacinto II), 81 M.J. 350, 
355 (C.A.A.F. 2021). 
 
1 Trial defense counsel explained that the question of 
whether E.B. was experiencing psychotic agitation at the time of 
her accusation against Appellant “goes to the heart of [E.B.’s] 
credibility, memory, and ability to accurately perceive events.” 
(Internal quotation marks omitted.) 
2 Appellant also was convicted of an additional specification 
of rape of a child (involving E.B.’s sister), in violation of Article 
120b, and two specifications of child endangerment by culpable 
negligence involving E.B. and her friend , in violation of Article 
134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2012). 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
Appellant appealed his conviction to this Court, arguing 
that the military judge abused his discretion  when he 
denied the defense motion for a continuance and when he 
denied a defense motion for in camera review  of E.B.’s 
mental health records.  Upon analyzing these issues, w e 
concluded that “[b]ecause the record before us  is unclear 
and incomplete , we cannot make an informed decision 
about whether the military judge’s crucial factual findings 
are clearly erroneous.” Jacinto II , 81  M.J. at 354.  We 
specifically noted the following: 
there is a crucial dispute between the parties 
about whether the medical records indicate that 
E.B.’s physician diagnosed E.B. with psychotic 
agitation and authorized attending medical 
personnel to administer Thorazine when  needed, 
or that E.B.’s physician was merely indicating in 
the charts that medical personnel were 
authorized to administer Thorazine if needed in 
the event E.B. subsequently displayed symptoms 
of psychotic agitation. 
Id. We then set aside the lower court’s decision in part and 
remanded for additional proceedings  to obtain “any other 
evidence (such as affidavits from medical providers) 
relevant to whether E.B. was diagnosed with psychotic 
agitation in May 2017” and to make “any other findings of 
fact necessary to resolve”  the continuance issue. Id. at 
354-55. 
On remand, the CCA ordered a DuBay hearing,
3 which 
resulted in the DuBay  judge ordering the production of  
E.B.’s entire hospital record. However, the DuBay  judge 
did not resolve whether E.B. was diagnosed with psychotic 
agitation in May 2017. Nevertheless, t he CCA concluded 
that the military judge abused his discretion in denying the 
continuance motion,  but the lower court  then held that 
Appellant was not prejudiced by the military judge’s error. 
United States v. Jacinto (Jacinto III), No. 201800325, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 14, at *11 -13, 2024 WL 234699, at *5 (N -M. 
 
3 United States v. DuBay , 17 C.M.A. 147, 37 C.M.R. 411 
(1967). 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 18, 2024) (unpublished) . As a result, 
the CCA again affirmed the findings and sentence. Id.  at 
*17, 2024 WL 234699, at *7. 
We then granted review of two issues: 
I. Did the lower court fail to comply with this 
Court’s remand order? 
II. Did Appellant suffer prejudice from the 
military judge’s erroneous continuance denial? 
United States v. Jacinto (Jacinto IV), 85 M.J. 96 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (order granting review). Following oral argument, we 
ordered the Government to submit an affidavit from Dr. 
Harwant Gill, E.B.’s treating psychiatrist, to address “why 
E.B. was prescribed Thorazine and whether E.B. exhibited 
psychotic agitation in May 2017.” United States v. Jacinto 
(Jacinto V ), 85 M.J. 339 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (order). The 
Government procured Dr. Gill’s affidavit, but this affidavit 
was “unresponsive on these points.” United States v. 
Jacinto (Jacinto VI), 85 M.J. 428, 430 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (per 
curiam). Consequently, we remanded th e record yet again 
for further factfinding regarding two key questions: 
1. Why was E.B. prescribed Thorazine in May 
2017? 
2. Did E.B. exhibit signs of psychotic agitation in 
May 2017? 
Id. 
The CCA ordered another DuBay  hearing. Dr. Gill 
appeared at a closed session of the hearing and only the 
DuBay judge questioned him.  Dr. Gill stated that he had 
recently reviewed the relevant portions of E.B.’s medical 
records from when she was hospitalized in May of 2017. Dr. 
Gill testified that he was one of E.B.’s treating physicians 
at the hospital and he prescribed Thorazine “as a standard 
precautionary medication available to nurses.”  He 
explained that he took this step just in case any instances 
of “acute agitation, self -injury, [or] attempts to harm 
others” arose but the nurses could not immediately contact 
a physician. He stated that prescribing Thorazine on an “as 
needed” basis was standard “admission protocol” for 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
patients E.B.’s age, and thus this prescription was “not 
specific to E.B.’s presenting symptoms or illness.” Dr. Gill 
also testified that E.B. did not  exhibit signs of psychotic 
agitation and that E.B. denied experiencing hallucinations 
and delusions. Further, Dr. Gill  stated that E.B. was not  
“actually administered Thorazine.” 
After this testimony, the defense sought to qualify Dr. 
Gill as an expert and to pose questions to him. The 
defense’s stated concern was that Dr. Gill’s limited 
testimony about E.B.’s May 2017 hospital stay did not 
reveal anything about whether E.B. was ex periencing 
psychotic agitation at the time she made the abuse 
allegation against Appellant, which was prior to her 
hospitalization. The defense wanted to question Dr. Gill 
about the extent of his memory of E.B. and the signs and 
symptoms of psychotic agitation. The military judge denied 
the defense’s request, stating that the purpose of the 
hearing was limited to two questions and these two 
questions had been answered. As for the defense request to 
qualify Dr. Gill as an expert, the DuBay  judge found that 
it would be unhelpful and irrelevant. 
Upon completing the hearing, the DuBay  judge issued 
written findings of facts  which were consistent with Dr. 
Gill’s testimony. The CCA adopted the se findings of facts 
and answered this Court’s questions as follows: 
    1. Why was E .B. prescribed Thorazine in May 
2017?  
Answer: E.B. was prescribed Thorazine as a 
standard precautionary measure for use on an “as 
needed” basis as part of an admissions protocol for 
all patients in E.B.’s age group. The Thorazine 
prescription was not specific to E.B .’s case or 
circumstances. In May 2017, E.B. was never 
administered Thorazine as it was not needed. 
    2. Did E .B. exhibit signs of psychotic agitation 
in May 2017?  
Answer: No.  
United States v. Jacinto , No. 201800325 (N -M. Ct. Crim. 
App. Sep. 22, 2025)  (response to order ). The CCA then 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
returned the record to this Court for further review of the 
two July 2024 granted issues. 
Upon the record’s return, this Court granted 
Appellant’s motion to make additional arguments relative 
to the DuBay  hearing. Appellant has now raised two 
additional issues for this Court to consider: 
I. 
Did the lower court fail to comply with this Court’s 
remand order? 
II. 
Was [A]ppellant denied his constitutional right to 
confront the witnesses against him when the 
DuBay judge refused to let the Defense examine 
or impeach Dr. Gill? 
Discussion 
As explained below, we answer the first additional issue 
in the negative  because the CCA and the DuBay  judge 
complied with this Court’s May 2025 remand order. As to 
the second additional issue, we hold that even if the 
military judge violated Appellant’s constitutional rights by 
denying him the opportunity to examin e or impeach Dr. 
Gill, the violation was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  
As also explained below, we resolve the July 2024 
granted issues in the Government’s favor. Specifically, we 
hold that original Issue I is moot and that original Issue II 
must be answered  in the negative because the military 
judge’s erroneous continuance ruling was harmless . We 
therefore affirm the decision of the lower court. 
Additional Issue I 
Appellant argues that the DuBay judge did not comply 
with this Court’s remand order because “the most recent 
DuBay hearing centered exclusively on the content of 
E.B.’s treatment records, which occurred only after she 
made her allegations,” and therefore, the hearing never 
addressed the issue of whether E.B. exhibited signs of 
psychotic agitation in May 2017 before her hospitalization. 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Appellant asserts that the DuBay  judge should have 
allowed Appellant to ask Dr. Gill about “other instances of 
E.B.’s behavior” because these instances would give insight 
into whether E.B. experienced psychotic agitation at the 
time she made the allegations  against Appellant. Because 
the military judge denied the defense request, Appellant 
argues that “the record has not been ‘fully developed on the 
psychotic agitation issue.’ ” (Citation omitted.) 
Contrary to Appellant’s position, we conclude that the 
CCA and the DuBay judge fully complied with this Court’s 
May 2025 remand order. In its remand, this Court sought 
answers to two questions: (1) why was E.B. prescribed 
Thorazine in May 2017; and (2)  did E.B. exhibit signs of 
psychotic agitation in May 2017? Jacinto VI, 85  M.J. at 
430. With the assistance of the DuBay  judge, the CCA 
answered both questions. Therefore, we answer Additional 
Issue I in the negative and hold that the CCA complied 
with this Court’s remand order. 
Additional Issue II 
Appellant next argues that the DuBay judge violated 
his constitutional right to confront Dr. Gill by not allowing 
the defense to question the doctor during the DuBay  
hearing. Specifically, Appellant argues that when the 
DuBay judge refused to allow the defense to question Dr. 
Gill “about E.B.’s behavior during the relevant time 
period,” the military judge “violated Appellant’s ‘right to 
call witnesses whose testimony [would have been] material 
and favorable to his defense.’ ” (Citation omitted.) Further, 
Appellant argues that his confrontatio n rights were 
violated when the DuBay  judge refused to let the defense 
examine Dr. Gill about (a) the limits of his memory of E.B., 
and (b) an email from Dr. Gill to the DuBay  judge stating 
that E.B.’s counsel had attempted to discourage Dr. Gill 
from testifying at the DuBay hearing. 
We begin our analysis by noting that t his Court has 
repeatedly stated that a DuBay  hearing must afford an 
accused due process, and we have explicitly held  that due 
process in a DuBay  hearing includes the right to 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
cross-examine witnesses. For example, in United States v. 
Miller, 47 M.J. 352, 359 (C.A.A.F. 1997), we wrote: 
Post-trial DuBay hearings must satisfy basic 
due process concepts. United States v. Stone , 26 
M.J. 401 (CMA 1988); United States v. Levite , 25 
M.J. 334 (CMA 1987). At the very least, accused 
persons should have notice of the post -trial 
hearing, the right to be heard at the proceeding, 
the right to present witnesses and “be represented 
by counsel, have an opportunity to cross -examine 
witnesses, . . . and have a verbatim record of the 
proceedings.” Levite, 25 M.J. at 339.  
(Emphasis added.) (Alteration in original.) 
That said, even if the DuBay judge in this case violated 
Appellant’s constitutional rights by not allowing him to 
question Dr. Gill, any error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt. We reach this conclusion primarily for 
three reasons.  
First, the record indicates that the proposed line of 
questioning by the defense would not have elicited evidence 
about whether E.B. was suffering from psychotic agitation 
before her hospitalization.  Dr. Gill’s testimony was based 
on his review of the hospital records, not his independent 
recollection of what E.B. might have told him a bout her 
behavior prior to her hospitalization. 
Second, because Dr. Gill openly acknowledged that his 
testimony was based on his review of E.B.’s hospital 
records and not based on his independent memory of E.B., 
the limits of his memory of E.B. were already clear.  
And third, the DuBay judge was already aware of the 
ex parte communication issue because Dr. Gill had emailed 
the DuBay judge about the actions of E.B.’s counsel.  
For these reasons, we conclude that any error 
committed by the DuBay judge when he declined to allow 
defense counsel to question Dr. Gill was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt.  
We now turn our attention to the issues that we 
originally granted in July of 2024. 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
Original Issue I 
Appellant argues that the CCA failed to comply with 
this Court’s July 2021 remand order. Appellant cites two 
specific instances of noncompliance: (1)  the CCA failed to 
“resolve[] the crucial dispute of whether E.B. was suffering 
from psychotic agitation” at the time of the allegations; and 
(2) the CCA did not identify the medical records that 
“should have been produced.” (Citation omitted.) (Internal 
quotation marks omitted.) However, both alleged instances 
of noncompliance have now been remedied. 
Starting with Appellant’s second point , we now have 
E.B.’s entire hospital record. At the time of our 2021 
remand, o ur concern was that information missing from 
the record prevented us from assessing the trial military 
judge’s factual findings and “ the questions surrounding 
E.B.’s diagnosis and her Thorazine prescription for 
psychotic agitation.” Jacinto II, 81 M.J. at  354. But with 
the hospital records  before us and with  the information 
produced during the most recent DuBay  hearing, that 
concern is now resolved. 
In terms of Appellant’s first point, the information 
resulting from our May 2025 remand for further 
factfinding demonstrates that at the time of her May 2017 
hospitalization, E.B. was not  suffering from psychotic 
agitation and Thorazine was not  administered to her.  We 
recognize that Appellant would like additional information 
regarding E.B.’s mental health at the time she made her 
allegations against Appellant —which was prior to her 
hospitalization—but that wa s not within the scope of the 
remanded issue.  See Jacinto  VI, 85  M.J. at 430 n.3 
(recommending that E.B.’s treating hospital physician be 
provided “with relevant portions of E.B.’s medical records 
so that he can attempt to answer the k ey [remand] 
questions”); Jacinto II, 81 M.J. at 355 (remanding to obtain 
relevant evidence “to whether E.B. was diagnosed with 
psychotic agitation in May 2017”). Accordingly, because the 
CCA has now provided us with information  responsive to 
our remand order, we conclude that Issue I is moot. 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
Original Issue II 
Original Issue II asks whether Appellant suffered 
prejudice from the military judge’s erroneo us denial of a 
defense request for a continuance. Appellant  agrees with 
the CCA that the trial military judge abused his discretion 
when denying the defense’s motion for a continuance, and 
the Government does not challenge the CCA’s conclusion 
in this Court.4 Therefore, we will assume that the military 
judge did indeed abuse his discretion and we will only  
consider whether Appellant was prejudiced by this error.  
This Court reviews questions of prejudice de novo. 
United States v. King , 83  M.J. 115, 120 (C.A.A.F. 2023).  
“When a military judge abuses his discretion denying a 
continuance . . . , the reviewing court will not grant relief 
unless the appellant suffers prejudice.” Jacinto II, 81 M.J. 
at 354 (citing Article 59(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 859(a) 
(2012)). That is, the error must “materially prejudice[] the 
substantial rights of the accused.” Article 59(a), UCMJ.  
“Where no harmful consequence resulted from denial of  a 
continuance, there is no ground for complaint . . . .” United 
States v. Kinard , 21 C.M.A. 300, 306, 45 C.M.R. 74, 80 
(1972) (citation omitted) (intern al quotation  marks 
omitted) (discussing the denial of a continuance in the 
context of withdrawal and replacement of counsel); see also 
United States v. Wellington, 58 M.J. 420, 423, 425 (C.A.A.F. 
2003) (assuming the military judge abused his discretion 
in denying the motion for a continuance after  the 
government’s untimely provision of the victim ’s medical 
records, but concluding the appellant was not prejudiced as 
demonstrated by the trial defense counsel ’s effective 
cross-examination of the victim’s doctors). 
 
4 E.B., as Amicus Curiae, disagrees with the CCA’s 
conclusion that the military judge  erred when he denied the  
continuance, but E.B.  confines her discussion to prejudice 
because this Court granted review of  the prejudice issue.  
Because there is consensus that prejudice is the only issue before 
this Court, we simply evaluate the question of prejudice. 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Here, t he military judge’s erroneous denial of the 
defense request for a continuance was harmless.  We now 
know that E.B. did not exhibit signs of psychotic agitation 
and she was not administered Thorazine.  Therefore, a  
continuance would not have given Appellant’s trial defense 
counsel any substantive new material to attack E.B.’s 
credibility. More specifically, there was insufficient 
evidence in E.B.’s hospital records  for the defense to 
develop and pursue a psychotic agitation defense even if 
the defense had more time prior to trial to examine those 
records. As such, there was “no harmful consequence [that] 
resulted from [the] denial of a continuance” and therefore 
the error was harmless. Kinard, 21 C.M.A. at  306, 45 
C.M.R. at 80 (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). 
In seeking to persuade us to the contrary, Appellant 
presents two arguments for why he suffered prejudice. 
First, he argues there was prejudice to his right to present 
a defense because without the continuance, his defense  
counsel could not “investigate and integrate relevant 
information about E.B.’s mental state” after its “strategy 
was focused on E.B.’s motive to fabricate.” However, there 
does not appear to be any substantive, admissible evidence 
in E.B.’s hospital records that would have helped the 
defense in this regard. Furthermore,  evidence regarding 
E.B.’s conduct prior to her hospitalization was not 
privileged and so the defense could have developed th at 
evidence independent of the  denied motion for a 
continuance.  
Second, Appellant argues that E.B.’s Thorazine 
prescription, even if it was not administered, was still 
relevant to a trial defense theory (that he would have made 
had the continuance been granted) because E.B.’s odd pre-
hospital behavior exemplified “why it was necessary and 
appropriate to prescribe Thorazine upon her admission.” 
However, this argument is effectively undermined by  the 
DuBay judge’s finding that the Thorazine prescription 
“was not specific to E.B.’s case or circumstances” and 
instead was prescribed as a precaution not only for E.B. but 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
for other similarly situated patients. Although Appellant 
does not bear the burden here, we are not persuaded by his 
reasoning for why there wa s prejudice resulting from the 
military judge’s error.  
Conclusion 
After considering the additional factfinding  and after 
further reviewing the granted issues , we affirm the 
judgment of the United States Navy -Marine Corps Court 
of Criminal Appeals. 