This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Nicholas J. MOORE, Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0110 
Crim. App. No. 40442 
 
Argued October 21, 2025—Decided January 23, 2026 
 
Military Judges: Colin P. Eichenberger and Dayle P. 
Percle (post-trial processing and remand) 
 
For Appellant: Colonel Matthew D. Talcott (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Thomas J. Alford , Lieutenant 
Colonel Jenny A. Liabenow , and Mary Ellen Payne,  
Esq. (on brief); Major Kate E. Lee.  
 
For Appellee: Major Megan R. Crouch  (argued); 
Megan P. Marinos, Esq. 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON  joined. Judge HARDY  filed a 
separate opinion concurring in the judgment. 
_______________
  
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court-martial found Appellee guilty, contrary 
to his pleas, of one specification of sexual assault without 
consent in violation of Article 120( b)(2)(A), Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920(b)(2)(A) (2018).  
The United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
(AFCCA) set aside th is finding on grounds that the 
evidence was legally  and factually  insufficient. United 
States v. Moore, No. ACM 40442 (f rev), 2024 CCA LEXIS 
485, at *3, 2024 WL 4765303, at *1 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. 
Nov. 13, 2024 ) (unpublished). Relying on this Court’s 
recent decision in United S tates v. Mendoza, 85 M.J. 213  
(C.A.A.F. 202 4), the AFCCA reasoned that “ the 
Government offered no evidence that [the alleged victim] 
was capable of consenting and did not consent .” Moore, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 485, at *17, 2024 WL 4765303, at *6. The 
AFCCA explained that the Government  instead had 
offered evidence only that the alleged victim “was asleep, 
and therefore not capable of consenting when the sexual 
act occurred.” Id. 
Major General Rebecca R. Vernon , U.S. Air Force,  
certified the question “ whether the Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals erred in applying United States v. 
Mendoza . . . to find  appellee’s sexual assault conviction  
legally and factually insufficient. ”
1 We answer this 
question in the affirmative. We hold that the evidence was 
legally sufficient, and because the AFCCA did not consider 
all applicable legal principles, w e r emand the case for a 
new factual sufficiency review consistent with this opinion. 
 
1 Major General Vernon ’s signature on the certificate for 
review is accompanied by this notation: “Performing The Duties 
Of The Judge Advocate General .” Appellee filed a motion  to 
compel discovery concerning Major General Vernon’s authority 
to certify the case and her compliance with the notification 
requirements in Article 67(a)(2), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  867(a)(2) 
(2024). This Court denied the motion. United States v. Moore, __ 
M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025) (interlocutory order). After considering 
the parties’ arguments, we are satisfied that this Court has 
jurisdiction here. 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
I. Background 
The specification of sexual assault in violation of Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, alleged that Appellee “[d]id, at or near 
Hill Air Force Base, Utah, on or about 8 February 2022, 
commit a sexual act upon Airman First Class [A.B.], by 
penetrating her vulva with his finger, with an intent to 
gratify his sexual desire, without the consent of Airman 
First Class [A.B.].” 
A.B. testified at trial that she had never had a romantic 
relationship with Appellee.  She further testified that 
Appellee was a “mutual friend” and that she and Appellee 
“didn’t really go out and spend time together.”  A.B. denied 
that “anything ever romantic happened between [her] and 
Airman Moore,” that she “ever felt like there was any sort 
of flirtation between the two of” them, and that she ever 
felt that Appellee “ was making any sort of advances ” 
toward her. On the contrary, A.B.  testified that 
“everything . . . had strictly been platonic up until this 
point.”  
Turning to the night in question, A.B. testified that she 
hosted three a irmen in her dorm room for an informal 
gathering that included eating dinner and watching 
television. She further testified that after the two other 
airmen departed,  she and Appellee  continued watching 
television while sitting next to each other on a couch.  
A.B. testified that she and Appellee had some physical 
contact while they were watching television , explaining: 
“[M]y feet were brought onto the couch. It was a small 
couch, so my feet  were, like, touching his leg a little bit. ”  
She further testified that Appellee then “ lifted his feet up 
and actually put them  . . . over [her].” But A.B. testified 
that she did not consider this odd because she “grew up 
around a bunch of brothers” and her “brothers would 
always do the same thing.” She denied that she considered 
the action “any kind of flirtation or sexual advance .” She 
denied that she was “pressing again st him” when she fell 
asleep. She denied that there was an y “cuddling” or 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
“spooning.” A.B. further testified that she was fully dressed 
while on the couch. 
A.B. testified that she fell asleep on the couch. She  
further testified that she  awoke a short time later when 
she “felt Airman Moore inside of me,” which she clarified to 
mean his fingers were  “[i]nside of [her] vaginal area” and 
that they were “penetrating [her] vulva.” She testified that 
she “could feel the physical sensation of those fingers being 
removed from [her]  as he pulled his hand away.”  She 
testified that she d id not “ever consent to that.” She also 
testified that she discovered that pieces of her clothing had 
been removed. 
A.B. testified that she pushed Appellee off her and 
asked, “[w]hat the [expletive] are you doing?” A.B. testified 
that Appellee responded, “You’re right, you’re right.” A.B. 
testified that she  told Appellee to leave her quarters and 
Appellee complied.  A.B. testified that she  then 
immediately ran crying to a friend’s quarters. A nurse and 
four other witnesses testified that A.B. told them about the 
incident shortly after it occurred.  
A general court-martial found Appellee guilty, contrary 
to his plea, of the specification of sexual assault without 
consent. Appellee was sentenced to a dishonorable 
discharge, confinement for eighteen months, forfeiture of 
all pay and allowances, and reduction to the grade of E -1. 
Appellee raised seven issues on appeal , but t he AFCCA 
considered only Appellee’s arguments that the evidence 
was legally and factually insufficient and that finding him 
guilty of sexual assault without consent b ased solely on 
evidence that A.B. was sleeping violate d his due process 
rights. Moore, 2024 CCA LEXIS 485, at *2 -3, 2024 WL 
4765303, at *1.  The AFCCA held that the evidence was 
legally insufficient because “the Government ’s evidence 
presented during Appell[ee]’s court-martial was limited to 
the fact that [A.B.] was asleep, and therefore not capable of 
consenting when the sexual act occurred.” Id. at *17, 2024 
WL 4765303, at *6. The AFCCA held that the evidence was 
factually insufficient “for the same reasons.” Id . at *1 8, 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
2024 WL 4765303, at *6. 2 Accordingly, the AFCCA set 
aside the finding of guilty and dismissed the charge and its 
specification with prejudice. Id., 2024 WL 4765303, at *6. 
II. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews de novo the legal sufficiency of the 
evidence. United States v. King, 78 M.J. 218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 
2019). “The test for legal sufficiency is whether, after 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the 
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” United States v. Gutierrez , 73 M.J. 172, 175 
(C.A.A.F. 2014)  (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Bennitt , 72 M.J. 266, 268 
(C.A.A.F. 2013)). This Court may review whether a Court 
of Criminal Appeals (CCA)  applied “correct le gal 
principles” in performing its factual sufficiency review. 
United States v. Harvey , 85 M.J. 127, 129 (C.A.A.F. 2024)  
(internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted). 
III. Discussion 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ,  establishes the offense of 
sexual assault without consent. Manual for Courts-
Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 60.a.(b)(2)(A) (2019 ed.) 
(MCM). It provides: “Any person subject to this chapter 
who— . . . (2) commits a sexual act upon another person —
(A) without the consent of the other person  . . . is guilty of 
sexual assault and shall be punished as a court -martial 
may direct.” 10 U.S.C. §  920(b)(2)(A). The government 
therefore must prove two elements beyond a reasonable 
doubt: “(i) That the accused committed a sexual act upon 
another person; and (ii) That the accused did so without the 
consent of the other person. ” MCM pt. IV, para. 
60.b.(2)(d)(i)-(ii). 
 
2 Although the AFCCA discussed the due process issue, it did 
not decide it. Appellee asserts in his brief that the AFCCA found 
a due process violation. We do not see this conclusion in the 
AFCCA’s opinion.  
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, differs from Article s 
120(b)(2)(B) and 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, which establish the 
offense of sexual assault of a person who is asleep, 
unconscious, or otherwise unaware the act is occurring and 
the offense of sexual assault when the other person i s 
incapable of consenting , respectively. MCM pt. IV, para s. 
60.b.(2)(e)-(f). Those two offenses do not contain a 
“without . . . consent” element. 10 U.S.C. §§  920(b)(2)(B), 
920(b)(3)(A). Instead, they require proof of an element that 
the victim was sleeping or that the victim was incapable of 
consenting because of impairment by an intoxicant. Id. 
Here, t he parties dispute the legal and factual 
sufficiency of the evidence to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element  in Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ. The Government argues that it proved this element 
through Appellee’s own incriminating statements  and 
“direct and circumstantial evidence showing that [ A.B.] 
never gave consent before falling asleep, awoke as the 
nonconsensual sexual act was happening, physically and 
verbally resisted the ongoing sexual act, and promptly 
reported the offense.”  Appellee respo nds that the 
Government “ cannot charge sexual assault without 
consent and then attempt to prove lack of consent solely by 
arguing the victim is incapable of consenting” because she 
was asleep . The victim’s sleep, Appellee contends, would 
only be sufficient to establish an element of an offense if 
the Government had charged him with violating Article 
120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ, which it did not. 
A. Governing Legal Principles 
Having considered the parties’ arguments, we are 
persuaded that the resolution of the certified question  
depends on the application of three legal principles. 
The first legal principle is this Court’s holding in 
Mendoza: “[T]he Government cannot . . . prove the absence 
of consent under Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, by merely  
establishing that the victim” was incapable of consenting  
at the time of the sexual act.  Mendoza, 85 M.J. at 222 
(emphasis added). The Court  reasoned in Mendoza that if 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
the government could prove lack of consent merely by 
showing incapacity to consent, then other portions of 
Article 120, UCMJ, would become surplusage. Id. at 
219-20. “[E]very sexual act committed upon a victim who is 
incapable of consenting under subsection (b)(3)(A)” because 
of intoxication, the Court explained, “would also qualify as 
a sexual assault under subsection (b)(2)(A) because the 
victim did not consent.” Id. at 220. If that  were so, then 
Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, would serve no purpose. Id. 
In Mendoza, the government presented evidence that 
the alleged victim was incapacitated by intoxication at the 
time that the sexual act occurred. Id. at 221. In this case, 
by contrast, the Government presented evidence that A.B. 
was asleep at the time when the sexual act occurred. 
Appellee, however, argues that the reasoning in Mendoza 
should apply “equally to cases where the Government 
charges sexual assault without consent and then argues 
lack of consent is met because the victim was asleep.” We 
are persuaded by this argument because we see no 
distinction between being unable to consent because of 
intoxication and being unable to consent because of sleep 
in this context. This is consistent with our reasoning in 
United States v. Casillas , where we explained that the 
government “could not prove lack of consent [under Article 
120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ] by establishing that the victim was 
asleep at the time of the act.” 86 M.J. 94, 102 (C.A.A.F. 
2025). We thus conclude that the principle of Mendoza 
applies to cases involving sleeping victims. 
The first legal principle has important consequences. In 
an uncontested case, a plea of  guilty to a specification of 
sexual assault without consent in violation of Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, is not provident if the accused admits 
solely that the victim was sleepi ng or incapacitated when 
the sexual act occurred. In a contested case, if the accused 
moves for a finding of not guilty under Rule for 
Courts-Martial 917(a), the military judge may not deny the 
motion based solely on evidence that the victim was asleep 
or incapacitated. A military judge also may not instruct the 
members that they may find the “without . . . consent” 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
element to be proved beyond a reasonable doubt based 
solely on evidence that the victim was asleep  or 
incapacitated. And on appeal, a CCA may not find that the 
evidence is factually sufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element solely because the CCA finds 
that the evidence proved the victim was asleep or 
incapacitated. Similarly, neither a CCA nor this Court may 
hold that  the evidence  is legally sufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element in Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, solely because there was evidence that the victim 
was asleep or incapacitated. 
The second legal principle is this: If a rational trier of 
fact could find from the evidence both  that the victim did 
not consent before falling asleep and  that the sexual act  
subsequently occurred while the victim was asleep, the 
evidence is legally sufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element of  Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ. We are persuaded by the Government’s argument 
that this second legal principle logically flows from Article 
120(g)(7)(B), UCMJ , which states: “ A sleeping, 
unconscious, or inc ompetent person cannot consent .” Put 
simply, if a victim did not consent  to a sexual act before 
falling asleep, and the victim later could not consent to a 
sexual act while asleep, then a sexual act occurring while 
the victim is asleep is “without . . . consent.”3 
This second legal principle  is consistent  with Article 
120(g)(7)(C), UCMJ , which provides that : “ All the 
surrounding circumstances are to be considered in 
determining whether a person gave consent.”  Evidence 
that the alleged victim did not consent before falling asleep 
and evidence that the victim was asleep  when the sexual 
act occurred are relevant surrounding circumstances . 
 
3 The Government expresses this logical reasoning as 
follows: If the “ evidence showed there was no freely given 
agreement to any sexual act ” before the victim fell asleep, the 
victim’s “ ‘default’ state, therefore, which continued into her 
sleeping state, was that of no consent. While asleep, [the victim] 
remained in the same ‘no consent ’ state since a 
‘sleeping . . . person cannot consent.’ ” 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
Together, they may establish the “without  . . . consent” 
element. 
The second legal principle is also consistent with 
Mendoza. When the g overnment presents eviden ce that a 
person did not  consent before falling asleep, the 
government is not attempting to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element “by merely establishing that 
the victim” was incapable of consenting.  85 M.J. at 222 
(emphasis added). There is no surplusage problem because 
to prove a violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A),  UCMJ, the 
government must prove a fact—namely, that the victim did 
not consent before falling asleep —that the g overnment 
would not have to prove to establish a violation of Article 
120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ. 
The Court stated in Mendoza that “Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, criminalizes engaging in a sexual act with a person 
capable of consenting who did not consent, and Article 
120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, criminalizes engaging in a sexual act 
with a person who is incapable of consenting.” 85 M.J. at 
215.
4 This statement does not contradict  the second legal 
principle because the Court emphasized that “our 
holding . . . does not bar the trier of fact from considering 
evidence of the victim’s intoxication when determining 
whether the victim consented.” Id . at 222 (emphasis 
added). Thus, the government can “offer[] evidence of an 
alleged victim’s intoxication to prove the absence of 
consent.” Id. But it cannot “prove the absence of consent 
 
4 This sentence does not mean that under Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, the sexual act must coincide with a period 
when the person upon whom the act is committed is capable of 
consenting. Rather, as explained above, it is legally sufficient if 
the victim does not consent to the sexual act prior to the start of 
a period of inc apacity, such as that caused by intoxication or 
sleep, and the accused then commits the sexual act upon the 
victim during the period of incapacitation. Relatedly, Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ,  is not the legally appropriate offense to 
charge when the person upon whom the sexual act is committed 
is persistently incapable of consenting due to a mental disease 
or defect or a physical disability. See Article 120(b)(3)(B), UCMJ. 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
under Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, by merely establishing 
that the victim was too intoxicated to consent.” Id . The 
same is true for sleep. The government can offer evidence 
of an alleged victim’s sleep to prove the absence of consent, 
but it cannot prove the absence of consent only  with 
evidence that the victim was asleep.  
The second principle, to be clear , concerns only the 
question of legal sufficiency. Accordingly, in a given case, a 
trier of fact  could find that the admitted evidence is 
insufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the 
victim did not consent before falling asleep.  A CCA 
performing a factual sufficiency review on appeal could 
reach the same conclusion. 
The third legal principle is this Court’s holding in 
Casillas, 86 M.J. at 102: Evidence may be legally sufficient 
to prove the “without . . . consent” element if the evidence 
shows that the victim wa s asleep when the sexual act 
began but awoke before the sexual act was complete and, 
while awake, did not consent to the ongoing sexual act. In 
such cases, the government is not attempting to “prove the 
absence of consent under Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, by 
merely establishing that the victim”  was incapable of 
consenting. Mendoza, 85 M.J. at 222 (emphasis added). 
Instead, the government is proving that a person who was 
awake during the sexual act did not consent , thus 
satisfying both elements of Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ.  
B. Legal Sufficiency 
In the light of these three principles, we must consider 
whether the evidence was legally sufficien t to prove that 
Appellee commit ted the offense of sexual assault in 
violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A ), UCMJ.  This offense, as 
explained above, has two elements: “(i) That the accused 
committed a sexual act upon another person; and (ii) That 
the accused did so without the consent of the other person.” 
MCM pt. IV, para. 60.b.(2)(d)(i) -(ii). The question is 
whether any rational trier of fact could find the eviden ce 
sufficient to prove each of these elements beyond a 
reasonable doubt. 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
With respect to the first element, we conclude that the 
evidence is legal ly sufficient to prove that Appellee 
“committed a sexual act upon” A.B. A sexual act is defined 
to include any “ penetration, however slight, of the 
vulva . . . of another by any part of the body  . . . with an 
intent to  . . . gratify the sexual desire of any person. ” 
Article 120(g)(1)(C), UCMJ.  At trial, A.B. testi fied that  
Appellee’s fingers were “[i]nside of [her] vaginal area” and 
that they were “penetrating [her] vulva.”  And drawing 
reasonable inferences from the circumstantial evidence, a 
reasonable trier of fact could infer that Appellee committed 
these acts with the requisite intent. 
This brings us to the second element, 
“without . . . consent.” The first legal principle discussed 
above prevents us from concluding  that the evidence was 
legally sufficient merely  because there was evidence that 
A.B. was asleep when the sexual assault occurred. But we 
hold that a  reasonable trier of fact could find the 
“without . . . consent” element to be proved beyond a 
reasonable doubt in accordance with either the second or 
third legal principles discussed above. 
The second legal principle , again, is that evidence is 
legally sufficient if it shows a lack of consent before a victim 
falls asleep even though the sexual act occurs while the 
victim is sleeping. In this case, a rational trier of fact could 
find that A.B. did not consent to the sexual act before she 
fell asleep based on her testimony that she did not “ever 
consent to that.” A rational trier of fact  could reach the 
same conclusion based on reasonable  inferences drawn 
from A.B. ’s testimony about the platonic nature of her 
acquaintance with Appellee and her interactions with him 
throughout the evening in question.  And because A.B. 
could not change her lack of consent once she was asleep, a 
reasonable trier of fact could find that the sexual act 
occurred “without . . . consent.” 
The third legal principle is that evidence that the victim 
woke up while a sexual act was occurring  and did not 
consent is legally sufficient to establish the 
“without . . . consent” element. Here, a reasonable trier of 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
fact could find that the sexual act occurred 
“without . . . consent” because A.B. testified that she awoke 
during the sexual assault and, while awake, immediately 
expressed her lack of consent.  For these reasons, w e hold 
that the evidence was legally sufficient. 
C. Factual Sufficiency 
This Court , as explained above,  can review the 
AFCCA’s understanding of applicable legal principles. 
Harvey, 85 M.J. at 129. Here, the AFCCA stated that the 
evidence was factually insufficient “for the same reason s” 
that it was legally insufficient. Moore, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
485, at *1 8, 2024 WL 4765303, at *6. Accordingly, if the 
AFCCA erred in its legal sufficiency analysis, it also erred 
in its factual sufficiency analysis. 
We have concluded , contrary to the AFCCA,  that the 
evidence was legally sufficient.  Our conclusion differs 
because the AFCCA did not apply the second and third 
legal principles  discussed above . This omission is 
understandable because the AFCCA rendered its decision 
before this Court  clarified the second legal principle here 
and before this Court decided  Casillas, which established 
the third legal principle. We therefore remand the case so 
that the AFCCA may conduct a new factual sufficiency 
review in accordance with this opinion.
5 
IV. Conclusion 
The certified question is answered in the affirmative.  
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is set aside. The record is returned to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Air Force for remand to the 
Court of Criminal Appeals for a new review of the factual 
sufficiency of the evidence, consistent with this opinion , 
 
5 Because the AFCCA concluded that the evidence was 
legally and factually insufficient, it did not decide other 
questions that Appellee had raised. Moore, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
485, at *2-3, 2024 WL 4765303, at *1. We express no opinion on 
these other issues.  The AFCCA may consider the se other 
questions on remand. 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
and to consider any other issues previously raised by 
Appellee before the lower court that were mooted by its 
prior decision. 
United States v. Moore, No. 25-0110/AF 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment. 
For the reasons stated in United States v.  Casillas, 86 
M.J. 94 (C.A.A.F. 2025) , I agree that the decision of the 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals should 
be set aside. 