This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Isaac J. SERJAK, Airman First Class 
United States Air Force, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0120 
Crim. App. No. 40392 
 
Argued October 22, 2025—Decided  January 23, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Lance R. Smith  
 
For Appellant: Mary Ellen Payne, Esq . (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcot t and Lieutenant Colonel 
Jenny A. Liabenow (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Frank J. Spinner, Esq.  (argued); 
Major Jordan L. Grande. 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge HARDY  filed a 
separate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
(AFCCA) held that the evidence in this case was factually 
insufficient to find Appellee guilty of sexual assault 
without consent in violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 920(b)(2)(A) (2018). United States v. Serjak , No. ACM 
40392, 2024 CCA LEXIS 524, at *3, 2024 WL 5076421, at 
*2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Dec. 11, 2024) (unpublished) . 
Relying on this Court’s decision in United States v. 
Mendoza, 85 M.J.  213 ( C.A.A.F. 2024) , t he AFCCA 
determined that the Government failed to meet its burden 
of proving “the victim was capable of consenting but did not 
consent.” 2024 CCA LEXIS 52 4, at * 42, *49, 2024 WL 
5076421, at *14, *17. 
Major General Rebecca R. Ver non, who was then 
performing the duties of the Judge Advocate General of the 
United States Air Force, certified the following question to 
this Court : “W hether the A ir Force Court of C riminal 
Appeals erred in applying United States v. Mendoza  . . . to 
find Appellee’s sexual assault conviction factually 
insufficient.”
1 We answer the certified  question in the 
affirmative and remand the case for a new factual 
sufficiency review consistent with this opinion. 
I. Background 
The specification of sexual assault without consent 
alleged that Appellee “did, at or near Royal Air Force 
Mildenhall, United Kingdom, on or about 19 February 
2021, commit a sexual act upon [J.M.], by penetrating her 
vulva with his penis, without her consent.” The 
Government sought to prove this specification by calling 
J.M. as a witness. J.M. testified that, on the evening in 
question, she began drinking at a friend’s home and that 
 
1 Major General Vernon’s signature on the certificate for 
review is accompanied by this notation: “Performing The Duties 
Of The Judge Advocate General .” We are satisfied that this 
Court has jurisdiction here. 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
she and others then went to a party. She testified that she 
first met Appellee at the party, that she had never spoken 
to Appellee before the party,  that she did not have any 
conversation with him at the party, and  that she did not 
dance with him at the party. 
J.M. testified that she  drank heavily at the party and 
was “pretty under the influence” by the end of the party.  
J.M. testified that A ppellee was a designated driver who 
drove her and others back to their air base and that during 
the ride she did not speak to Appellee. J.M. further testified 
that upon returning to the air base, she and others went to 
an airman’s dorm room, that she continued drinking, and 
that she became even more intoxicated. 
J.M. testified that Appellee drove her back to her dorm, 
that she started walking to her dorm room, that Appellee 
called out her name to come back, that she turned around 
and walked back to Appellee’s dorm room, that Appellee 
ushered her into his room, that they spoke for a while, and 
that she lay down on his bed and fell asleep.  She testified 
that she was fully dressed when she fell asleep except that 
she had taken her shoes off . She testified that wh en she 
woke up, she was wearing only a jacket and her hair was 
wet. She testified that she  immediately went into the 
bathroom and locked the door. 
J.M. testified that while she was in the bathroom, she 
removed a tampon  that was deep inside her body . J.M. 
testified that she does not have sex while menstruating.  
J.M. testified that  she then left the bathroom , put on 
clothes, and ran to her room. Finally, J.M. testified that she 
was not attracted to Appellee, that she does not remember 
having sex with him, and that she did not want to have sex 
with him before she fell asleep in his room. 
After the incident, Appellee reported that J.M. had 
sexually assaulted him.  On a “Sexual Assault Forensic 
Examination (SAFE) Report” form, Appellee wrote that he 
told J.M. that he did not want to have sex with her, that 
she got on top of him, that every time he tried to move 
away, she wrapped her legs around him, and that she dug 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
her nails into him.  The report documented scratches on 
Appellee’s body. The first sergeant of Appellee’s unit  
testified that Appellee had similarly told him that he had 
invited an intoxicated female airman to his dorm room , 
that he tried to help her sober up, that they both fell asleep, 
and that when they woke up, she pressured him to have 
sex. 
A general court-martial found Appellee guilty, contrary 
to his pleas, of committing a sexual act upon J.M. without 
her consent in violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ. The 
court-martial also found Appellee guilty, again contrary to 
his pleas, of making a false official statement in violation 
of Article 107, UCMJ , 10 U.S.C. §  907 (2018), for stating 
that he was sexually assaulted by J.M. , or words to th at 
effect. For these and other offenses, 2 the military judge  
sentenced Appellee to a dishonorable discharge, 
confinement for 54 months and 100 days, forfeiture of all 
pay and allowances, and reduction to the grade of E-1. 
Relying on this Court’s decision in Mendoza, t he 
AFCCA held that the evidence was factually insufficient 
for finding Appellee guilty of  sexual assault without 
consent. Serjak, 2024 CCA LEXIS  524, at *49, 2024 WL 
5076421, at *17. The AFCCA reasoned: 
The Government charged this offense as “without 
consent,” a violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ. [J.M.] did not testify she consented to the 
penetration of her vulva by [Airman First Class 
Serjak]’s penis as she did not make a “freely given 
agreement” to the sexual intercourse. [Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States  pt. IV, para. 
60.a.(g)(7)(A) (2019 ed.) (MCM ).] However, 
whether she had the capacity to consent as a 
“competent person” is not in the record before us. 
MCM, pt. IV, ¶ 60.a.(g)(7)(A). Although [Airman 
 
2 The general court-martial also found Appellee guilty of 
other offenses that did not concern J.M., namely, one 
specification of assault consummated by battery in violation of 
Article 128, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 928 (2018), and one specification 
of abusive sexual contact in violation of Article 120, UCMJ. 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
First Class Serjak]  provided a statement to the 
nurse examiner that [J .M.] had initiated sexual 
intercourse with him, this statement is 
inconsistent with the remainder of the evidence 
before us and does not specifically address the 
issue of whether she had sufficient capacity to 
consent, and did in fact, consent. 
Id. at *48-49, 2024 WL 5076421, at *17. 
II. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews de novo the legal sufficiency of the 
evidence. United States v. King, 78 M.J. 218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 
2019). “The test for legal sufficiency is whether, after 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the 
prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the 
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” United States v. Gutierrez , 73 M.J. 172, 175 
(C.A.A.F. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Bennitt , 72 M.J. 266, 268 
(C.A.A.F. 2013)). This Court may review whether a Court 
of Criminal Appeals (CCA) applied “correct legal 
principles” in performing its factual sufficiency review. 
United States v. Harvey, 85 M.J. 127, 129 (C.A.A.F. 2024). 
III. Discussion 
A. Applicable Legal Principles 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, establishes the offense of 
sexual assault without consent. M CM pt. IV, para. 
60.a.(b)(2)(A). This article provides: “Any person subject to 
this chapter who — . . . (2) commits a sexual act upon 
another person —(A) without the consent of the other 
person . . . is guilty of sexual assault and shall be punished 
as a court -martial may direct.” 10 U.S.C. §  920(b)(2)(A). 
Based on this language , the government must prove two 
elements beyond a reasonable doubt: “(i) That the accused 
committed a sexual act upon another person; and (ii) That 
the accused did so without the consent of the other person.” 
MCM pt. IV, para. 60.b.(2)(d)(i)-(ii). 
The parties in this case disagree about  whether the 
AFCCA properly assessed the factual sufficiency of the 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
evidence to prove the “without  . . . consent” element in 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ.  In United States v. Moore, __ 
M.J. __ , __  (6-10) (C.A.A.F.  2026), another case decided  
today, the Court identified three legal principles that may 
resolve disputes about the legal and factual sufficiency of 
evidence to prove the “without  . . . consent” element. We 
review these principles here. 
The first legal principle identified in Moore is this 
Court’s holding in Mendoza. Moore, __ M.J. at __ ( 6-7). In 
Mendoza, this Court decided  that “the Government 
cannot . . . prove the absence of consent under Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, by merely establishing that the 
victim” was incapable of consenting at the time of the 
sexual act. 85 M.J. at 222 (emphasis added). 
The second legal principle identified in Moore is this:  
If a rational trier of fact could find from the 
evidence both that the victim did not consent 
before falling asleep and that the sexual act 
subsequently occurred while the victim was 
asleep, the evidence is legally sufficient to 
prove the “ without . . . consent” element of 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ.  
__ M.J. at __ (8). But even though the evidence may be 
legally sufficient, a CCA could still find the evidence to be 
factually insufficient. Id. at __ (10). 
The third legal principle identified in Moore is our 
holding in United States v. Casillas , 86 M.J. 94 (C.A.A.F. 
2025). Moore, __ M.J. at __ (6). In Casillas, the Court held 
that e vidence may be legally  sufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element if the evidence shows that 
the victim was asleep when the sexual act began but awoke 
before the sexual act was complete and, while awake, did 
not consent to the ongoing sexual act.  86 M.J. at 102. But 
again, even though the evidence may be legally sufficient, 
a CCA could still find the evidence to be factually 
insufficient. Moore, __ M.J. at __ (12). 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
B. Factual Sufficiency 
In this case, as explained above, the AFCCA held the 
evidence was factually insufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element of Article 120(b)(2)(B), 
UCMJ. We see no reason to question whether the AFCCA 
understood the first and third legal principles described in 
Moore when it conducted its factual sufficiency review. We 
cannot be confident, however,  the AFCCA properly 
understood the second legal principle because the AFCCA 
decided this case before this Court decided Moore.  
Under the second legal principle, the evidence was 
legally sufficient. A  reasonable trier of fact  could have 
found that J.M. did not give consent to a sexual act with 
Appellee at any time before she fell asleep  or became too 
intoxicated to consent because she testified that she did not 
consent. J.M.’s testimony regarding her lack of consent is 
consistent with her testimony that she did not talk, dance, 
or flirt with Appellee. A reasonable trier of fact also could 
have found, on the basis of J.M.’s testimony, that the sexual 
act occurred at a time when she was either asleep or too 
intoxicated to reverse course and give consent. 
However, as we recognized in Moore , even if  the 
evidence is legally sufficient to prove the 
“without . . . consent” element of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, a CCA still might find the evidence to be factually 
insufficient. We therefore remand the case for a new 
factual sufficiency review. We of course express no opinion 
on whether the AFCCA should or should not find the 
evidence to be factually sufficient. 
IV. Conclusion 
The certified question is answered in the affirmative. 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is set aside. The record is returned to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Air Force for remand to the 
Court of Criminal Appeals for  a new review of the factual 
sufficiency of the evidence, consistent with this opinion , 
and to consider any other issues previously raised by 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Appellee before the lower court that were mooted by its 
prior decision. 
United States v. Serjak, No. 25-0120/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting. 
For the reasons stated in United States v.  Mendoza, 85 
M.J. 213 (C.A.A.F. 2024), I respectfully dissent. 