This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Michael S. MALONE Jr., Sergeant First Class 
United States Army, Appellee 
 
No. 25-0140 
Crim. App. No. 20230151 
 
Argued October 7, 2025—Decided January 20, 2026 
 
Military Judge: Jessica R. Conn 
 
For Appellant: Major Vy T. Nguyen (argued); Colonel 
Richard E. Gorini (on brief). 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Andrew W. Moore (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten, Lieutenant Colonel Robert 
D. Luyties , and  Major Cody D. Cheek  (on brief); 
Colonel Frank E. Kostik Jr. 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, and 
Judge JOHNSON  joined. Judge HARDY  filed a 
separate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
The Gov ernment charged Appellee with several  
offenses, to include three specifications of domestic violence 
in violation of Article 128 b, Uniform Code of M ilitary 
Justice (UCMJ), 10  U.S.C. §  928b (2018) . The conduct 
underlying these domestic violence specifications occurred 
at the same time and in the same place, and they involved 
the same victim and were of the same nature, thereby 
raising the specter of multiplicity . And notably, Rule for 
Courts-Martial (R.C.M.)  907(b)(3)(B) (2019 ed.) explicitly 
states that multiplicity serves as a proper ground for 
dismissal of specifications.  
At trial, the military judge informed Appellee that “any 
motions to dismiss .  . . should be made at this time.” 
Appellee’s defense counsel responded, “no motion s.” 
Appellee then pleaded guilty to the three domestic violence 
specifications.  
On appeal to the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (CCA), Appellee for the first time challenged these 
specifications as being multiplicious. A panel of the CCA 
held that Appellee waived the multiplicity issue  at trial . 
However, when the CCA granted Appellee’s request for en 
banc reconsideration, the en banc CCA  concluded that 
there was no waiver
1 and then held  that the domestic 
 
1 It is important to note that the President  has changed the 
landscape in this area of the law , making waiver issues more 
clear-cut. Effective July 28, 2023, R.C.M. 910(j) —the waiver 
provision for guilty pleas—now states:  
Except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of this rule, 
a plea of guilty that results in a finding of guilty 
waives any objection, whether or not previously 
raised, as to the factual issue of guilt of the 
offense(s) to which the plea was made and any 
non-jurisdictional defect as to the offense(s) to 
which the plea was made that occurred prior to 
the plea. 
R.C.M. 910(j) (2024 ed.). Appellee’s offenses occurred before the 
effective date of this new provision. See Exec. Order No. 14,103 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
violence specifications were indeed multiplicious. United 
States v. Malone, 85 M.J. 573, 576 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2025) 
(en banc). 
The acting Judge Advocate General of the Army (TJAG) 
certified two issues for our review: 
I. Whether the Army Court erred in finding 
Appell[ee] did not affirmatively waive multiplicity 
where counsel stated defense had no motions 
before entering unconditional guilty pleas and 
declined additional inquiry into matters relevant 
to the unit of prosecution. 
II. Whether the Army Court erred in finding 
Appell[ee’s] convictions under Article 128b(1), 
UMCJ, facially duplicative when the underlying 
“violent offenses” were assault consummated by 
battery and aggravated assault. 
United States v. Malone, 85 M.J. 457 (C.A.A.F. 2025) 
(docketing notice of certificate for review).  
We conclude that Appellee affirmatively waived the 
multiplicity issue. We note the following: the military judge 
specifically advised defense counsel that any “motions to 
dismiss” should be made prior to Appell ee’s plea; R.C.M. 
907(b)(3)(B) explicitly states that “motions to dismiss” 
include any multiplicity claims; the  potential merits of a 
multiplicity claim in this case were obvious  on the face of 
the charge sheet, in the stipulation of fact, and during the 
providence inquiry; and yet, defense counsel 
unambiguously stated that he would not be filing any 
motions. Based on this set of circumstances, we answer the 
first certified issue in the affirmative because the 
multiplicity issue was affirmatively waived. We therefore 
decline to answer the second certified issue because it is 
moot. Accordingly, we reverse the lower court’s decision. 
 
§ 1, 88 Fed. Reg. 50,535 (Aug. 2, 2023) (stating that changes in 
Annex I, of which R.C.M. 910(j) is a part, took effect on July 28, 
2023). (Appellee’s court-martial occurred on March 22, 2023.)  
 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
I. Background 
On the evening of November 30  and the early morning 
hours of December 1, 2022, Appellee and his girlfriend, Ms. 
GR, engaged in an argument that escalat ed into physical 
violence. Appellee struck Ms. GR in the face with his hand, 
punched her in the face, arm, shoulder, abdomen, and leg  
with his hand , and threw her to the ground , thereby 
breaking her clavicle . Among other offenses, 2 the 
convening authority referred three domestic violence 
specifications as follows: 
SPECIFICATION 1: In that [Appellee] did, . . . on 
or about 1 December 2022, commit a violent 
offense against Ms. [GR], the intimate partner of 
[Appellee], to wit: by unlawfully striking her in 
the face with his hand. 
. . . . 
SPECIFICATION 3: In that [Appellee] did, . . . on 
or about 1 December 2022, commit a violent 
offense against Ms. [GR], the intimate partner of 
[Appellee], to wit: by unlawfully striking her in 
the head, face, arm, shoulder, torso, and leg with 
his hand . . . .[3] 
SPECIFICATION 4: In that [Appellee] did, . . . on 
or about 1 December 2022, commit a violent 
offense against Ms. [GR], the intimate partner of 
[Appellee], to wit: unlawfully throw Ms. [GR] to 
the ground with his hand, and did thereby inflict 
substantial bodily harm, a broken clavicle. 
 
2 This argument with Ms. GR also resulted in  charges of 
another do mestic violence specification as well as one 
specification of  aggravated assault , one specification of 
maiming, and one specification of obstruction of justice in 
violation of Articles 128, 128a, and 131b, UCMJ, 10  U.S.C. 
§§ 928, 928a, 931b (2018). In addition , App ellee was charged 
with two specifications of disobeying a superior commissioned 
officer in violation of Article 90, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 890 (2018). 
3 This specification also alleged that Appellee unlawfully 
struck Ms. GR with his foot. However, Appellee pleaded guilty 
to this specification except for the words, “and foot,” and he was 
found guilty of the specification without the excepted words. 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Appellee agreed to plead guilty to these three domestic 
violence specifications  and to two specifications of 
disobeying a superior commissioned officer in exchange for 
the Government dismissing the remaining specifications 
and charges . He also agreed to be sentenced to a 
bad-conduct discharge and to be sentenced separate ly for 
each domestic violence specification, all to run concurrently 
with a maximum confinement range of twenty -four to 
thirty-two months . The plea agreement contained the 
following “savings clause”: “If before or during the trial, one 
or more specifications are amended, consolidated, or 
dismissed with [Appellee’s] consent for any reason, this 
agreement will remain in effect. ” During the providence 
inquiry, the military judge explained  that this clause 
meant that the agreement would remain in effect “ if the 
court or one of the parties moved to dismiss one of the 
specifications.” 
Appellee also agreed to enter into a stipulation of fact 
describing his misconduct. Appellee admitted that he 
physically attacked Ms. GR in the master bedroom  by 
striking her face . He “then continued to aggressively” 
punch Ms. GR in her face, head, right arm, right shoulder, 
right side abdomen, and right leg. Despite Ms. GR’s pleas 
for him to stop, Appellee “continued the assault” by 
pushing her to the ground, breaking Ms. GR’s clavicle. 
At Appellee’s arraignment, the military judge had the 
following exchange with trial defense counsel: 
[Military Judge ]: [Appellee] , how do you plead? 
Before receiving your plea, I advise you that any 
motions to dismiss or to grant other appropriate 
relief should be made at this time. Your defense 
counsel will speak for you. 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, the defense has no 
motions. 
(Emphasis added.)  
Trial defense counsel then entered pleas on Appellee’s 
behalf in accordance with the plea agreement.  During the 
ensuing pro vidence inquiry , Appellee admitted to 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
committing all three domestic violence specifications . In 
the discussion of  these specifications with the military 
judge, Appellee agreed that the  physical acts were “the 
same event ” when describing the first two specifications 
and “all part of the same transaction” when describing all 
three specifications. The military judge found Appellee’s 
plea of guilty provident , entered findings of guilty,  and 
consistent with the plea agreement, sentenced Appellee to 
a bad -conduct discharge, total confinement for thirty 
months, and a reduction to the grade of E-3. The convening 
authority approved the findings and sentence, and the 
military judge subsequently entered judgment. 
On appeal to the CCA, Appellee argued for the first time 
that the three domestic violence specifications were 
multiplicious. A panel  of the CCA held that Appellee 
waived the multiplicity issue. Granting Appellee’s request 
for en banc reconsideration, the en banc CCA d etermined 
there was no waiver and held that the domestic violence 
offenses were multipli cious. Malone, 85 M.J. at 576. The 
acting TJAG then filed a certif icate for review asking , in 
part, whether Appellee waived the multiplicity issue. 
II. Standard of Review 
“ ‘This Court reviews de novo whether an accused has 
waived an issue.’ ” United States v. Harborth, 85 M.J. 469, 
475 (C.A.A.F. 2025) ( quoting United States v. Blackburn , 
80 M.J. 205, 209 (C.A.A.F. 2020)). 
III. Applicable Law 
R.C.M. 905(e)(1)-(2) (2019 ed.) provides  that a party’s 
failure to raise defenses, motions, or objections before pleas 
or before adjournment forfeits these claims  “absent an 
affirmative waiver.” The CCA held that under this rule and 
“the presumption against waiver of constitutional 
protections,” Appellee had merely forfeited his multiplicity 
defense because there was no “affirmative waiver.” Malone, 
85 M.J. at 581.  The Government contests this 
determination, arguing that the “plain meaning of defense 
counsel’s responses to the military judge demonstrates 
affirmative waiver.” Appellee disagrees, arguing that trial 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
defense counsel did not affirmatively waive any 
multiplicity motion. Accordingly, this case turns on the 
rules that were applicable to waiver  at the time of 
Appellee’s court-martial. 
Waiver extinguishes an issue, and as a result, that issue 
cannot be reviewed on appeal. Harborth , 85 M.J. at 475 
(citing United States v. Gladue, 67 M.J. 311, 313 (C.A.A.F. 
2009)). “Waiver can occur either by a party’s intentional 
relinquishment or abandonment of a known right or  by 
operation of law.” United States v. Day , 83 M.J. 53, 56 
(C.A.A.F. 2022) (citing United States v. Jones, 78 M.J. 37, 
44 (C.A.A.F. 2018)). Generally, an unconditional guilty 
plea operates to waive “all defects which are neither 
jurisdictional nor a deprivation of due process of law.” Id.  
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States 
v. Schweitzer, 68 M.J. 133, 136 (C.A.A.F. 2009)). This 
includes “multiplicity issue[s],” United States v. Heryford, 
52 M.J. 265, 266 (C.A.A.F. 2000), except when  multiplicity 
involves specifications that are “ ‘facially duplicative,’ that 
is, factually the same.” United States v. Lloyd, 46 M.J. 19, 
23 (C.A.A.F. 1997) (quoting United States v. Broce, 488 U.S. 
563, 575 (1989)); see also United States v. Pauling, 60 M.J. 
91, 94 (C.A.A.F. 2004) (“An unconditional guilty plea 
waives a multiplicity issue unless the offenses are ‘facially 
duplicative . . . .’ ” (quoting Lloyd, 46 M.J. at 23)). 
Even if specifications are facially duplicative, “[e]xpress 
waiver or  voluntary consent  . . . will foreclose” this 
multiplicity inquiry. Lloyd, 46 M.J. at 23 . That is because 
an accused “ ‘may knowingly and voluntarily waive many 
of the most fundamental protections afforded by the 
Constitution,’ ” including a double jeopardy objection based 
on multiplicity. Gladue , 67 M.J. at 314 (quoting United 
States v. Mezzanatto, 513 U.S. 196, 201 (1995)).  
An “express” waiver occurs when there is “the 
‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known 
right,’ ” id. at 313 (quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 
725, 733 (1993)), and is accomplished via affirmative action 
by the accused or the accused’s counsel. Affirmative action 
may occur when a trial defense counsel states that there is 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
“no objection” to a proposed course of legal action . United 
States v. Swift , 76 M.J. 210, 217 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (“ [A]s a 
general proposition of law, ‘no objection’ constitutes an 
affirmative waiver of the right or admission at issue .”); 
United States v. Ahern , 76 M.J. 194, 198  (C.A.A.F. 2017) 
(“[U]nder the ordinary rules of waiver, Appellant ’s 
affirmative statements that he had no objection to 
admission [of the evidence]  . . . operate to extinguish his 
right to complain about [its] admission on appeal. ”). 
Affirmative action also may occur when an accused chooses 
to enter into a plea agreement with a “waive[] all waivable 
motions” provision. Gladue, 67 M.J. at  314 (“Appellant’s 
express waiver of any waivable motions waived claims of 
multiplicity and unreasonable multiplication of charges 
and extinguished his right to raise these issues on 
appeal.”). And affirmative action may further occur when a 
party seeks “ [n]o changes” to a military judge’s 
instructions. United States v. Davis, 79  M.J. 329, 330 -32 
(C.A.A.F. 2020) (holding that defense counsel waived 
objections to findings instructions by stating “No changes,” 
when the military judge asked if there were any objections 
or requests for additional instructions and responding, “No 
Your Honor,” when later asked if there were any objections 
to the findings instructions). 
“There is ‘a presumption against the waiver of 
constitutional rights, and for a waiver to be effective it 
must be clearly established that there was an intentional 
relinquishment of a known right or privilege.’  ” United 
States v. Smith, 85 M.J. 283, 287 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (quoting 
United States v. Sweeney , 70 M.J. 296, 303- 04 (C.A.A.F. 
2011)). “ ‘No magic words are required to establish a 
waiver.’ ” United States v. Elespuru , 73 M.J. 326, 328 
(C.A.A.F. 2014) (alteration in original removed) (quoting 
United States v. Smith, 50 M.J. 451, 456 (C.A.A.F. 1999)). 
Instead, “[t]he determination of whether there has been an 
intelligent waiver . . . must depend, in each case, upon the 
particular facts and circumstances surrounding that case.” 
Id. (second alteration in original) (internal quotation 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
marks omitted) (quoting Johnson v. Zerbst , 304 U.S. 458, 
464 (1938)). 
IV. Discussion 
A. Whether Counsel Can Waive a Multiplicity 
Claim on a Client’s Behalf 
Before explaining our waiver rationale, we first must 
address an issue raised by Appellee in his brief . Namely, 
whether counsel may waive a multiplicity claim on a 
client’s behalf, or whether the client must personally waive 
such a claim. 
Our prece dent recognizes that “in certain 
circumstances, defense counsel may waive constitutional 
rights on behalf of their clients.” United States v. Harcrow, 
66 M.J. 154, 157 (C.A.A.F. 2008); see also New York v. Hill, 
528 U.S. 110, 114 (2000) (“[W]aiver [of nonfundamental 
rights] may be effected by action of counsel.”). As noted by 
the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit 
in United States v. Teague, 953 F.2d 1525, 1531 (11th Cir. 
1992) (en banc), “Criminal defendants possess essentially 
two categories of constitutional rights: those which are 
waivable by defense counsel on the defendant’s behalf, and 
those which are considered ‘fundamental’ and personal to 
defendant, waivable only by the defendant . Generally 
included in the former are matters which primarily involve 
trial strategy and tactics.”  
We have previously recognized that a trial defense 
counsel waived a multiplicity claim on behalf of an accused 
in Elespuru, 73 M.J. at 328-29. This precedent is consistent 
with federal civilian courts, which have specifically allowed 
an accused’s counsel to waive double jeopardy claims, and 
multiplicity claims are grounded in the Fifth Amendment 
right against double jeopardy .
4 In light of these 
 
4 See United States v. Morgan , 929 F.3d 411, 424 (7th Cir. 
2019) (recognizing that d ouble jeopardy “can be waived by 
counsel”); Watkins v. Kassulke, 90 F.3d 138, 143 (6th Cir. 1996) 
(holding that where “defense counsel consents as a matter of 
trial strategy to a mistrial, that consent binds the defendant and 
removes any bar to reprosecution, regardless of whether the 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
circumstances, we see no reason to conclude that a counsel 
cannot waive a facially duplicative multiplicity claim on 
behalf of his or her  client. This is especially true because 
Appellee cites no caselaw and no provision  in the Manual 
for Court s-Martial that would require the accused to 
personally engage in a waiver colloquy  for this type of 
claim. 
B. The Merits of the Waiver Issue 
We now turn our attention to the first issue raised  in 
this case: Was the multiplicity issue waived at trial? Stated 
differently, we must examine whether there was an                
“ ‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known 
right.’ ” Olano, 507 U.S. at 733 (quoting Johnson, 304 U.S. 
at 464). We are persuaded by the Government’s argument 
that it is appropriate for this Court to consider the fact that 
Appellee chose not to file an ineffective assistance of 
counsel claim against the attorney who represented him at 
trial. See Hill, 528 U.S. at 115 (“Absent a demonstration of 
ineffectiveness, counsel’s word on [decisions pertaining to 
the conduct of the trial] is the last.”) ; United States v. 
 
defendant participates in the decision ,” and rejecting dictum 
from United States v. Rich, 589 F.2d 1025, 1032 (10th Cir.1978), 
that an attorney lacks authority to waive double jeopardy rights 
on behalf of a client); Benge v. Johnson, CIV. A. No. 08-78-GMS, 
2011 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 34324, at *27 -28, 2011 WL 1230157, at 
*9 (D. Del. Mar. 31, 2011) (unpublished) (“Considering that a 
claim of double jeopardy is an affirmative defense that must be 
raised properly in order to avoid being deemed waived, it would 
be illogical to conclude that counsel cannot expressly waive a 
double jeopardy defense on a d efendant’s behalf.”); cf. United 
States v. Burke, 257  F.3d 1321, 1323 (11th Cir. 2001) (noting 
that the Supreme Court allows defendants themselves “to make 
fundamental decisions for” their cases, i.e., “ whether to plead 
guilty, waive a jury, testify in his or her own behalf or to take an 
appeal,” and noting this list “is all the Supreme Court has said 
about fundamental rights that belong solely to the defendant for 
decision”); cf. also McCoy v. Louisiana, 584 U.S. 414, 422 (2018) 
(adding the “[a]utonomy to decide that the objective of the 
defense[, including]  to assert innocence,” to the list of 
fundamental decisions that accused themselves can only waive). 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Campos, 67 M.J. 330, 333 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (citing the 
appellant’s failure to allege ineffective assistance of 
counsel as a factor in this Court’s waiver determination). 
Appellee’s failure to do so results in a presumption that 
defense counsel acted in a competent manner , and this 
presumption influences our analysis of this case.  See 
Strickland v. Washington , 466 U.S. 668, 689 (1984) 
(requiring courts to  “indulge a strong presumption that 
counsel’s conduct falls within the wide range of reasonable 
professional assistance ,” unless proven otherwise) . 
Specifically, in the context of the record before us, we apply 
this presumption of competence in deciding whether 
Appellee and his defense counsel knew at trial of the right 
to seek dismissal of some of the domestic violence  
specifications on multiplicity grounds.
5 As seen below, 
there are a number of factors that cause us to conclude that 
this was a “known right.” 
First, competent counsel would know that R.C.M.  
907(b)(3)(B) (2019 ed.) plainly states that multiplicity 
serves as a proper ground for dismissal of specifications.6 
Second, competent counsel would not overlook a 
potentially meritorious multiplicity claim in a case such as 
this one where this issue was undeniably obvious on the 
face of the charge sheet , in the stip ulation of fact, and 
during the providence inquiry. Specifically, t he charges 
alleged three specification s of similar acts of domestic 
violence on the same date and involving the same victim . 
Further, the stipulation of fact not only reflected that the 
three specifications of  domestic violence occurred on the 
same night, took place in the same location , and involved 
 
5 Our analysis is based on the context of this case , and we 
make no general rule on when the conduct of “fallible lawyers” 
establishes waiver.  United States v. Palik , 84 M.J. 284, 293 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) ( citation omitted) (inter nal quotation marks 
omitted). 
6 This rule provides various “[g]rounds for dismissal,” 
including if a “specification is multiplicious with another 
specification.” R.C.M. 907(b)(3)(B) (2019 ed.). 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
the same victim, it also demonstrated  that Appellee’s 
underlying conduct was of the same nature when it noted 
that Appellee first struck GR’s face with his hand , “then 
continued to aggressively” punch GR, and “continued the 
assault” by pushing GR to the ground. Finally, during the 
plea proceedings Appellee acknowledged that the domestic 
violence specifications were “part of the same event” and 
“all part of the same transaction.” Thus, the potential for a 
meritorious multiplicity claim w as repeatedly highlighted 
throughout this case and competent counsel would have 
taken notice.  
Third, in the course of reviewing the “savings clause” 
language in the plea agreement, competent counsel  would 
have been prodded to consider whether multiplicity issues 
were lurking in this c ase. After all, this clause 
contemplated that “one or more specifications [may be] 
amended, consolidated, or dismissed. ” Dismissal and 
consolidation of specifications are remedies for 
multiplicity. See United States v. Morris, 18  M.J. 450, 451 
(C.M.A. 1984) (providing that once it became clear that 
“both of these assaults were parts of a single altercation 
between the two men[,] . . . . it was incumbent on the trial 
judge—and subsequently the Court of Military Review —
either to consolidate the specifications or to dismiss a 
specification as multiplicious”); United States v. Mayberry, 
72 M.J. 467, 467 (C.A.A.F. 2013) (summary disposition) 
(same). Further, competent counsel would have explained 
the meaning of this savings clause  to his client , which 
would have entailed a discussion of the potential to 
consolidate and dismiss  specifications if they were 
multiplicious. Indeed, Appellee acknowledged that  he 
understood the plea agreement and  that his trial defense 
counsel reviewed the entire agreement with him. 
Fourth and finally , competent counsel would have 
discussed with his client the advantages and 
disadvantages of seeking the dismissal  of some of the 
specifications on multiplicity grounds.  
Therefore, based on these circumstances, we conclude 
that Appellee and his counsel knew they had a right to seek 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
dismissal of some of the domestic violence specifications on 
multiplicity grounds. Having determined that this was a 
“known right,” we next turn to the question of whether 
Appellee “intentional[ly] relinquish[ed]” this right. Day, 83 
M.J. at 56. 
As outline d above, h ere the military judge was 
essentially asking trial de fense counsel  whether he had 
any objection to proceeding with the guilty plea despite the 
fact that he would no longer be able to file a motion to 
dismiss—which specifically encompass ed a multiplicity 
claim pursuant to the language of R .C.M. 907(b)(3)(B)—
and Appellee’s defense counsel said, “No.” This scenario is 
akin to those  cases where a defense counsel respond s “no 
objection” to a proposed course of legal action, and we have 
consistently held that th is constitutes an “intentional 
relinquishment” of the right at issue. See United States v. 
Haynes, 79 M.J. 17, 19 (C.A.A.F. 2019)  (stating that 
“defense counsel’s agreement [ with the military judge ’s 
proposal was] akin to a statement of ‘no objection,’ which 
we have previously recognized may count as an affirmative 
waiver”); Campos, 67  M.J. at 333 (holding that the 
appellant’s failure to allege ineffective assistance of 
counsel along with “d efense counsel ’s clear ‘no objection ’ 
response amounted to” waiver); see also Davis, 79 M.J. at  
330-32 (holding that the response, “ [n]o changes ,” was 
indicative of waiver when asked if there were objections or 
requests for findings instructions). Because of the obvious 
parallels,
7 we reach the same result here and conclude that 
there was affirmative waiver. 
This waive r determination  is buttressed by  “the 
particular facts and circumstances surrounding 
[Appellee’s] case.”  Elespuru, 73 M.J. at  328 (internal 
quotation marks omitted)  (quoting Johnson, 304 U.S. at 
464). Key among them is the fact that Appellee received a 
 
7 Even the en banc CCA recognized  that, “[a]rguably, this 
language does not sound that different from a defense counsel 
stating ‘no objection’ ” in other contexts which this Court “has 
held constituted waiver.” Malone, 85 M.J. at 580. 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
substantial benefit in exchange for his decision not to file a 
motion to dismiss and to instead plead guilty to the  
purportedly multiplicious domestic violence specifications. 
Specifically, pursuant to the plea agreement the convening 
authority withdrew and dismissed serious specifications—
to include aggravated assault, maiming, and obstruction of 
justice. These specifications had the potential to  
significantly increase Appellee’s punitive exposure during 
sentencing.
8 Moreover, and importantly, under the terms 
of the plea agreement the penalties for the potentially 
multiplicious offenses were required to run concurrently . 
Therefore, Appellee knew he did not run the risk of more 
confinement if he affirmatively waived the multiplicity 
claim.
9 Therefore, the record before us indicate s that the 
defense made a “deliberate decision” not to challenge these 
arguably multiplicious specifications in order to obtain this 
favorable plea agreement . United States v. Rich , 79 M.J. 
472, 475 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (citation omitted) (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  Accordingly, we hold that 
Appellee intentionally relinquished his known right to 
pursue a multiplicity claim in this case. 
V. Conclusion 
At trial, Appellee  affirmatively waived his ability to 
raise a multiplicity claim on appeal. And because waiver 
extinguishes the issue, we cannot reach the question  of 
whether the three specifications were, in fact, 
multiplicious. Accordingly, we answer the first certified 
issue in the affirmative  and decline to answer th e second 
certified issue. The decision of the United States Army 
Court of Criminal Appeals is reversed. The case is returned 
 
8 These dismissed offense s had a punitive exposure of an 
additional twenty-eight years of confinement. See Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States pt. IV, paras. 77.d.(3)(b)(iii), 78.d., 
83.d. (2019 ed.). 
9 But cf. Ball v. United States, 470 U.S. 856, 865 (1985) (“The 
separate conviction, apart from the concurrent sentence, has 
potential adverse collateral consequences that may not be 
ignored.”). 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
to the Judge Advocate General of the Army  for remand to 
the United States Army  Court of Criminal Appeals  to 
complete its  review under Article 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866 (2018 & Supp. V 2019-2024). 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting. 
For many years, the military justice system was less 
than diligent about maintaining the distinction between 
the legal concepts of forfeiture and waiver. See United 
States v. Gladue, 67 M.J. 311, 313 (C.A.A.F. 2009)  (noting 
the failure of military courts to consistently distinguish 
between waiver and forfeiture). More recently, however, 
this Court has generally  preserved the distinction, 
reinforcing that waiver arises from the “ intentional 
relinquishment or abandonment of a known right ” while 
forfeiture occurs when a party “ fail[s] to make the timely 
assertion of a right .” United States v. Cook , 86 M.J. 104, 
108 (C.A.A.F. 2025)  (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Gladue, 67 M.J. at 313); United States v. Davis, 79 
M.J. 329, 331  (C.A.A.F. 2020) (same); United States v. 
Ahern, 76 M.J. 194, 197 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (same).  Because 
the Court’s decision in this case undermines our more 
recent efforts  and blurs the line between forfeiture and 
waiver, I respectfully dissent.
1 
I. “[T]he defense has no motions.” 
As accurately described by the majority, the following 
exchange occurred during Appellee’s arraignment:  
[Military Judge ]: [Appellee] , how do you plead? 
Before receiving your plea, I advise you that any 
motions to dismiss or to grant other appropriate 
relief should be made at this time. Your defense 
counsel will speak for you. 
[Defense Counsel]: Your Honor, the defense has no 
motions. 
(Emphasis added.) On its face, defense counsel’s statement 
indicated nothing more than that Appellee had no motions 
to make at that time. Appellee’s failure to move to dismiss 
some of the charges as multiplicitous would seem to fall 
squarely within the definition of forfeiture set forth in the 
Rules for Court s-Martial (R.C.M.) . Pursuant to 
R.C.M. 905(e)(1), the “[f]ailure by a party to raise defenses 
or objections or to make motions or requests which must be 
 
1 I agree with the majority that defense counsel can waive a 
multiplicity claim on his client’s behalf. 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
2 
 
made before pleas are entered .  . . forfeits the defenses or 
objections absent an affirmative waiver .” (Emphasis 
added.) 
To find affirmative waiver  instead of forfeiture , t he 
majority construes defense counsel’s simple five -word 
statement as: (1) acknowledging that Appellee had a 
colorable multiplicity claim that he had the right to pursue; 
and (2) expressing a deliberate and intentional decision by 
Appellee to relinquish his right to pu rsue that claim.  
United States v. Malone, __ M.J. __, __ (11-14) (C.A.A.F. 
2025). As the majority correctly points out, this Court has 
previously embarked on similar efforts to infer affirmative 
waiver from simple statements by defense counsel in other 
contexts. Id. at __ ( 13-14). But those cases do not control 
the specific facts presented in this case, and for the reasons 
explained below, I see no reason to extend their reasoning 
to the new circumstance presented here, especially in light 
of this Court’s presumption against finding waiver when 
constitutional rights are at issue. United States v. 
Blackburn, 80 M.J. 205, 209 (C.A.A.F. 2020). 
A. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
At the Government’s invitation, t he majority grounds 
its waiver analysis on the fact that Appellee chose not to 
file an ineffective assistance of counsel (IAC) claim against 
the attorney who represented him at trial. Malone, __ M.J. 
at __ (10-13). I disagree that an appellant’s decision to raise 
or not raise an IAC claim on appeal should be granted such 
legal significance. An appellant’s decision not to bring an 
IAC claim on appeal—a decision  made long after the court-
martial has concluded—cannot retroactiv ely transform a 
forfeiture into an affirmative waiver. 
I acknowledge that this Court has previously cited an 
appellant’s failure to file an IAC claim as a relevant factor 
when finding waiver. For example, in United States v. 
Campos, 67 M.J. 330, 333 & n.4 (C.A.A.F. 2009), the Court 
noted that the appellant did not file an IAC claim in a case 
where the evidence in the record left no uncertainty as to 
whether the defense counsel’s statement of “no objection” 
was an intentional relinquishment of a known right. But 
the majority stretches that reasoning significantly farther, 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
3 
 
making this Court’s speculative presumptions about what 
a competent attorney would have  known and would have 
done the cornerstone of its waiver analysis. 
In my view, the majority’s analysis reads too much into 
Appellee’s decision not to bring an IAC claim . To succeed 
on such a claim, an appellant must establish that his 
attorney’s performance was deficient —i.e. , that the 
attorney “made errors so serious that counsel was not 
functioning as the ‘counsel’ guaranteed the defendant by 
the Sixth Amendment.” Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 
668, 687  (1984) (emphasis added) . An attorney’s 
performance will not be deemed deficient unless the 
attorney’s “acts or omissions were outside the wide range 
of professionally competent assistance .” Id. (emphasis 
added). The essential question is whether the attorney’s 
“representation fell below an objective standard of 
reasonableness.” Id. at 688. 
Nothing in this standard suggests that competent, non-
deficient counsel must perform perfectly, or that every 
mistake or omission made by defense counsel establishes 
grounds for an IAC claim. To the contrary, a defense 
counsel’s performance will not be deficient unless he makes 
errors “so serious” that his performance offends the Sixth 
Amendment. Id. at 687.  Thus, the Supreme Court 
recognizes that lesser errors by defense counsel—those not 
“so serious” that they violate the Constitution—are simply 
mistakes that do not establish grounds for filing an IAC 
claim. The possibility of such mistakes is exactly why plain 
error review exists for forfeited issues. 
The majority’s approach does not seem to acknowledge 
the possibility of these  lesser errors and —if taken to its 
logical conclusion —would turn every  instance of 
remediable forfeiture into an intentional waiver unless an  
appellant files a n IAC claim against his trial defense 
counsel. When a defendant forfeits an issue at trial, this 
Court reviews the issue  for plain error. United States v. 
Batres, __ M.J. __, __ ( 5) (C.A.A.F. 2025)  (citing United 
States v. Davis, 76 M.J. 224, 229 (C.A.A.F. 2017)) . Under 
plain error review, this Court can only provide relief if the 
alleged error was plain or obvious. Id. (citing Davis, 76 M.J. 
at 229). But  by the majority’s reasoning , unless the 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
4 
 
appellant files an IAC claim , the Court must assume : 
(1) that defense counsel would have recognized any plain 
or obvious  issue, and (2) that the appellant must have 
made a knowing and intentional decision not to raise the 
issue at trial. Under this approach , plain and obvious 
forfeited issues become intentional waivers by default. This 
suggests that the only way for an appellant to obtain relief 
from a forfeited issue —including an attorney’s mistake s 
that fall short of offending the C onstitution—is to 
simultaneously bring an IAC claim , to rebut the 
presumption that defense counsel  knowingly relinquished 
the appellant’s right to raise the issue at trial. 
Of course, I agree with the majority that “counsel is 
strongly presumed to have rendered adequate assistance 
and made all significant decisions in the exercise of 
reasonable professional judgment.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 
690. However, competent, non -deficient counsel are  still 
capable of making errors or omissions that qualify as non-
waived forfeitures. Accordingly, Appellee’s decision not to 
bring an IAC claim in this case should  not control our 
waiver analysis. 
B. Forfeiture or Waiver 
On its face, defense counsel ’s simple statement that  
“the defense has no motions ” does not establish an 
affirmative waiver  of Appell ee’s multiplicity claim . As 
noted by the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA) below , there was no mention of 
multiplicity during either the pretrial proceedings  or the 
providence inquiry, nor any discussion  of it in the plea 
agreement or the stipulation of fact . United States v. 
Malone, 85 M.J. 573, 579-80 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2025). The 
issue simply went unaddress ed by the Government, 
Appellee, and the military judge.  
In tacit recognition that the plain language of defense 
counsel’s statement did not expressly establish affirmative 
waiver, the Government argues that defense counsel’s  
statement must be “[v]iewed in context ” and urges this 
Court to apply “ [t]he logic  of an implicit waiver” to this 
case. The majority obliges the Government, taking several 
pages to carefully explain how the words “the defense has 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
5 
 
no motions” can be construed to indicate that: (1) Appellee 
and his counsel knew they had a right to seek dismissal of 
some of the domestic violence specifications on multiplicity 
grounds; and (2)  Appellee intentionally relinquished his 
known right to pursue a multiplicity claim in this case . 
Malone, __ M.J. at __ (11-14). To be clear, I do not fault the 
majority’s reasoning. I agree that the Court can —with 
significant effort —infer waiver from defense counsel’s 
statement. I just don’t believe that we should. I think the 
better practice would be to require an accused to more 
explicitly concede the point so that it would be clear on the 
record that there was an intentional  relinquishment or 
abandonment of a known right. 
In this case, the Government created the multiplicity 
issue by drafting specifications  that, in the words of the 
majority, had a n “undeniably obvious ” multiplicity 
problem. Malone, __ M.J. at __ ( 11). Neither the 
Government, nor Appellee, nor the military judge 
addressed the issue at any time during the court -martial 
proceedings. In a case where t he Government failed to 
negotiate a “waive all waivable motions” provision  in the 
plea agreement , I see no reason why Appellee’s simple 
statement that “ the defense has no motions” should be 
considered as anything more than forfeiture. 
C. Plain Error 
Because I believe that Appellee only forfeited the 
multiplicity issue, I would analyze  Issue II under a plain 
error standard of review. See Batres, __ M.J. at __ (5) . To 
prevail on plain error review, an appellant must show that 
there was error, that the error was plain or obvious, and 
that the error was materially prejudicial to the appellant. 
Id. As the majority states , the issue of multiplicity was 
“undeniably obvious on the face of the charge sheet, in the 
stipulation of fact, and during the providence inquiry.”  
Malone, __ M.J. at __ ( 11). And as the majority further 
explains, the Supreme Court has held that the adverse 
collateral consequences of multiplicious convictions “ may 
not be ignored,” a holding that cuts  in favor of finding 
prejudicial error even where, as here, Appellee’s sentences 
were to run concurrently accordingly to the plea 
agreement. Id. at __ ( 14 n.9)  (internal quotation marks 
United States v. Malone, No. 25-0140/AR 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
6 
 
omitted) (quoting Ball v. United States, 470 U.S. 856, 865 
(1985)). Thus, having found that this issue was forfeited 
rather than waived, I would find plain error and affirm the 
ACCA’s decision merging Specifications 1, 3, and 4 of 
Charge I into a consolidated Specification 4, and then 
dismissing Specifications 1 and 3 of Charge I, and affirm 
the sentence.   
II. Conclusion 
In this guilty  plea case, the Government drafted 
multiplicious specifications and then failed to negotiate a 
“waive all waivable motions ” provision in the plea 
agreement. Nevertheless, the Government asks this Court 
to apply the doctrine of impli cit waiver to extinguish the 
ability of any appellate court to review the issue. I would 
decline the Government’s invitation and simply apply the 
President’s guidance in R.C.M. 905(e)(1) to Appellee’s case, 
identifying a failure to file a multiplicity motion, finding a 
forfeiture, and analyzing the issue on appeal for plain 
error. For that reason, I respectfully dissent. 