This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Ross E. DOWNUM, Captain 
United States Army, Appellee 
 
No. 24-0156 
Crim. App. No. 20220575 
 
Argued October 23, 2024—Decided September 30, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Scott Z. Hughes 
 
For Appellant: Captain Anthony J. Scarpati  (ar-
gued); Colonel Christopher B. Burgess, Major Chase 
C. Cleveland , and Major Timothy R. Emmons  (on 
brief); Colonel Richard E. Gorini. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Amber Bunch (argued); Major 
Matthew S. Fields  and Daniel Conway , Esq. (on 
brief); Scott Hockenberry, Esq., and Major Beau O. 
Watkins. 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON and Judge MAGGS 
joined. Judge SPARKS filed a dissenting opinion, in 
which Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Government charged Captain Downum, Appellee 
in this case, with the wrongful use of cocaine under Arti-
cle 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. §  912a (2018). Although the Government had the 
machine-generated results of Appellee’s urinalysis test in 
its possession, it declined to seek admission of those results 
into evidence. Instead, the Government relied solely on the 
testimony of an expert witness, Dr.  CO, who was recog-
nized by the military judge as an expert in the field of fo-
rensic toxicology and drug testing. Dr.  CO did not person-
ally test Appellee’s urine sample, but she had reviewed the 
test results in preparation for trial and opined that Appel-
lee’s urine sample tested “positive for BZE at 295 nano-
grams per milliliter.”
1 Based on this testimony and other 
evidence, a panel of officers sitting as a general court-mar-
tial found Appellee guilty of one specification of violating 
Article 112a, UCMJ. 
Finding the evidence both legally and factually insuffi-
cient, the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
(ACCA) reversed. United States v. Downum , No. ARMY 
20220575, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *6, 2024 WL 1829153, 
at *3 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 29, 2024)  (summary disposi-
tion on reconsideration) (unpublished). The Judge Advo-
cate General of the Army exercised his authority under Ar-
ticle 67(a)(2), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 867(a)(2) (2018), to certify 
three issues directly to this Court: 
I. Whether the Army Court erred in conducting its 
legal sufficiency analysis when it held that United 
States v. Campbell , 50 M.J. 154, 160 (C.A.A.F. 
1999), requires not only expert testimony inter-
preting urinalysis results but the admission of the 
underlying paper urinalysis results as well. 
 
1 Dr. CO had previously testified that BZE, short for 
benzoylecgonine, is a metabolite of cocaine, the presence of 
which indicates that the provider of the urine sample has 
ingested cocaine. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
II. Whether the Army Court erred when it held 
that unobjected-to expert testimony interpreting 
the urinalysis results lacked relevance without 
the admission of the paper urinalysis results. 
III. Whether the Army Court failed to conduct a 
proper factual sufficiency analysis under Arti-
cle 66(d)(1)(B). 
United States v. Downum , 84 M.J. 463 (C.A.A.F. 2024) 
(docketing notice). 
For the reasons explained below, we begin with the sec-
ond certified issue. We disagree with the factual presump-
tion embedded within the question presented —that the 
ACCA disregarded Dr. CO’s expert testimony interpreting 
the urinalysis results after stating  that the testimony 
lacked relevance —and instead conclude that the ACCA 
only found that Dr.  CO’s testimony provided little proba-
tive value in the absence of the underlying test results. Be-
cause this conclusion was within the ACCA’s Article 66(d) 
authority, we find no error.
2 Turning next to the third is-
sue, we find that there is an open question as to whether 
the ACCA applied the proper standard of review. Never-
theless, even assuming that the ACCA misunderstood the 
requirement to provide appropriate deference to the fact 
that the trial court saw and heard the witnesses testify, we 
find no prejudice to the Government’s case and therefore 
affirm the ACCA’s conclusion that Appellee’s conviction 
was factually insufficient. Having affirmed the ACCA on 
this basis, we decline to answ er the first certified issue, 
which has been rendered moot by our resolution of the 
third issue. 
I. Background 
The specification at issue in this case alleged that Ap-
pellee “did, at or near Fort Hood, Texas, between on or 
about 10 September 2021 and on or about 13 September 
2021, wrongfully use cocaine.” To obtain a conviction under 
Article 112a, UCMJ, the Governme nt was required to 
 
2 See Article 66(d), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  866(d) (defining the 
duties of the service courts of appeal). 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
prove both: (1) that Appellee used cocaine; and (2) that Ap-
pellee’s use of cocaine was wrongful. Manual for Courts-
Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 50.b.(2) (2019 ed.). Ap-
pellee’s defense was that he did not knowingly ingest co-
caine, and that he likely tested positive on his urinalysis 
because someone spiked his drink with cocaine at a bar. 
To prove Appellee’s wrongful use of cocaine, the Govern-
ment relied primarily on the testimony of four witnesses 
who detailed the urinalysis process, the chain  of evidence 
for Appellee’s urine sample, and the results of Appellee’s 
urinalysis. As mentioned above, despite having the paper 
urinalysis results in its possession at trial, the Government 
declined to place those results into the record. As noted by 
the ACCA, this appea red to be a deliberate choice rather 
than an oversight by trial counsel. Instead, Dr. CO, the di-
rector of the lab that performed the urinalysis test, offered 
her expert testimony that —based on her review of Appel-
lee’s urinalysis test results—Appellee’s urine “was positive 
for BZE at 295 nanograms per milliliter.” Dr.  CO further 
explained that this was above the Department of Defense 
“cutoff” level of 100 nanograms per milliliter that indicates 
a positive test result. Based on this evidence, the general 
court-martial found Appellee guilty, contrary to his plea, of 
one specification of violating Article 112a, UCMJ, and sen-
tenced him to thirty days of restriction, $1,000 in forfei-
tures for one month, and a written reprimand.  
Frustrated by the Government’s failure to enter the pa-
per test results into the record, the ACCA held that the 
finding of guilty was both legally and factually insufficient. 
The ACCA’s opinion stated: 
Without the admission of the test results, com-
monly accomplished by offering them as non -tes-
timonial business records under Mil. Rule 
Evid. 803(6), the expert’s testimony lacked rele-
vance. Beyond [Dr.  CO] stating a ng/ml level, 
there were no facts in evidence for her to explain, 
and no test results for her to interpret. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *6, 2024 WL 1829153, 
at *3 (emphasis added) (footnote omitted). The Judge Ad-
vocate General certified the case to this Court for review. 
II. Standards of Review 
When this Court reviews a service court’s factual 
sufficiency analysis, we ask whether the court applied 
“correct legal principles” in performing its factual 
sufficiency review. United States v. Harvey , 85 M.J. 127, 
129 (C.A.A.F. 2024). This Court reviews a CCA’s decision 
as to what level of deference is appropriate for its factual 
sufficiency review of a court-martial’s findings for abuse of 
discretion. Id. at 131.  
III. Discussion 
The Judge Advocate General certified three issues to 
this Court. We first address whether the ACCA erred in 
stating that the testifying expert’s testimony “lacked rele-
vance.” Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *6, 2024 WL 
1829153, at *3. We then review the ACCA’s factual suffi-
ciency analysis to determine whether that court applied 
correct legal principles. 
A. Relevance of Dr. CO’s Expert Testimony 
We begin with the second certified question: whether 
the ACCA erred when it held that Dr.  CO’s expert testi-
mony interpreting the urinalysis results lacked relevance 
without the admission of the paper urinalysis results. We 
understand the Government to be a rguing that when the 
ACCA stated that Dr.  CO’s expert testimony “lacked rele-
vance,” it was concluding that her testimony failed to qual-
ify as relevant evidence under Military Rule of Evidence 
(M.R.E.) 401. See, e.g., Brief for Appellant at 26-27, United 
States v. Downum , No. 24 -0156 (C.A.A.F. June 14, 2024) 
(“That the government did not admit the machine gener-
ated data should go to the weight of the expert testimony 
rather than its relevance.”).  
We agree that the ACCA would have erred if it had 
ruled that Dr.  CO’s testimony was not relevant under 
M.R.E. 401 and had disregarded it entirely. To be relevant, 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
evidence need only have any tendency to make a fact of 
consequence more or less probable than it would be without 
the evidence. M.R.E.  401(a)-(b). Dr. CO’s testimony easily 
clears this low bar. Dr. CO’s testimony was relevant to es-
tablishing both that Appellee used cocaine and that that 
use was wrongful. 
But contrary to the Government’s assertion, we do not 
interpret the ACCA to have held that Dr.  CO’s testimony 
was not relevant under the rules of evidence. If the ACCA 
had done so, Dr. CO’s testimony would have been inadmis-
sible, see M.R.E. 402(b) (“Irrelevant evidence is not admis-
sible.”), and the ACCA could not have considered it at all. 
Because Dr.  CO’s testimony about the urinalysis results 
was the only evidence that Appellee had used cocaine, the 
exclusion of Dr.  CO’s testimony w ould have ended the 
ACCA’s analysis at the first element of the offense. Appel-
lee’s conviction would not have been legally or factually suf-
ficient because there would have been no evidence that he 
had used cocaine at all. 
But this is not how the ACCA analyzed the sufficiency 
of Appellee’s conviction. To the contrary, the ACCA focused 
on whether Dr. CO’s testimony established the second ele-
ment of the offense, whether Appellee’s use of cocaine was 
wrongful. When the governme nt seeks to prove that a de-
fendant’s use of a controlled substance was wrongful based 
solely on scientific evidence, this Court has held that one 
way by which the government may establish an inference 
of wrongfulness is by offering expert testimony interpr et-
ing the urinalysis tests that prove the defendant’s use of 
the controlled substance. United States v. Green , 55 M.J. 
76, 80 (C.A.A.F. 2001); United States v. Campbell , 52 M.J. 
386, 388 (C.A.A.F. 2000) (per curiam) (on reconsideration). 
If the Government seeks to obtain an inference of wrong-
fulness through the process set forth in Campbell , the ex-
pert testimony proffered by the government must establish 
multiple facts about the testing, including that the metab-
olite is not naturally produced by the body or any substance 
other than the drug in question, that the cutoff level and 
reported concentration are high enough to reasonably 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
discount the possibility of unknowing ingestion, and that 
the testing methodology reliably detected the presence and 
concentration of the drug or metabolite in the sample. 52 
M.J. at 388.
3 
Applying this precedent, the ACCA found Dr. CO’s tes-
timony lacking, stating that Dr.  CO “offered virtually no 
information about the test itself, whether it is regarded as 
scientifically sound, and whether it was conducted in ac-
cordance with prescribed procedures in this case.” 
Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *4, 2024 WL 1829153, 
at *2. The ACCA acknowledged that Dr.  CO testified that 
the level of BZE in Appellee’s urine sample exceeded the 
cutoff level and that BZE does not occur naturally in the 
body. Id., 2024 WL 1829153, at *2. However, the ACCA 
also noted that Dr.  CO failed to explain the cutoff level’s 
significance or explain how the urinalysis test controls for 
the possibility of innocent ingestion —the very defense 
raised by Appellee. Id., 2024 WL 1829153, at *2. 
Despite the ACCA’s inartful statement that Dr.  CO’s 
testimony “lacked relevance,” the ACCA conducted a de-
tailed analysis of Dr.  CO’s testimony, rather than disre-
garding it as not relevant under M.R.E. 401. Viewed in the 
context of the ACCA’s entire opinion , we interpret the 
 
3 We disagree with the dissent’s assertion that Campbell is 
no longer the controlling precedent. United States v. Downum , 
__ M.J. __, __-__ (2-4) (C.A.A.F. 2025) (Sparks, J., dissenting). In 
Green, the Court clarified that an Article 112a conviction would 
still be legally sufficient if the expert testimony did not address 
whether the defendant would have experienced the physiological 
effects of the controlled substance, 55 M.J. at 81, but otherwise  
left the Campbell permissible-inference factors intact. The Court 
did present three nonexclusive Campbell -like factors that mili-
tary judges should consider when determining whether scientific 
evidence about urinalysis testing should be admitted (in addi-
tion to any other factors that the military judge finds relevant to 
determining the admissibility of scientific evidence), id . at 80, 
but nothing in Green  suggests that those factors replaced the 
Campbell factors for the distinct purpose of determining 
whether the Government established a permissible inference of 
wrongfulness. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
ACCA’s statement that Dr.  CO’s testimony “lacked rele-
vance” merely to indicate that the ACCA found that 
Dr. CO’s testimony provided diminished probative value 
without the underlying urinalysis results. Because we con-
clude that this was within the ACCA’s Article 66 authority, 
the ACCA did not err when it stated that Dr.  CO’s testi-
mony lacked relevance. 
B. The ACCA’s Factual Sufficiency Analysis 
We turn next to the third certified issue, which asks 
whether the ACCA erred when conducting its factual suffi-
ciency analysis. The Government argues that the ACCA 
erred by applying a de novo standard of review and by fail-
ing to provide “appropriate deference” to the results of the 
court-martial as now required under Article  66(d)(1)(B), 
UCMJ. 
As this Court discussed at length in our opinion in Har-
vey, 85 M.J. at 130- 32, Congress recently amended Arti-
cle 66(d), UCMJ, in the William M. (Mac) Thornberry Na-
tional Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. 
L. No. 116 -283, § 542, 134 Stat. 3388, 3611, altering the 
service courts’ statutory authority to perform factual suffi-
ciency reviews. Although it was long settled that the ser-
vice courts applied a “de novo” standard of review under 
the earlier versions of Article 66(d), UCMJ, see, e.g., United 
States v. Washington, 57 M.J. 394, 399 (C.A.A.F. 2002), the 
proper label for the standard of review under the newly 
amended Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, is more difficult to de-
scribe. As the Court noted in Harvey , the United States 
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals, the govern-
ment, and the appellant in that case all provided different 
descriptions of the new standard of review when a service 
court performs a factual sufficiency analysis. 85 M.J. at 
130. Although this Court explained how the new standard 
should be construed and applied in Harvey, we declined to 
place a label on it, neither endorsing nor rejecting the con-
tinued use of the phrase “de novo” to describe the standard 
or review. Id. at 130-31. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
The ACCA issued its opinion in this case on March 29, 
2024, more than five  months before this Court issued its  
opinion in Harvey. Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *1, 
2024 WL 1829153, at *1. In describing the underlying law 
and standard of review, the ACCA began by stating, “We 
review factual sufficiency de novo.” Id.  at *2, 2024 WL 
1829153, at *1 (first citing United States v. Scott , 84 M.J. 
583, 584 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2024); and then citing Wash-
ington, 57 M.J. at 399). The ACCA proceeded to expressly 
recognize that Congress amended Article 66, UCMJ, and 
then block quoted the new text in Article 66(d)(1)(B), 
UCMJ, including the key provision mandating that the ser-
vice courts give “appropriate deference to the fact that the 
trial court saw and heard the witnesses and other evi-
dence.” Id., 2024 WL 1829153, at *1- 2 (quoting Article  
66(d)(1)(B)(ii)(I)). 
The Government points to this portion of the ACCA’s 
opinion to argue that the ACCA misapplied the newly 
amended Article  66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ. The Government fo-
cuses on the fact that the ACCA described the standard of 
review as “de novo,” which means “[a]n appeal in which the 
appellate court uses the trial court's record but reviews the 
evidence and law without deference to the trial court’s rul-
ings.” Appeal, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024) (de-
fining “appeal de novo”). Essentially the Government ar-
gues t hat the ACCA could not have simultaneously 
“assess[ed] the evidence in the entire record without regard 
to the findings reached by the trial court,” Washington, 57 
M.J. at 399, and provided appropriate deference to the fact 
that the trial court saw and heard the witnesses as Arti-
cle 66(d)(1)(B)(ii)(I) requires. 
The Government’s argument highlights a tension that 
has long existed between this Court’s factual sufficiency ju-
risprudence and the text of Article  66, UCMJ. When Con-
gress originally enacted Article 66, UCMJ, the statute au-
thorized the service courts to “w eigh the evidence, judge 
the credibility of witnesses, and determine controverted 
questions of fact” but to do so while also “recognizing that 
the trial court saw and heard the witnesses.” Act of Aug. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
10, 1956, ch. 1041, Pub. L. No. 84-1028, 70A Stat. 59 (codi-
fying the UCMJ as Title 10 of the United States Code). 
Nevertheless, this Court and our predecessor have long de-
scribed the standard of review for factual sufficiency 
simply as “de novo.” See, e.g., United States v. Cole, 31 M.J. 
270, 272 (C.M.A. 1990) (describing then-Article 66(c) as an 
“awesome, plenary, de novo power of review” that author-
izes a service court to “ ‘substitute its judgment’ for that of 
the military judge ”); Washington, 57 M.J. at  399 (holding 
that the service courts are “required to conduct a de novo  
review of the entire record of trial”). 
Congress’s recent amendments to Article 66, UCMJ, ex-
acerbated the tension between our precedent and the text 
of the article. As we explained in Harvey, depending on the 
type of evidence presented at trial, the level of deference 
owed by a service court to certain factual determinations 
by the trial court might be materially more than one would 
expect under de novo review.
4 Because of this, it is no 
longer appropriate to describe the service courts’ standard 
of review when performing factual sufficiency review 
simply as “de novo.” Instead, when stating the standard of 
review and performing factual sufficiency review, service  
courts should cite and follow this Court’s guidance in Har-
vey, 85 M.J. at 130-32, instead of the Court’s prior guidance 
in Washington, 57 M.J. at 399. 
In its opinion below, the ACCA’s stated that it was ap-
plying de novo review and cited our decision in Washing-
ton. Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *2, 2024 WL 
1829153, at *1. To be fair, the ACCA also acknowledged 
Congress’s amendment to Article  66, UCMJ, and recited 
the new language requiring it to give appropriate deference 
to the trial court. Id., 2024 WL 1829153, at *1-2. This con-
tradiction raises an open question whether the ACCA’s 
 
4 To be clear, neither Harvey nor the text of Article  66(d), 
UCMJ, forecloses the possibility that—based on the type of evi-
dence presented at trial—a service court might owe little to no 
deference to the trial court in performing its factual sufficiency 
review. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
analysis was consistent with our decision in Harvey. To re-
solve this question, we examine the ACCA’s factual suffi-
ciency analysis to determine whether the ACCA failed to 
provide appropriate deference as the Government claims. 
See United States v. Weatherspoon , 49 M.J. 209, 212 
(C.A.A.F. 1998) (determining that remand for a new factual 
sufficiency review was unnecessary despite finding there 
was an open question whether the lower court applied an 
“inaccurate standard” because it was “satisfied that any 
misconception regarding the correct standard was harm-
less”), abrogated on other grounds by  United States v. 
Gutierrez, 74 M.J. 61, 66 (C.A.A.F. 2015). 
In support of its argument, the Government notes that 
Appellee took the stand and testified in his own defense, 
claiming that he never intentionally ingested cocaine dur-
ing his time in the Army, and speculating that “some type 
of substance” that was in his  drink at a bar after he had 
returned from the bathroom may have been the cause of 
his testing positive. The Government asserts that the 
panel—which had the opportunity to see and hear Appel-
lee’s testimony firsthand—must have rejected his explana-
tion for the positive urinalysis results to find him guilty be-
yond a reasonable doubt. The Government argues that the 
Article 66 appropriate deference standard required the 
ACCA to defer to the panel’s rejection of Appellee’s testi-
mony and affirm the finding of guilt, even if the ACCA har-
bored its own doubts about the factual sufficiency of the 
conviction. 
We do not think that the appropriate deference 
requirement constrained the ACCA’s review in this way. In 
this case, when Appellee testified in his own defense, he 
adamantly denied that he had ever intentionally ingested 
cocaine: 
[CDC]: Captain Downum, did you knowingly or in-
tentionally ingest cocaine at any time in Septem-
ber of 2021? 
A: I did not intentionally ingest cocaine. 
[CDC]: Okay. At any time in— since your Army ca-
reer from West Point to the present day, did you 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
ever knowing intent —intentionally ingest what 
you believed to be cocaine? 
A: Absolutely not. 
So the Government is correct that the panel must have 
believed the Government witnesses over Appellee to have 
found him guilty. But under the new version of Article  66, 
UCMJ, the service courts are still authorized to “weigh the 
evidence and determine cont roverted questions of fact.” 
Article 66(d)(1)(B)(ii), UCMJ. The new Article  66(d) 
appropriate deference requirement does not prohibit a 
service court from concluding that a finding of guilt is 
factually insufficient simply because the defendant took 
the st and and denied that he committed the charged 
offense. To conclude otherwise would be to impose a 
presumption of guilt similar to the one that this Court 
rejected in Harvey, 85 M.J. at 132. 
Ultimately, the ACCA’s factual sufficiency analysis did 
not turn on the veracity or the credibility of the witnesses 
who testified at trial or whether the ACCA provided appro-
priate deference to the fact that the trial court heard and 
saw those witnesses testify. Instead, the ACCA’s decision 
rested on the simple fact that —without the admission of 
the urinalysis test results into the record—the ACCA found 
the proffered evidence insufficient to prove that Appellee 
wrongfully used cocaine beyond a reasonable do ubt. See 
Downum, 2024 CCA LEXIS 156, at *1, 2024 WL 1829153, 
at *1 (“This is the proverbial ‘paper’ urinalysis case, but in 
this case without the paper.”). Even under the new version 
of Article  66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, that conclusion was within 
the ACCA’s discretion to reach. See Harvey, 85 M.J. at 131 
(“Because the CCA does not have to give complete defer-
ence to the court -martial, . . . the CCA, during a factual 
sufficiency review in a particular case, might weigh the ev-
idence differently from how the court -martial weighed the 
evidence.”). Nothing in the newly amended Arti-
cle 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, requires a service court to give def-
erence to the trial court about the absence of evidence that 
the service court believes is critical for a conviction to be 
factually sufficient. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
To be clear, our decision signifies nothing more than 
that the ACCA did not abuse its discretion in performing 
its factual sufficiency analysis. As the ACCA itself noted, it 
is not the case that “the introduction of the test results in 
documentary form is the only method of proving” the 
wrongful use of controlled substances. Downum, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 156, at *6 n.7, 2024 WL 1829153, at *3 n.7. But a 
conviction cannot stand if either a court-martial (in the first 
instance) or a CCA (on factual sufficiency review) finds the 
evidence factually insufficient to support a finding of 
guilty. As this Court noted in United States v. Graham, 50 
M.J. 56, 60 (C.A.A.F. 1999), this is especially true when 
courts consider an Article  112a specification based on a 
failed urinalysis test: 
[O]ur service personnel, who are called upon to de-
fend our Constitution with their very lives, are 
sometimes subject to searches and seizures of 
their bodies, without probable cause, for evidence 
of a crime. We should zealously guard the uses of 
these resu lts and hold the Government to the 
highest standards of proof required by law.  
Id. By declining to enter the paper urinalysis results into 
the record, the Government assumed the risk that either 
the court-martial or the ACCA might find the remaining 
evidence factually insufficient to establish Appellee’s guilt 
beyond a reasonable doubt.  Although the Government 
cleared the first hurdle and obtained a conviction from the 
court-martial in this case, Article 66(d)’s appropriate def-
erence requirement did not prevent the ACCA from reach-
ing a different conclusion on appeal. 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, 
dissenting. 
The lower court appears to have taken the view that 
admission of the underlying paper urinalysis results is 
required before the government is permitted  use of the 
permissive inference of wrongfulness in a urinalysis case . 
This view runs counter to my reading  of United States v. 
Green, 55 M.J. 76 (C.A.A.F. 2001) , United States v. 
Campbell (Campbell I ), 50 M.J. 154 (C.A.A.F. 1999),  and 
United States v. Campbell  (Campbell II  ), 52 M.J. 386 
(C.A.A.F. 2000) (per curiam)  (on reconsideration) . 
Furthermore, I am aware of n o other basis in the law for 
adopting such a requirement in urinalysis cases.  
Consequently, because I view this as a failure on the part 
of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
(ACCA) to apply correct legal principles, I am unable to join 
the majority’s decision to affirm the lower court’s factual 
insufficiency conclusion. 
A. Relevance of the expert’s testimony 
Because the majority began its analysis of the case by 
first addressing the second certified issue, I too will begin 
there. The second certified question asks the Court to 
determine whether the lower court erred when it held that, 
absent the test results, Dr. CO’s expert testimony “lacked 
relevance.” United States v. Downum , 84 M.J. 463 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) ( certificate for review ). The majority 
characterizes this language as an “inartful statement” and 
in turn, interprets this statement “merely to indicate the 
ACCA found Dr CO’s testimony provided diminished 
probative value without the underlying urinalysis results.” 
United States v. Downum , __ M.J. __-__ (7-8) (C.A.A.F. 
2025). I, on the other hand, have a less chari table view of 
this statement. Appellate military judges are seasoned 
senior judge advocates, who can presumably distinguish 
between the fairly simple legal concepts of relevance and 
probative value. The majority concedes that the lower court 
“would have erred” had it disregarded Dr. CO’s testimony 
as irrelevant under Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 401. 
Downum, __ M.J. at __ (5). Yet, it is my view that is exactly 
what it did. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
2 
 
 To be relevant, evidence needs to have any “tendency 
to make a fact  more or less probable than it would be 
without the evidence.”  M.R.E. 401(a). The lower court 
found that Dr. CO’s testimony was irrelevant and therefore 
inadmissible. See M.R.E. 402(b) (“Irrelevant evidence is not 
admissible.”). I disagree and find that  Dr. CO’s testimony 
easily cleared this low bar. The testimony was relevant to 
establishing both that Appellee used cocaine and that said 
use was wrongful. The lower court’s statement is at b est 
ambiguous, and “[t]he appropriate remedy for incomplete 
or ambiguous rulings is a remand for clarification.” United 
States v. Kosek , 41 M.J. 60, 64 (C.M.A. 1994) (emphasis 
added). As such, this case should be remanded. 
B. Appellee’s conviction was legally sufficient without 
the paper urinalysis results  
Although I understand the majority’s resolution of the 
case rendered the first certified question moot, I feel 
compelled to address this issue. The first certified question 
asks this Court whether the ACCA erred in holding that 
Campbell I requires the admission of paper test results.  
Downum, 84 M.J. 463 . I would hold that the ACCA erred 
because Green is the applicable precedent, and Green  
makes it clear that the admission of paper test results is  
not required to sustain a conviction. Because Green 
modified the legal landscape for these cases , neither 
Campbell I nor Campbell II applies. Furthermore, a n 
important point to be made here is that the ACCA erred in 
its application of Campbell  I because the Campbell  I test 
only applies where the government’s only evidence for drug 
use derives from novel scientific methodologies.  
A conviction is legally sufficient when a “ rational 
factfinder . . . could have found all essential elements of the 
offense [at issue] beyond a reasonable doubt .” United 
States v. Mays, 83 M.J. 277, 279  (C.A.A.F. 2023) (first 
alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Nicola, 78 M.J. 223, 226 (C.A.A.F. 
2019)). The reviewing court is obligated to draw “every 
reasonable inference from the evidence of record in favor of 
the prosecution.” United States v. Robinson , 77 M .J. 294, 
298 (C.A.A.F. 2018) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). “As such, the standard for legal 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
3 
 
sufficiency involves a very low threshold to sustain a 
conviction.” United States v. King , 78 M.J. 218,  221 
(C.A.A.F. 2019)  (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted).  
Campbell II states that the prosecution may 1 
demonstrate the relationship between the paper urinalysis 
results and the permissive inference of knowing, wrongful 
use through expert testimony showing:  
(1) that the metabolite is not naturally produced 
by the body or any substance other than the drug 
in question; (2) that the cutoff level and reported 
concentration are high enough to reasonably 
discount the possibility of unknowing ingestion 
and to indica te a reasonable likelihood that the 
user at some time would have experienced the 
physical and psychological effects of the drug; and 
(3) that the testing methodology reliably detected 
the presence and reliably quantified the 
concentration of the drug or me tabolite in the 
sample.  
52 M.J. at 388 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted).  
However, as numerous lower court opinions recognized, 
it is not possible to definitively state that the user 
“experienced the physical and psychological effects of the 
drug.” See, e.g. , United States v. Barnes , 53 M.J. 624, 
228-29 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2000) (Anderson, J., 
concurring dubitante) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted), vacated , 55 M.J. 236 (C.A.A.F. 2001) 
(summary disposition) (remanding in light of Green).2 As a 
 
1 The majority cites Campbell II for the proposition that the 
Government’s expert testimony “must” establish certain factors. 
Downum, __ M.J. at __ -__ (6-7). However, Campbell II says 
expert testimony “may” establish these factors. 52 M.J. at 388  
(“the prosecution may demonstrate the relationship between the 
test result and the permissive inference” through the Campbell 
factors). 
2 Academic literature supported this conclusion. See, e.g. , 
David A. Berger, Campbell and Its Progeny: The Death of the 
Urinalysis Case , 47 Naval L. Rev. 1, 30  (2000); Michael R. 
Stahlman, New Developments on the Urinalysis Front: A Green 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
4 
 
result, this Court created a new framework in Green.3 See, 
e.g., United States v. Mahoney, No. NMCCA 9900147, 2003 
CCA LEXIS 102, at *2, 2003 WL 1895472, at *1 (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. Apr.  17, 2003), aff’d, 59 M.J. 147 (C.A.A.F. 
2003) (summary disposition). 
In a footnote, the majority states that  the Green Court 
presented “three nonexclusive Campbell -like factors that 
military judges should consider when determining whether 
scientific evidence about urinalysis testing should be 
admitted.” Downum, __ M.J. at __ (7 n.3). However, Green 
states that this process is for “novel scientific evidence.” 55 
M.J. at 80. Campbell I and Campbell II likewise limited the 
application of the three -factor test to novel scientific 
procedures. 50 M.J. at 155, 160; 52 M.J. at 388. In 
Campbell I, there was only one lab in the entire United 
States using the  gas chromatography tandem mass 
spectrometry (GC/MS/MS) methodology. 50 M.J. at  156. 
Since no other lab conducted that test, other scientists 
could not reproduce the results. Id. at 156-58. For the same 
reason, the test was not peer reviewed and had not gained 
acceptance as scientifically valid in the field. Id. While this 
methodology may have been a “novel scientific procedure” 
prior to  1999, after twenty -five years of utilization in 
urinalysis cases the GC/MS /MS methodology is no longer  
novel or unique. 
When the military judge is considering evidence of a 
test that does not involve a novel scientific procedure, 
different considerations apply. If the expert testimony has 
“an established scientific, technical, legal, judicial, or 
evidentiary foundation” reg arding reliability and 
relevance, it may be appropriate to take judicial notice 
 
Light in Naked Urinalysis Prosecutions?, Army Law ., April 
2002, at 14.  
3 Subsequent to the ruling in Green, this Court affirmed the 
two cases where the lower court declined to apply Campbell. See 
United States v. Pugh , 55 M.J. 357 (C.A.A.F. 2001)  (summary 
disposition); United States v. Tanner , 55 M.J. 357 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) (summary disposition).  It also summarily vacated and 
remanded every certified case (nine cases) where the lower court 
applied Campbell. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
5 
 
under M.R.E. 201 without further litigation. Green, 55 M.J. 
at 81. “If the military judge determines that the scientific 
evidence—whether novel or established —is admissible, 
the prosecution may rely on the permissive inference 
during its case on the merits. ” Id. The key distinction is 
that the decision rests with the military judge. 
A further point to be made is that the rules of evidence 
allow for an expert to testify to the underlying facts and 
data of an opinion substantively. M.R.E. 703 provides as 
follows: 
An expert may base an opinion on facts or data in 
the case that the expert has been made aware of 
or personally observed. If experts in the particular 
field would reasonably rely on those kinds of facts 
or data in forming an opinion on the subject, they 
need not be admissible for the opinion to be 
admitted. If the facts or data would otherwise be 
inadmissible, the proponent of the opinion may 
disclose them to the members of a court -martial 
only if the military judge finds that their 
probative value in helping the members evaluate 
the opinion substantially outweighs their 
prejudicial effect. 
There is no question that M.R.E. 703 allows an expert 
to bring in the contents of a urinalysis report.  See, e.g. , 
United States v. Blazier, 69 M.J. 218, 222 (C.A.A.F. 2010)  
(“We further hold that an expert may, consistent with 
the . . . rules of evidence, (1) rely on, repeat, or interpret 
admissible and nonhearsay machine -generated printouts 
of machine-generated data . . . .”). There is also no question 
that Dr. CO was “ aware of or personally observed ” 
Appellee’s urinalysis. Due in large part to its misreading of 
Green and Campbell, the lower court was so focused on the 
paper results that they gave little to no weight to Dr. CO’s 
testimony. Dr. CO testified that, based on her review, 
Appellee’s sample tested positive for cocaine on the initial 
screening. She also testified that “based on [her] review 
of . . . the litigation packet” further testing, via gas 
chromatography mass spectrometry, had been conducted, 
and that this confirmatory test “was positive for BZE at 295 
nanograms per milliliter.” Dr. CO was reciting the results 
from nonhearsay, machine -generated data. Cf. Smith v. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
6 
 
Arizona, 602 U.S. 779, 783 (2024) ( holding “an absent lab 
analyst’s factual assertions” are admitted “into evidence for 
their truth”). Thus, Dr. CO was not merely giving an 
opinion. Her recitation of the BZE level was a fact that 
supported her opinion that Appellee had consumed cocaine. 
To a layperson  “BZE at 295 nanograms per milliliter ” 
may sound a bit like unintelligible science speak . Th is 
unfamiliarity with the data  is the very reason we have 
experts explain this information, which Dr. CO did 
extensively. And, just as we rely on toxicologists to explain 
the significance of the technical terms , we rely on the 
military judge to decide whether the prosecution has met 
its burden  to give the permissive inference instruction. 
Here, the military judge decided the issue  in accordance 
with Green. The lower court’s reliance on Campbell  I 
created substantive hurdles the Government never needed 
to surmount. 
It is true, as t he majority  states, that  Dr. CO’s 
testimony was the only direct evidence of drug use, 
Downum, __ M.J. at __ ( 6), but  in the absence of an 
objection, the facts Dr. CO relied on  and testified to were 
in evidence and the members were free to consider them 
substantively. Furthermore , Appellee’s defense strategy 
revolved around conceding  to the presence of cocaine. 
Appellee only contested whether the use was wrongful, in 
other words, the innocent ingestion defense. Trial defense 
counsel’s opening statement admitted Appellee had cocaine 
in his system and that its presence was “high enough to go 
over the cutoff level that the lab reports as being 
forensically defensible.” His cross -examination of Dr. CO 
concedes: “[a]ll we can say is for certain [sic], [Appellee] 
consumed enough cocaine, then [sic] in the metabolic 
process it produced the metabolite that passed . . . the cut-
off level that the lab sets?” Dr. CO responded, “Yes.” On his 
own direct examination, Appellee admit ted he could have 
been exposed to “a small amount of cocaine” during the 
weekend in question.
4 Finally, trial defense counsel in his 
 
4 The question presented to Appellee by his counsel was as 
follows: 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
7 
 
closing argument not only admits Appellee’s “urine had 
somehow had cocaine in [his] system at least a few days 
prior
,” but also concedes this case is “not whether or not 
there was a metabolite for cocaine in his system, that’s a 
red herring if the government comes up in their second 
argument and says[,] we’re arguing that, no.”  
Beyond that, Appellee chose to testify in his own 
defense. It was the responsibility of the panel to evaluate 
his credibility and determine whether to apply the 
permissive inference. United States v. Bond, 46 M.J. 86, 89 
(C.A.A.F. 1997) . Additionally, both of his fact witnesses 
contradicted his story. Immediately after Appellee’s 
testimony, the defense’s first fact witness, BL, twice 
contradicted Appellee’s version of events, denying Appellee 
ever mentioned any concerns about his drink . He went so 
far as to say, “[i]t seems like I would have remembered 
that. And I don’t off the top of my head, sir.” His next fact 
witness, KG, testified t hat Appellee confess ed to testing 
positive for cocaine before the drug test  results were even 
available. This was despite Appellee testifying earlier that 
he did not know whether his drink had been spiked with 
drugs, let alone know what substance could have been in 
his drink, be it amphetamines, ecstasy, or cocaine . The 
defense’s case and the introduction of extrinsic evidence of 
drug use place this case outside the realm where the 
Campbell test would ever apply.  
In addition, there is a strong argument to be made that 
Appellee waived any objection to the permissive inference 
instruction. “Whether an appellant has waived an issue  is 
 
Q. Okay, and having heard the testimony of Dr. 
[CO], the forensic toxicologist, in her testimony about 
how a small amount of cocaine can produce a 
positive . . . above what you produced on the urinalysis 
with your urine,  . . . can you say for sure that you 
weren’t somehow exposed to a very small amount in 
some other setting that weekend? 
A. I cannot say that I was not exposed in any other 
setting. 
 
  
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
8 
 
a legal question that this Court reviews de novo. ” United 
States v. Cunningham , 83 M.J. 367, 37 4 (C.A.A.F. 2023) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States 
v. Davis, 79 M.J. 329, 332 (C.A.A.F. 2020)).  Trial defense 
counsel did not  object when the Government stated it 
would not be admitting  the paper urinalysis results into 
evidence. Finally, defense counsel did not object when the 
permissive inference instruction was given.5 
This is because there was never any question as to the 
presence of cocaine in his system, the contents of the paper 
urinalysis results, or the value of Dr. CO’s testimony. The 
failure to object indicates one of two things : either there 
was an understanding at trial that the paper urinalysis 
results were not necessary, or defense counsel saw some 
benefit in waiving the issue.  
C. The ACCA incorrectly applied the new 
Article 66(d)(1)(B)(ii)(II) 
Because the lower court erred with regards to Issue I 
and Issue II, their factual sufficiency review was  flawed. 
By determining that the contents of the urinalysis could 
only come into the trial through the paper  results, the 
lower court essentially struck the contents of Dr. CO’s 
testimony from consideration  because it believed there 
were no facts in evidence for her to interpret. Thus, her 
testimony became irrelevant. This is incorrect for all the 
reasons previously stated.  
Further, t he majority relies on  United States v. 
Weatherspoon, 49 M.J. 20 9 (C.A.A.F. 1998), in applying a 
 
5 At the close of the Government’s case, defense counsel did 
make a somewhat perfunctory and vague motion for a finding of 
not guilty under Rule for Courts -Martial 917, challenging the 
sufficiency of the evidence as follows:  
[W]e will make a motion under Rule for Court -
Martial 917, particularly under the element of 
knowing use. There has, based on the testimony 
and evidence presented thus far , there is not 
sufficient evidence in that be (sic) given to the 
members allowing reasonable infer [ences]—or 
permissible inferences to the g overnment that 
would support the element of knowing use. 
United States v. Downum, No. 24-0156/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, dissenting. 
9 
 
harmless error standard to  the CCA’s factual sufficiency 
analysis. I would simply note that we have said, “when the 
record reveals that a CCA misunderstood the law, this 
Court remands for another factual sufficiency review under 
correct legal principles.” Harvey, 85 M.J . at 129 (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. 
Thompson, 83 M.J. 1, 4 (C.A.A.F. 2022)). This Court has 
also remanded when it was “an open question” whether a  
lower court  correctly applied the law. United States v. 
Nerad, 69 M.J. 138, 147 (C.A.A.F. 2010). 
This case should be remanded to the Army c ourt to 
conduct a new factual sufficiency review.  In my view 
evidence introduced on the merits through the expert’s 
testimony without objection were matters properly 
considered by the members. And, because the A CCA’s 
factual insufficiency conclusion was based on a 
misapplication of the Campbell and Green trilogy of cases, 
a remand should be in order. 
D. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, I respectfully dissent.  