This opinion is subject to revision before publication 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Brandon Z. Miller, Specialist 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0025 
Crim. App. No. 20230026 
 
Argued May 21, 2025—Decided September 24, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Jacqueline Tubbs (arraignment) 
and Adam S. Kazin (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Captain Andrew W. Moore (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Autumn R. Porter,  Major Bryan 
A. Osterhage, and Jonathan F. Potter, Esq. (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Captain Nicholas A. Schaffer (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini and Major Justin L. Tal-
ley (on brief). 
 
Amicus Curiae in Support of Appellant: Colonel Pi-
lar G. Wennrich , USAF, and Dwight H. Sullivan , 
Esq. (on behalf of the Air Force Appellate Defense 
Division) (on brief). 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a sep-
arate dissenting opinion. 
 
_______________ 
  
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Like the federal civilian courts and all state courts, the 
military justice system includes a rule — Military Rule of 
Evidence (M.R.E.) 412—that restricts the ability of an ac-
cused charged with a sexual offense to introduce evidence 
about the past sexual activity or predisposition of the al-
leged victim.1 If an accused seeks to admit evidence cov-
ered by the rule, the President has ordered that the mili-
tary judge must conduct a closed hearing to determine 
whether the evidence may be admitted.  M.R.E. 412(c)(2). 
We granted review in this case to determine if the auto-
matic closure of such hearings violates an accused’s consti-
tutional or regulatory right to a public trial. Because we 
conclude that neither the Sixth Amendment public trial 
right nor the Rule for Court s-Martial (R.C.M.) 806 public 
trial right extend s to hearings conducted pursuant to 
M.R.E. 412, the military judge did not err when he closed 
the M.R.E. 412 hearings during the pretrial phase of Ap-
pellant’s court-martial. We therefore affirm the decision of 
the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals  
(ACCA). 
I. Background 
The Government charged Appellant with two specifica-
tions of sexually assaulting civilian B.M. in violation of Ar-
ticle 120, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. §  920 (2018).2 Prior to trial,  the defense filed two 
motions to admit evidence under M.R.E. 412(b). Following 
Appellant’s arraignment, the military judge conducted an 
Article 39(a) session3 and closed the courtroom to the pub-
lic as required by M.R.E. 412(c)(2) to litigate the defense’s 
first motion. The defense did not object  to the closure.  
 
1 M.R.E. 412 and its civilian federal and state law equiva-
lents are commonly known as rape shield laws. 
2 Although not relevant to this appeal, the Government also 
charged Appellant with one specification of assault in violation 
of Article 128, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 928 (2018), and one specifica-
tion of willfully disobeying a superior commissioned officer in vi-
olation of Article 90, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 890 (2018). 
3 10 U.S.C. § 839(a) (2018). 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
About a year later, the military judge conducted a second  
Article 39(a) session to litigate the defense’s second motion 
and again ordered the courtroom’s closure. This time, de-
fense counsel objected to the closure and requested that the 
military judge consider whether the closure violated Appel-
lant’s constitutional right to a public trial . The military 
judge noted the objection and overruled it without further 
comment. 
On January 19, 2023, a panel with enlisted members 
sitting as a general court-martial convicted Appellant, con-
trary to his pleas, of one specification of sexual assault and 
one specification of willfully disobeying a superior commis-
sioned officer, in violation of Articles  90 and 120, UCMJ, 
respectively. The ACCA summarily affirmed. United States 
v. Miller, No. ARMY 20230026, slip op. at 1 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. July 19, 2024)  (per curiam) (unpublished) . We 
granted review of the following issue: 
Whether the total closure of the court over Appel-
lant’s objection violated his right to a public trial.  
United States v. Miller, 85 M.J. 375 (C.A.A.F. 2025) (order 
granting review). 
II. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews a military judge’s decision to close 
the courtroom for an abuse of discretion. United States v. 
Hasan, 84 M.J. 181, 204 (C.A.A.F. 2024). Finding an abuse 
of discretion calls for more than a difference of opinion.  
United States v. McElhaney , 54 M.J. 120, 130 (C.A.A.F. 
2000). Rather, to constitute an abuse of discretion, the chal-
lenged decision must be “arbitrary, fanciful, clearly unrea-
sonable, or clearly erroneous.” Id. (citations omitted) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). Additionally, interpreting 
the interplay between provisions of the  R.C.M. and the 
M.R.E. is a question of law that we review de novo. United 
States v. Hamilton, 78 M.J. 335, 342 (C.A.A.F. 2019). 
III. Discussion 
Before this Court, Appellant raises two arguments, one 
based on the Constitution,  and one based on the R.C.M.  
First, Appellant argues that the military judge’s closure of 
his M.R.E. 412 hearings violate d his Sixth Amendment  
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
right to a public trial under Waller v. Georgia, 467 U.S. 39 
(1984). Second, even if the Sixt h Amendment public trial 
right does not extend to M.R.E. 412 hearings, Appellant ar-
gues that the President extend ed a qualified public trial 
right to such hearings when he promulgated 
R.C.M. 806(b)(4). For the reasons set forth below, we hold 
that neither the Sixth Amendment nor R.C.M. 806 applies 
to M.R.E. 412 hearings and that the military judge did not 
err by c onducting closed hearings as required by  
M.R.E. 412(c).  
A. Military Rule of Evidence 412 
In 1978, Congress enacted the Privacy Protection for 
Rape Victims Act to protect the privacy of rape victims.  
Pub. L. No. 95-540, § 1, 92 Stat. 2046, 2046-47 (1978). The 
act amended the Federal Rules of Evidence by creating 
Rule 412, which stated: “in a criminal case in which a 
person is accused of rape or of assault with intent to 
commit rape, reputation or opinion evidence of the past 
sexual behavior of an alleged victim of such rape or assault 
is not admissible. ” § 2(a), 92 Stat. at 2046-47. Two years 
later, when the President promulgated the first Military 
Rules of Evidence, he incorporated a similar rule as 
M.R.E. 412. Exec. Order No. 12,198, 45 Fed. Reg. 16,932 
(Mar. 14, 1980). 
The version of M.R.E.  412 that governed Appellant’s 
court-martial states: 
(a) Evidence generally inadmissible. The following 
evidence is not admissible in any proceeding in-
volving an alleged sexual offense except as pro-
vided in subdivisions (b) and (c):  
(1) Evidence offered to prove that a victim en-
gaged in other sexual behavior; or 
(2) Evidence offered to prove a victim’s sexual 
predisposition. 
M.R.E. 412(a) (2019 ed.).4 The rule further provides three 
exceptions under which evidence otherwise inadmissible 
 
4 All further citations to the Military Rules of Evidence and 
Rules for Courts-Martial in this opinion refer to the Manual for 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
under M.R.E. 412(a) may still be admitted. M.R.E.  412(b). 
If an accused, such as Appellant, wishes to offer  evidence 
pursuant to one of the three exceptions, the rule  estab-
lishes a procedure by which the military judge will hold a 
hearing to determine whether the proffered evidence will 
be admitted. M.R.E. 412(c). Importantly for the purpose of 
this appeal, the rule dictates that the hearing “shall be 
closed.” M.R.E. 412(c)(2). 
B. The Sixth Amendment Public Trial Right 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the accused in a 
criminal prosecution the right to a “public trial .” U.S. 
Const. amend. VI. This fundamental right traces its roots 
back a millennium  to England prior to the Norman Con-
quest and is an indispensable attribute of the Anglo-Amer-
ican trial. See Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia, 448 
U.S. 555, 564 -73 (1980) (chronicling a historical overview 
of the right to a public trial). Consistent with this tradition, 
our predecessor Court affirmed that the Sixth Amendment 
right to a “public trial” applies to courts -martial. United 
States v. Hershey, 20 M.J. 433, 435-36 (C.M.A. 1985). 
Although there is no dispute that the public trial right 
applies generally to courts -martial, there is less 
certainty—both in the civilian and the military courts —
about the scope of the right. The Supreme Court has made 
clear that the right applies to “the actual proof at trial” (i.e., 
the presentation of evidence to the jury ), Waller, 467 U.S. 
at 44, but it has never clarified how far the right extends 
beyond that core  application or articulated a test for 
determining whether the right applies to specific pretrial 
hearings.
5 
 
Courts-Martial, United States (2019 ed.) (Manual or MCM), un-
less otherwise noted. 
5 We are not aware of any cases addressing the constitution-
ality of M.R.E. 412’s civilian counterpart Fed. R. Evid. 412, but 
state courts have split over whether the public trial right applies 
to state law rape shield hearings. Compare Commonwealth v. 
Jones, 37 N.E.3d 589 (Mass. 2015) (finding mandatory closure of 
rape shield hearings unconstitutional), and State v. Hoff , 385 
P.3d 945, 949 (Mont. 2016) (finding right to public trial attached 
to rape shield hearing), with State v. McNeil , 393 S.E.2d 123, 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
The Supreme Court has , however, confirmed that the 
public trial right does apply to two specific pretrial proceed-
ings—suppression hearings and voir dire —but  not for the 
same reasons. In Waller, the Court concluded that suppres-
sion hearings are often just as important as the trial itself, 
noting that in many criminal trials, the suppression hear-
ing determines the outcome because defendants often ac-
cept a plea deal  if they lose a motion to suppress critical 
evidence. 467 U.S. at 46- 47. The Court also observed that 
challenges to the seizure of evidence frequently attac k the 
conduct of law enforcement and prosecutors , issues in 
which there is a strong public interest in transparency and 
increased public scrutiny. Id. at 47. 
In Presley v. Georgia, the Supreme Court concluded that 
if the First Amendment granted the public the right to at-
tend juror selection proceedings (as it had previously held 
in Press-Enterprise Co. v. Superior Court of California,  464 
U.S. 501 (1984)), then “there is no legitimate reason” not to 
extend the same right of a proceeding open to the public to 
a criminal defendant under the Sixth Amendment. 558 
U.S. 209, 213 (2010) (per curiam). In Press-Enterprise, the 
Court based its conclusion on two factors: (1) that the se-
lection of jurors had historically been a presumptively pub-
lic process in both colonial America and in England, and (2) 
that opening a proceeding to the public enhances both the 
basic fairness of the proceeding and the appearance of fair-
ness to the public. 464 U.S. at 505-08. 
Appellant argues that the values discussed in Waller  
are implicated by M.R.E.  412 hearings, and therefore the 
Sixth Amendment right to a public trial should extend to 
M.R.E. 412 hearings as well . In support of this argument, 
Appellant relies primarily on Jones , a decision from the 
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in which that 
court concluded that the public trial right extended to in 
camera hearings conducted under the Massachusetts rape 
shield law. 37 N.E.3d at 603-07 (examining Mass. Gen. 
 
126-27 (N.C. Ct. App. 1990) (finding no error in closure of rape  
shield hearing and distinguishing from Waller ), and State v. 
Macbale, 305 P.3d 107 (Or. 2013) (upholding in camera require-
ment for the rape shield hearings). 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Laws ch. 233, §  21B). The Massachusetts court reasoned 
that rape shield hearings have “a far closer kinship to 
pretrial suppression hearings” tha n to routine 
administrative matters that other courts have ruled may 
be closed. Id. at 604. The court further concluded that, like 
suppression hearings, the judge’s determination during a 
rape shield hearing will often have “a critical impact on the 
trial itself .” Id. The court also rejected the reasoning of 
other state courts that have concluded that the Sixth 
Amendment public trial right does  not extend to their 
states’ rape shield hearings. Id. at 605-06. 
We are not persuaded by Appellant’s arguments or by 
the Jones opinion. In our view, M .R.E. 412 hearings are 
fundamentally different from suppression hearings  and 
voir dire  for several reasons.  First, u nlike suppression 
hearings—where  a party attempts to exclude evidence that 
is otherwise going to be admitted at trial— the subject mat-
ter of a M.R.E. 412 hearing is presumed to be inadmissible 
and therefore excluded from trial. The President has pre-
determined that evidence of a sexual offense victim’s past 
sexual behavior or sexual predisposition is irrelevant to the 
question of the accused’s guilt unless it meets one of three 
express exceptions. M.R.E. 412(a), (b). And except for when 
the evidence is constitutionally required to be admitted to 
protect the accused’s due process rights, qualifying under 
one of the other two exception s is still not sufficient on its 
own to admit the proffered evidence. The President has fur-
ther ordered that M.R.E. 412 evidence is still inadmissible 
unless the probative value of such evidence outweighs the 
danger of unfair prejudice to the victim’s privacy . 
M.R.E. 412(c)(3). And even then, the proffered M.R.E.  412 
evidence could still be excluded for prejudice, confusion, 
waste of time, or other reasons  under M.R.E.  403. 
M.R.E. 412(c)(3).  
Second, we do not view M.R .E. 412 hearings to be as 
case critical or potentially dispositive as suppression hear-
ings. The evidence litigated in M .R.E. 412 hearings is so 
collateral that it is rebuttably presumed to be irrelevant . 
Suppression hearings, in contrast, typically involve essen-
tial evidence such as confessions, identifications of the ac-
cused, or the physical evidence providing the basis of the 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
charges at trial.  Suppression hearings carry such weight 
that the outcome of the hearing often results in charges be-
ing dropped or a plea being taken. Waller, 467 U.S. at  46 
(“suppression hearings often are as important as the trial 
itself”). Additionally, suppression hearings often turn on 
the determination of contested factual matters that require 
resolution for a ruling on exclusion to be reached. Con-
versely, M.R.E. 412 hearings typically turn on legal ques-
tions—whether one of the exceptions applies and whether 
the proffered evidence’s probative value outweighs unfair 
prejudice to the victim’s privacy. Because the outcome of 
M.R.E. 412 hearings turn on questions of relevance, proba-
tive value, and prejudice, we view these rulings more akin 
to a pretrial conference concerning an evidentiary matter 
than a suppression hearing.
6 Cf. Richmond Newspapers,  
448 U.S. at 598 n.23 (Brennan, J., concurring  in the judg-
ment) (noting that the implicit guarantee of the First 
Amendment of the public to attend criminal trials does not 
restrict judges’ ability to conduct conferences in chambers, 
“inasmuch as such conferences are distinct from trial pro-
ceedings”). 
Third, we do not believe that M.R.E.  412 hearings in-
voke the same concerns about transparency and public 
scrutiny as suppression hearings. Suppression hearings of-
ten involve allegations of law enforcement negligence or 
malfeasance. Such misconduct strikes at the heart of  due 
process and personal liberty, and the public airing of such 
behavior is of paramount interest to the public writ large. 
Waller, 467 U.S. at 47 (“The public in general also has a 
strong interest in exposing substantial allegations of police 
misconduct to the salutary effects of public scrutiny.”) . In 
contrast, evidence of a specific victim’s past sexual behav-
ior or predisposition has little value to the public.  Indeed, 
an express purpose of M.R.E. 412 is to prevent unnecessary 
airing of a victim’s sexual history. See MCM, Analysis of 
the Military Rules of Evidence app. 22 at A22-29 (1984 ed.) 
 
6 In Jones, the Massachusetts court asserted without expla-
nation that the outcome of rape shield hearings “ ‘frequently de-
pends on a resolution of factual matters.’ ” 37 N.E.3d at 604 
(quoting Waller, 467 U.S. at 47). At least in the context of 
M.R.E. 412, we disagree with that assessment. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
(explaining that M.R.E. 412 “is intended to shield victims 
of sexual assaults from the often embarrassing and degrad-
ing cross-examination and evidence presentations common 
to [sexual offense prosecutions]”). And if the evidence prof-
fered at a M.R.E. 412 hearing is determined to be admissi-
ble, that evidence will be presented in open court  during 
the public portion of the accused’s trial. 
Finally, unlike the voir dire process, M. R.E. 412 hear-
ings have no historical tradition of being public as they are 
relatively new creations. But while rape  shield hearings 
may be novel, the exclusion of presumptively irrelevant ev-
idence from a trial is most certainly not. Indeed, “a presup-
position involved in the very conception of a rational sys-
tem of evidence”  is the fundamental principle “which 
forbids receiving anything irrelevant, not logically proba-
tive.” James Bradley Thayer, Preliminary Treatise on Evi-
dence at the Common Law 264-65 (1898). Accordingly, his-
torical precedent does not support the public airing of 
irrelevant evidence. 
We acknowledge that M .R.E. 412 hearings share some 
characteristics with the core  phases of courts-martial to 
which the public trial right applies . M.R.E. 412 hearing s 
may involve the calling of witnesses and the presentation 
of evidence. But these similarities in form do not overcome 
the significant differences in substance described above. 
We also recognize that the Supreme Court in Waller  
identified several “aims and interests” that contributed to 
its conclusion that the public trial right applies to suppres-
sion hearings. 467 U.S. at 446. Appellant argues that the 
public trial right should also apply to M.R.E. 412 hearings 
because some of these interests—such as ensuring that the 
public sees that the accused is fairly dealt with and not un-
justly condemned; ensuring that the judge and prosecutor  
carry out their duties responsibly; and discouraging per-
jury—are also implicated in M.R.E.  412 hearings. We are 
not persuaded by this argument for two reasons. First, 
these Waller “aims and interests” are arguably implicated 
in every phase of a court -martial, which would call into 
question the constitutionality of every courtroom closure 
and in camera review dictated by the Manual , including 
those in M.R.E.  505 ( classified information) , M.R.E. 506 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
(government information), M.R.E. 507 (identity of inform-
ants), M.R.E. 513 (psychotherapist-patient privilege), and 
M.R.E. 514 (victim advocate -victim privilege).  We do not 
believe that the Supreme Court in Waller intended to ex-
tend the public trial right to every pretrial proceeding in a 
criminal trial.7 Second, the Supreme Court also recognized 
encouraging witnesses to come forward as an important in-
terest in Waller. 467 U.S. at 46. As noted above, an express 
purpose of M.R.E. 412 is to protect the victims of sexual of-
fenses from embarrassing and degrading cross -examina-
tion. This Waller interest is advanced by the clos ure of 
M.R.E. 412 hearings rather than degraded by it. 
Taking all these factors into account, we conclude that 
the right to a public trial under the Sixth Amendment does 
not extend to M.R.E. 412 hearings. These hearings have a 
discrete and limited purpose involving evidentiary deter-
minations and are not part of the “trial” for purposes of the 
public trial right. Consequently, Waller and its standard 
are inapplicable, and the military judge did not violate the 
Sixth Amendment by closing the courtroom  for the 
M.R.E. 412 hearing. 
C. Rule for Courts-Martial 806 
Even though the Sixth Amendment public trial right 
does not apply to M.R.E.  412 hearings, the President has 
the authority under Article  36, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  836 
(2018), to grant servicemembers greater protections than 
those guaranteed by the Constitution. Consistent with this 
principle, Appellant argues that the President conferred on 
servicemembers a qualified right t o a public M.R.E. 412 
hearing via R.C.M. 806 regardless of the applicability of 
the Sixth Amendment. 
R.C.M. 806 states: “Except as otherwise provided in this 
rule, courts -martial shall be open to the public.” 
R.C.M 806(a) (2019 ed.). The rule further provides: 
 
7 Such an interpretation of Waller would also call into ques-
tion the constitutionality of federal grand jury proceedings, 
which are generally secret under Federal Rule of Criminal Pro-
cedure 6(e). 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Courts-martial shall be open to the public unless 
(A) there is a substantial probability that an over-
riding interest will be prejudiced if the proceed-
ings remain open; (B)  closure is no broader than 
necessary to protect the overriding interest; 
(C) reasonable alternatives to closure were con-
sidered and found inadequate; and (D)  the mili-
tary judge makes case-specific findings on the rec-
ord justifying closure. 
R.C.M. 806(b)(4) (2019 ed.). This is essentially a codifica-
tion of the four-factor test presented by the Supreme Court 
in Waller for determining whether the closure of a suppres-
sion hearing was justified . Hasan, 84 M.J. at  205 & n.14 
(noting that the same standard applied to both constitu-
tional and R.C.M. court closure claims). 
Appellant’s argument is based on an alleged tension be-
tween M.R.E. 412(c)(2), which mandates the closure of 
M.R.E. 412 hearings, and R.C.M  806(a), w hich expressly 
states that courts-martial “shall be open to the public” un-
less “otherwise provided by this rule.” Noting that 
R.C.M. 806 does not expressly exclude any proceedings 
from its application, Appellant argues that we must inter-
pret M.R.E. 412(c)(2) to require closure only if the four-fac-
tor Waller test codified in R.C.M. 806(b)(4) has been satis-
fied.8 Because the military judge did not consider whether 
R.C.M. 806(b)(4) was satisfied in this case , Appellant ar-
gues that the military judge abused his discretion when he 
closed Appellant’s M.R.E. 412 hearing. Again, we disagree. 
As an initial matter, it is not clear why “courts-martial” 
in R.C.M. 806(a) should be interpreted any broader than 
the Supreme Court interprets “trial” in the Sixth 
Amendment. See Waller, 467 U.S. at 43-44 (interpreting 
trial as the “presentation of evidence to the jury” and “the 
 
8 Appellant also argues in a footnote that M.R.E. 412 did not 
apply in this case because the evidence in question was prior al-
legations of sexual assault, not the victim’s sexual behavior or 
predisposition. See, e.g., Fed. R. Evid. 412, Advisory Committee 
Notes to 1994 Amendments (“Evidence offered to prove allegedly 
false prior claims by the victim is not barred by Rule 412. How-
ever, this evidence is subject to the requirements of Rule 404.”). 
Given our resolution of Appellant’s other arguments , we need 
not address this issue. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
actual proof at trial”). Appellant cites R.C.M. 103(8)(B) in 
support of his argument that R.C.M.  806(a) applies to all 
Article 39(a) hearings, but that provision addresses who is 
part of a court -martial rather than which procedures are 
part of a court -martial for the purposes of R.C.M.  806. 
Furthermore, R.C.M.  103(8)(B) includes the caveat 
“depending on the context”  which further undermines 
Appellant’s argument. Given that R.C.M.  806 expressly 
incorporates the Supreme Court’s test from Waller, we see 
no obvious reason why the public trial right in 
R.C.M. 806(a) would be any broader than the right 
guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment. 
But we need not determine the precise scope of the 
R.C.M. public trial right because even if we accepted Ap-
pellant’s interpretation of R.C.M.  806(a), we still do not 
agree with his broader  argument. Any tension between 
M.R.E. 412 and R.C.M . 806 would easily be resolved 
through the application of a well-established canon of stat-
utory interpretation: the specific governs the general. 
RadLAX Gateway Hotel, LLC v. Amalgamated Bank , 566 
U.S. 639, 645 (2012). As explained by the Supreme Court, 
this canon is particularly true when there is a comprehen-
sive statutory scheme and the drafters have purposely ad-
dressed specific concerns with specific solutions.  Id. This 
canon is often applied when there is a general rule of per-
mission or prohibition that is contradicted by a contrary 
specific rule. Id. To harmonize the scheme, the specific pro-
vision is interpreted as an exception to the general rule. Id. 
Here, the Manual presents a comprehensive scheme for 
conducting courts-martial. R.C.M. 806(a) is a general rule 
that prohibits the closure of courts-martial to the public. In 
contrast, M.R.E. 412(c) is a narrow mandate for closed pro-
ceedings in very specific circumstances. It only applies if a 
party has properly moved to offer a certain type of evi-
dence, under a specific exception to the general prohibition 
of said evidence.  Following the canon, M.R.E. 412(c)(2) is 
properly interpreted as an exception to R.C.M.  806’s gen-
eral rule. Accordingly, the restrictions in R.C.M. 806(b)(4) 
do not apply to the closure of M.R.E. 412 hearings. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
D. Conclusion 
Neither the Sixth Amendment public trial right nor the 
public trial right conferred by R.C.M.  806 applies to hear-
ings conducted pursuant to M.R.E. 412(c)(2). We therefore 
answer the granted issue in the negative and hold that the 
military judge’s closure of the courtroom did not violate Ap-
pellant’s right to a public trial.  
IV. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge Maggs, dissenting.
The Court holds that a military judge may close a hear-
ing on the admissibility of evidence under Military Rule of 
Evidence (M.R.E.) 412  without conducting a case-by-case 
analysis of whether the closure would violate the accused’s 
Sixth Amendment right to a public trial . This holding, in 
my view, conflicts with the Supreme Court’s decision s in 
Waller v. Georgia, 467 U.S. 39 (1984) , and Presley v. Geor-
gia, 558 U.S. 209 (2010) (per curiam), and this Court’s de-
cision in ABC, Inc. v. Powell, 47 M.J. 363 (C.A.A.F. 1997). 
In Waller, the Supreme Court held that a trial judge 
may close certain types of  hearings over the accused’s ob-
jection only after making a determination on the specific 
facts of the case : (1) that closing the hearing will advance 
an “overriding interest,” (2) that the closure is “no broader 
than necessary to protect that interest,” and (3) that there 
are no “reasonable alternatives” to closing the hearing. 467 
U.S. at 48;  see also Presl ey, 558 U.S. at 213-14 (following 
Waller). This Court reached the same conclusion in ABC, 
Inc., holding that a decision to close certain types of hear-
ings “must be made on a case-by-case, witness-by-witness, 
and circumstance-by-circumstance basis.” 47 M.J. at 365. 
For reasons that I will explain, I conclude that a hearing 
under M.R.E. 412  is the kind of hearing for which an  
individualized determination  is necessary  under these 
precedents. No such determination was made in this case. 
I therefore would remand the case for additional 
proceedings to ascertain whether the omission of the 
individualized determination  caused any prejudice.  
Because the Court affirms  without ordering such a 
remand, I respectfully dissent. 
I. Background 
M.R.E. 412(a) generally bars admission of evidence of-
fered to prove that the victim of a sexual offense “engaged 
in other sexual behavior” or  offered to prove the “ victim’s 
sexual predisposition.” M.R.E. 412(b), however, recognizes 
certain except ions to this general prohibition . M.R.E. 
412(c) then establishes procedures that the military judge 
must follow if an accused seeks admission of evidence un-
der one of these exceptions.  Important here, M.R.E. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
2 
 
412(c)(2) specifies: “Before admitting evidence under this 
rule, the military judge must conduct a hearing, which 
shall be closed.” (Emphasis added.) 
In this case, the military  judge twice closed the court -
martial to conduct a hearing pursuant to M.R.E. 412(c)(2) 
to determine whether proffered evidence was admissible 
under the exceptions in M.R.E. 412(b).  The military judge 
ruled that the evidence at issue during the first hearing 
could be admitted under one of the exceptions found in 
M.R.E. 412(b) . Conversely, the military judge ruled that 
the evidence proffered at the second hearing could not be 
admitted at the court-martial. The record contains the tes-
timony of witnesses, the arguments of counsel, and the de-
cision of the military judge, but all of this is under seal and 
thus not available for the public to see.  
Prior to the second hearing, trial defense counsel ob-
jected to its closure. Trial defense counsel argued that the 
military judge could not close the court-martial to the pub-
lic without “a constitutional analysis as to why the hearing 
is going to be closed.” The military judge briefly responded 
that the objection “is noted and is overruled.” The United 
States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) summarily 
affirmed in a per curiam decision. We granted review to 
decide the question “[w]hether the total closure of the court 
over Appellant’s objection violated his right to a public 
trial.” 
II. Discussion 
The Sixth Amendment provides: “In all criminal prose-
cutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and 
public trial.” U.S. Const. amend. VI. This Court has previ-
ously held that the Sixth Amendment right to a public trial 
applies to a court -martial. United States v. Hershey , 20 
M.J. 433, 435 (C.M.A. 1985). This case presents three ques-
tions about the right to a public trial. The first question is 
whether a hearing under M.R.E. 412 is covered by the 
Sixth Amendment  right to a public trial . If this kind of 
hearing is covered, the second question is whether the mil-
itary judge ’s summary decision to close the hearing vio-
lated that right. And if a violation did occur, the third ques-
tion is what remedy is necessary. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
3 
 
A. Scope of the “Public Trial” Right 
The right to a public trial  “extends beyond the actual 
proof at trial.” Waller, 467 U.S. at 44. In Waller, for exam-
ple, the Supreme Court held that the public trial right ap-
plied to a hearing on a motion to suppress wiretap evi-
dence. Id. at 43. Similarly, in Presley, the Supreme Court 
held that the public trial right extended to voir dire pro-
ceedings. 558 U.S. at 209;  see also Press-Enterprise Co. v. 
Superior Ct. of California, 464 U.S. 501, 513 (1984)  (hold-
ing that the First Amendment also requires public voir dire 
proceedings).1 In ABC, Inc., this Court held that the public 
trial right extended to a preliminary hearing under Article 
32, Uniform Code of Military Justice  (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 832 (1994). 47 M.J. at 365. 
The Supreme Court  has not announced a specific rule 
for determining the portions of a criminal proceeding that 
are subject to the public trial right.
2 In the absence of such 
a rule, however, the Supreme Court decision in Waller 
provides guidance for determining the types of proceedings 
that are covered by the public trial right. T he Supreme 
 
1 The Supreme Cour t has reasoned that the First Amend-
ment implicitly provides a right of public access to trials. Presley, 
558 U.S. at 211-12 (explaining precedents in this area). The Su-
preme Court has not determined whether the right to a public 
trial under the Sixth Amendment is “coextensive” with this First 
Amendment right in all contexts. Id.  at 213. But in Waller and 
Presley, which were Sixth Amendment cases, the Supreme Court 
relied “heavily” on Press-Enterprise, which was a First Amend-
ment case. Id. at 212-13. 
2 The Air Force Appellate Defense Division (AFADD), as ami-
cus curiae, briefly but helpfully addresses the original meaning 
of the term “public trial” in the Sixth Amendment. AFADD a r-
gues that a hearing analogous to a hearing under M.R.E. 412  
would have been considered part of a “public trial” at the time of 
the Sixth Amendment’s adoption because “ [s]uch a hearing  
bears the essential attributes of a late-eighteenth century Amer-
ican criminal trial.” Although this argument may well be correct, 
I hesitate to rely on it because neither the Government nor Ap-
pellant discusses the original meaning of “public trial” in their 
briefs. I therefore confine my analysis to the precedents of the 
Supreme Court and this Court and leave the question of the orig-
inal meaning of “public trial” for a future decision. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
4 
 
Court in Waller first observed that public trials  serve 
important functions, such as allow ing the public to see 
whether an accused person is treated fairly ; ensuring the 
prosecutor, judge, and jury act responsibly ; encouraging 
witnesses to come forward ; and discouraging perjury. 467 
U.S. at 46. The Supreme Court then reasoned that “[t]hese 
aims and interests are no less pressing in a hearing to 
suppress” evidence than in “the trial itself.” Id. (citations 
omitted). 
Neither the Supreme Court nor this Court ha s decided 
the issue of whether  the public trial right applies to 
hearings under M.R.E. 412 or its federal civilian analogue, 
Fed. R. Evid. 412.3 State courts are divided on whether the 
public trial right applies to state law analogues  of M.R.E. 
412 and Fed. R. Evid. 412 . Compare, e.g., Commonwealth 
v. Jones, 37 N.E.3d 589, 602 (Mass. 2015) (holding that the 
public trial right extends to hearings under the state law 
equivalent of Fed. R. Evid. 412 and M.R.E. 412), with State 
v. Macbale, 305 P.3d 107, 122  (Or. 2013) (holding the 
opposite). 
Having considered the thorough arguments of the par-
ties, I am persuaded that the public trial right does apply 
to an M.R.E. 412 hearing. In my view, this issue is largely 
controlled by the reasoning of  this Court in ABC, Inc . In 
ABC, Inc., the Court considered whether an investigative 
hearing under Article 32, UCMJ, was properly closed to the 
 
3 M.R.E. 412 is similar to Fed. R. Evid. 412, which this Court 
has described as M.R.E. 412’s “federal analogue.” United States 
v. Gaddis , 70 M.J. 248, 255 (C.A.A.F. 2011). Amendments to 
M.R.E. 412 have ensured that M.R.E. 412 and Fed. R. Evid. 412 
remain “closely align[ed].” Manual for Courts -Martial, United 
States, Analysis of the Military Rules of Evidence app. 16 at 
A16-3 (2019 ed.) [hereinafter Drafters’ Analysis]. Thus, Fed. R. 
Evid. 412(a) and 412(b) contain the same general prohibitions 
and exceptions as M.R.E. 412(a) and 412(b). And much like 
M.R.E. 412(c)(2), Fed. R. Evid. 412(c)(2) provides: “Before admit-
ting evidence under this rule, the court must conduct an in cam-
era hearing and give the victim and parties a right to attend and 
be heard.” Given the similarity of the two provisions, this Court 
has considered cases under Fed. R. Evid. 412 when interpreting 
M.R.E. 412. E.g., Gaddis, 70 M.J. at 252-53. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
5 
 
public and press. That case, like this case, involved allega-
tions of sexual misconduct involving multiple victims. The 
investigating officer had closed the hearing  under Article 
32, UCMJ, in part to “shield the alleged victims from pos-
sible news reports about anticipated attempts to delve into 
each woman’s sexual history.”4 47 M.J. at 364. But follow-
ing the Supreme Court’s decision in Press-Enterprise Co. 
and other cases, the Court held that “the military accused 
is likewise entitled to a public Article 32 investigative hear-
ing.” Id. at 365 (citations omitted). 
I see no persuasive way of distinguishing ABC, Inc. and 
this case. Both cases concerned hearings prior to trial on 
the merits involving testimony as to the sexual experiences 
of alleged victims. There was no reason to believe that all 
testimony presented at the  Article 32 , UCMJ,  hearing 
would later be proffered or admitted at the court- martial. 
But the Court still found that the right to a public trial re-
quired the Article 32, UCMJ, hearing to be presumptively 
open. Id.  
Although the Government does not distinguish ABC 
Inc., the Government argues that M.R.E. 412 hearings are 
unlike other hearings that deal with the merits of a case 
because M.R.E. 412 creates a “rule of exclusion” where the 
evidence at issue is presumed to be irrelevant. But the type 
of evidence proffered in an M.R.E. 412 hearing  is not al-
ways irrelevant. It may be admitted if one of the exceptions 
in M.R.E. 412(b) applies. Indeed, this Court has overturned 
decisions made by military judges to exclude eviden ce un-
der M.R.E. 412 whe n this Court determined that the evi-
dence did fall into one of the exceptions outlined under 
M.R.E. 412(b) and that exclusion of the evidence was prej-
udicial to the accused. E.g., United States v. Ellerbrock, 70 
M.J. 314, 320-21 (C.A.A.F. 2011); United States v. Buena-
ventura, 45 M.J. 72, 80  (C.A.A.F. 1996); United States v. 
Jensen, 25 M.J. 284 , 289 (C.M.A. 1987); United States v. 
 
4 The current version of Article 32, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 832(d)(3) (2024), states that a “victim may not be required to 
testify at the preliminary hearing.” ABC, Inc. was decided before 
the victim’s right to refuse to testify at an Article 32 hearing was 
added to the UCMJ. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
6 
 
Dorsey, 16 M.J. 1, 8 (C.M.A. 1983); United States v. Gray , 
40 M.J. 77, 80 -81 (C.M.A. 1994). In short, in many cases, 
the admission of evidence important to the court- martial 
may turn on the outcome of a n M.R.E. 412 hearing in the 
same way as it may turn on the outcome of a suppression 
hearing.  
In this respect , I agree with the  reasoning of the Su-
preme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in Jones. Address-
ing closed hearings under a Massachusetts “rape shield 
law” analogue to Fed. R. Evid. 412, the court in that case 
stated: 
A rape shield hearing i s neither a routine ad-
ministrative matter nor is it “trivial” to the trial. 
On the contrary, a rape shield hearing has a far 
closer kinship to pretrial suppression hearings, to 
which the United States Supreme Court decided 
in Waller that the Sixth Amendment public trial 
right attaches, than to any of the routine admin-
istrative matters that courts have subsequently 
determined may be conducted in a closed court 
room. Like a pretrial suppression hearing, the de-
termination emerging from a rape shield hearing 
often will have a critical impact on the trial itself, 
particularly in cases that hinge on the issue of 
consent. Additionally, the admissibility of evi-
dence otherwise barred under the rape shield law 
hinges on a showing that the evidence fits into one 
of the exceptions to the statute . . . . The outcome 
of a rape shield hearing, then, like that of a pre-
trial suppression hearing, “frequently depends on 
a resolution of factual matters.” Waller, 467 U.S. 
at 47. 
Jones, 37 N.E.3d at 604 (citation omitted). 
B. Possible Closure Despite the Public Trial Right 
Although in my view the right to a public trial extends 
to hearings under M.R.E. 412, I recognize that this right is 
not absolute. Press-Enterprise Co., 464 U.S. at 509. On the 
contrary, closures of proceedings covered by the public trial 
right may occur in some instances, although these closures 
“must be rare and only for cause shown that outweighs the 
value of openness.” Id. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
7 
 
In Waller, the Supreme Court held that a hearing to 
which the public trial right extends may be closed if (1) “the 
party seeking to close the hearing  . . . advance[s] an over-
riding interest that is likely to be prejudiced, ” (2) “the clo-
sure [is] no broader than necessary to protect that inter-
est,” and (3) the “trial court  . . . consider[s] reasonable 
alternatives to closing the proceeding.” Waller, 467 U.S. at 
48. The trial court  also must “make findings adequate to 
support the closure” under these considerations. Id. And as 
noted previously, this Court held in ABC, Inc. that the de-
termination whether to close a portion of the court-martial 
“must be made on a case -by-case, witness-by-witness, and 
circumstance-by-circumstance basis.” ABC, Inc., 47 M.J. at 
365 (citing Globe Newspaper Co. v. Superior C t. for the 
Cnty. of Norfolk, 457 U.S. 596, 609 (1982)). 
Accordingly, if the accused requests that an M.R.E. 412 
hearing be open, the military judge must make an individ-
ualized determination of whether the accused’s public trial 
right must yield in accordance with Waller  and ABC, Inc. 
For most M.R.E. 412 hearings, the named victim’s privacy 
likely will be the kind of “overriding interest” that the Su-
preme Court addressed in Waller. This Court, indeed, pre-
viously ha s recognized that “ M.R.E. 412 is intended to 
‘shield victims of sexual assaults from the often embarrass-
ing and degrading cross-examination and evidence presen-
tations common to ’ ” sexual offense prosecutions  in the 
past. Gaddis, 70 M.J. at 252 (quoting  Drafters’ Analysis 
app. 22 at A22-35 (2008 ed.)). Accordingly, in a given case, 
a military judge may conclude, after an individualized 
analysis, that the hearing or portions of the hearing should 
be closed. 
But the usually important interest in the named vic-
tim’s privacy might not be “overriding” in all cases. For ex-
ample, the named victim for whatever reason might not op-
pose an open hearing  with respect to some matters . And 
even if some parts of a hearing should be closed  under the 
test in Waller, other parts of the hearing may not need to 
be closed. For example, if counsel are merely arguing about 
legal issues, such as the meaning of M.R.E. 412 or legal 
precedents, without disclosing confidential facts,  closure 
may be unnecessary. 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
8 
 
C. Remedy in This Case 
The foregoing discussion does not answer the question 
of whether the second M.R.E. 412 hearing in this case 
should have been open or closed , in whole or in part . In-
stead, it leads only to the conclusion that the military judge 
erred by not making an individualized determination  
whether that hearing should be closed once the accused ob-
jected to its closure . In Waller, the Supreme Court dealt 
with a similar situation by remanding the case and order-
ing an individualized determination of whether parts of the 
hearing in question should have been open and whether a 
new hearing should be held. Waller, 467 U.S. at 50. T he 
Supreme Court further explained that “[i]f, after a new . . . 
hearing, essentially the same evidence is suppressed, a 
new trial presumably would be a windfall for the defend-
ant, and not in the public interest.” Id. 
Following this precedent, the appropriate remedy here 
would be to remand the case for a DuBay  hearing.
5 In the 
DuBay hearing, the military judge would make an individ-
ualized determination whether Appellant’s M.R.E. 412 
hearing should have been closed. If this case-by-case deter-
mination were to reveal that the M.R.E. 412 hearing 
should have been closed, any error in failing to make a  
case-by-case determination in the first instance w ould be 
harmless, and the findings and sentence should be af-
firmed. 
On the other hand, if the DuBay military judge were to 
determine that the second M.R.E. 412 hearing in this case 
should not have been closed, then a public M.R.E. 412 hear-
ing would have to be held. What happens next would de-
pend on the outcome of the public hearing. If the  public 
hearing resulted in the same suppression  of the evidence 
that already occurred at the original trial, then a rehearing 
would be  unnecessary, and the findings and sentence 
would have to be affirmed. Otherwise, a new trial with the 
new evidence w ould be necessary unless exclusion of the 
evidence was harmless. 
 
5 United States v. DuBay , 17 C.M.A. 147, 37 C.M.R. 411 
(1967). 
United States v. Miller, No. 25-0025/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
9 
 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, I would not affirm the deci-
sion of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
at this time but would instead remand the case for further 
proceedings consistent with my opinion. 