This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Edmond A. MAEBANE III, 
Hospital Corpsman Second Class Petty Officer 
United States Navy, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0196 
Crim. App. No. 202200228 
 
Argued March 18, 2025—Decided September 18, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Stephen F. Keane 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Zoe R. Danielczyk, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Lieutenant Colonel Matthew E. Neely, 
USMC (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant K. Matthew Parker, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Colonel Iain D. Pedden, USMC, 
Lieutenant Commander James P. Wu Zhu , JAGC, 
USN, Major Candace G. White, USMC, and Brian K. 
Keller, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON and Judge 
JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a dissenting 
opinion, in which Judge HARDY joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A panel of officer s and enlisted members at a general 
court-martial convicted Appellant, contrary to his pleas, of 
one specification of reckless endangerment and one 
specification of involuntary manslaughter, in violation of 
Articles 114 and 119, Uniform Code of Military Jus tice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 914, 919  (2018). The United States 
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) 
affirmed the findings and sentence.  United States v. 
Maebane, No. NMCCA 202200228, 2024 CCA LEXIS 171, 
at *34 -35, 2024 WL 1954294, at *12- 13 (N -M. Ct. Crim. 
App. May 3, 2024) (unpublished).  The granted issue 
requires us to decide whether an accused has “a S ixth 
Amendment right to present evidence of a recorded third 
party’s confession to the crime for which the accused is on 
trial.” United States v. Maebane, 85 M.J. 151 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (order granting review). We conclude that under the 
facts of this case, the military judge violated Appellant’s 
constitutional right to present the evidence, and the 
military judge’s exclusion of such evidence was prejudicial. 
Accordingly, we set aside the decision of the NMCCA.  
I. Background 
On the evening of August 16, 2019, Appellant hosted a 
gathering at his residence. In attendance were Hospital 
Corpsman Third Class Petty Officer [HM3] Whiskey, 
Hospital Corpsman Second Class Petty Officer [HM2] 
Hotel, HM2 Wilson, Hospital Corpsman First Class Petty 
Officer [HM1] Davis, Appellant, and the victim, [HM3] 
Delta. 
After arriving at Appellant ’s home between 
approximately 6:30 and 7:30 p.m. , the group cooked food, 
listened to music, smoked cigars, and consumed varying 
quantities of alcohol. At some point in the evening, 
Appellant showed HM2 Wilson his new Springfield 9mm 
pistol. According to HM2 Wilson, Appellant took the pistol 
from a nearby coffee table, “cleared [the pistol], so removed 
the magazine, cleared [the] round that was in the chamber. 
And then, [Appellant] handed [HM2 Wilson] the pistol. ” 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
Appellant subsequently placed the magazine and cleared 
round onto the nearby television stand.1 According to HM2 
Wilson, he then handed the pistol back to Appellant, who 
passed the gun to the others at the party. However, HM2 
Hotel claimed that no one other than HM2 Wilson and 
Appellant handled a firearm that night. 
Over the course of the evening, Appellant brought out 
two additional firearms, a Springfield 1911 .45 pistol and a 
lever action rifle. As the weapons were passed around, 
there were instances where the s ailors “dry fired” the 
weapons (i.e., pulling their triggers while they were 
unloaded). Appellant and HM3 Whiskey were seen dry 
firing the Springfield 9mm while pointing it at the victim. 
Eventually, the weapons were put away. The lever 
action rifle was put behind a recliner, the 1911 .45 was 
placed between a wall and couch, and the Springfield 9mm 
was set down under a coffee table. Later,  as the group 
played a drinking game , HM2 Wilson noticed the 9mm 
magazine and spare round were still on the television 
stand. After asking HM2 Davis to pass him the magazine 
and spare round, HM2 Wilson removed each round from 
the magazine, counted the m, reloaded the magazine, and 
then placed both the magazi ne and spare round onto a 
windowsill near him. He did so to prevent someone from 
loading a round into the Springfield 9mm by accident. 
Eventually, Appellant asked HM2 Wilson for the rounds 
and magazine back, stating he intended to put the 
Springfield 9mm away upstairs. But rather than bringing 
the rounds and magazine upstairs, Appellant “ loaded the 
magazine into the pistol, charged a round into [the] 
chamber [by racking the slide], took the magazine out, put 
the spare round into the magazine ” and then place d “the 
magazine back [into] the pistol. ” Appellant then put the 
Springfield 9mm in his waistband. 
 
1 The NMCCA’s finding that HM2 Wilson took this action is 
clearly erroneous. Maebane, 2024 CCA LEXIS 171, at * 3, 2024 
WL 1954294, at *1. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
Sometime thereafter, Appellant began wrestling with 
the victim. At this point, Appellant gave HM2 Wilson both 
the handguns. Having seen Appellant load the Springfield 
9mm, HM2 Wilson placed the weapon under his thighs 
while Appellant and the victim wrestle d. When the 
wrestling ended, Appellant asked for the Springfield 9mm 
back and again put the gun in his waistband. 
Around midnight, Appellant and the victim began 
wrestling again. Subsequent testimony stated that  
Appellant pulled the Springfield 9mm from his waistband 
and placed it against the victim ’s head. The victim then 
“grabbed [the pistol] by the front of the muzzle and, sort of, 
pulled it in, like, a couple inches to his forehead. ” Shortly 
before this, HM2 Hotel had witnessed Appellant pull the 
slide, causing a round to enter the firing chamber. Seeing 
the pistol against the victim’ s head and believing 
Appellant, in pulling the slide with a loaded magazine in 
the weapon, had just put another round in the chamber, 
HM2 Hotel “tried to jump up and tell him to stop. ” HM2 
Hotel testified that he was too late, and that Appellant 
pulled the trigger, killing the victim. 
HM2 Wilson called 911. Agents from both the Army 
Criminal Investigative Division (CID) and the Naval 
Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) responded to the 
call. Appellant told CID that the victim had “reached down 
into the sofa, pulled out a pistol and put it to his head and 
shot himself.” Around 1:45 a.m. on August 17, 2019, HM3 
Whiskey, HM2 Hotel, HM2 Wilson, HM1 Davis, and 
Appellant were then interviewed. HM3 Whiskey, HM2 
Hotel, HM2 Wilson, and HM1 Davis recalled hearing a shot 
but denied seeing it fired. Appellant did not provide a 
statement. 
NCIS agents initially  came to the conclusion that the 
trajectory of the fatal shot came from where HM3 Whiskey 
was sitting. Early that morning, Special Agent [SA] Tango 
read HM3 Whiskey his rights under Article 31(b), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 831(b) (2018), and accused him of shooting the 
victim. In response, HM3 Whiskey stated, “If I shot him, I 
don’t remember, ” and went on to note he “ never put the 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
magazine inside the gun.” In response, SA Tango told HM3 
Whiskey that she believed the victim ’s death may have 
been an accident, and that HM3 Whiskey had a bright 
future ahead of him. HM3 Whiskey  replied, “I am 
scared . . . . If I knew I did it, I would say it.” Special Agent 
Tango next told HM3 Whiskey that she believed the bullet 
that killed the victim was fired from where he was seated. 
After being confronted with this allegation, HM3 Whiskey 
continued to assert he did not remember what happened. 
HM3 Whiskey then told SA Tango, “ [b]ut if like the 
evidence . . . you can ’t argue evidence if the evidence and 
stuff come back and say I [shot the victim] it was an 
accident.” About a minute later, he stated “ I don ’t know 
what happened . . . I literally do not know what happened 
. . . . Maybe I just blocked it out . . . . I don’t know what 
happened.” SA Tango elicited from HM3 Whiskey that he 
had an older sister and told him that the victim had a little 
sister who looked up to him. HM3 Whiskey  repeated, “If I 
knew that it was me that did it, I would say that it was me 
that did it.” 
SA Tango again told HM3 Whiskey that the shot that 
killed the victim was fired from where he was seated. In 
response, HM3 Whiskey said, “ If that ’s all the evidence 
[concerning the victim’s death], then I guess when I pulled 
the trigger and it went off, I guess my mind just shut it off, 
shut it out. Because I never intended for that to happen. It 
was just a stupid fucking accident. ” After this statement, 
SA Tango left the room. When she left, HM3 Whiskey 
immediately whispered to himself, “It wasn’t me.” 
When SA Tango returned after ten minutes, she 
continued her questioning. HM3 Whiskey admitted to 
playing with the gun but told SA Tango he did not know 
how it became loaded. Then, he stated, “I guess, I guess, I 
did it. There’s really no arguing it. It was a stupid fucking 
thing. It was a mistake. I didn ’t mean to do it. I fucking 
killed somebody.” 
After HM3 Whiskey confessed, SA Tango asked him a 
number of follow-up questions, including, “Did you pull the 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
trigger?” to which HM3 Whiskey responded, “I believe so.” 
He then stated “I swear I put down my beer, looked at the 
TV and that’s when the shot got off.” In response to further 
pressing, HM3 Whiskey told SA Tango, “I guess after I took 
a drink—beer, I picked up the gun either from the floor or 
couch next to me and then I shot him. ” He then stated, “I 
guess that makes sense if I did have the gun in my hand.” 
HM3 Whiskey went on to describe the shooting in 
further detail after further questioning , stating, “[w]hen I 
put down my beer, I picked up the gun, pointed it at him, 
expecting it to dry fire again, boom, hands went up because 
it scared the fuck out of me and that ’s when I saw him 
slump. That ’s when I was like holy shit. ” At SA Tango ’s 
urging, HM3 Whiskey wrote a letter to the victim ’s 
parents, stating, “Your son was a good man and I took him 
from you and this world out of pure stupidity. ” HM3 
Whiskey was placed into pretrial confinement the following 
day. 
While HM3 Whiskey was in pretrial confinement, HM1 
Davis voluntarily returned to NCIS and told investigators 
that he saw Appellant holding a gun immediately after 
hearing the gunshot. HM1 Davis described to investigators 
that he believed the weapon Appellant was holding was the 
Springfield 1911 .45 pistol. He further said that, from his 
perspective, only Appellant could have fired the shot that 
killed the victim. He did mention, however, that it was 
possible HM3 Whiskey could have fired the shot if the 
evidence showed the entrance wound was in the back of the 
victim’s head. An autopsy revealed that the bullet entered 
the victim’s forehead and exited the wound on the back of 
the victim’s head. 
Approximately twelve days after his interview with SA 
Tango, HM3 Whiskey recanted his confession. Among the 
reasons he offered for falsely confessing were “ he was 
scared,” he had received only “an hour of sleep,” he “wanted 
the questions to stop, ” and SA Tango ’s mention of the 
victim’s family “made him feel terrible.” Over the course of 
the investigation, HM2 Hotel and HM2 Wilson were again 
interviewed by NCIS  and stated that Appellant fired the 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
shot that killed the victim. Each recalled Appellant holding 
a black pistol that looked like the Springfield 9mm 
immediately after the shot was fired. Forensic testing 
confirmed that the bullet that killed the victim was fired 
from the Springfield 9mm pistol. 
When questioned by NCIS about where people were 
located when the shot was fired, HM2 Hotel, HM2 Wilson, 
and HM1 Davis were in agreement. Each described 
Appellant as being on the victim ’s immediate right, while 
HM3 Whiskey was sitting to the victim ’s left. Ultimately, 
the forensic report of the shooting indicated the bullet that 
killed the victim was lodged in the wall immediately to the 
victim’s left.  Appellant was then charged with reckless 
endangerment and involuntary manslaughter. 
Prior to trial, Appellant moved for a preliminary ruling 
to admit the recording of HM3 Whiskey ’s interview with 
SA Tango and his handwritten note to the victim’s parents 
under Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 807, the residual 
exception to the rule against hearsay.  Appellant’s motion 
also relied on the Supreme Court’s decision in Holmes v. 
South Carolina, 547 U.S. 319 (2006), and this Court’s 
decision in United States v. Woolheater , 40 M.J. 170 
(C.M.A. 1994), in arguing that excluding this evidence 
would violate his Sixth Amendment right to present a 
complete defense. In his ruling on the motion, the military 
judge determined that the evidence was inadmissible 
under M.R.E. 807 because the statements were 
untrustworthy. This was because the  military judge 
determined that: (a) there was no corroborating evidence, 
or more precisely that it “cannot be corroborated” by the 
record; (b) HM3 Whiskey only confessed after suggestive 
questioning in the second interview; (c) HM3 Whiskey’s 
mental state w as not reliable; and (d) it was a false 
confession. The military judge ruled the handwritten note 
inadmissible under M.R.E. 807 for the same reasons. He 
ruled in the alternativ e that admitting HM3 Whiskey ’s 
statement would not serve the interests of justice and 
“would serve to mislead the members and waste time in 
violation of [M.R.E.] 403.” The military judge’s ruling never 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
addressed Appellant’s reliance on Holmes and Woolheater, 
or Appellant’s contention that admission of HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession and letter were necessary under his 
constitutional right to present a complete defense. Further, 
he ignored circumstantial evidence that HM3 Whiskey was 
in fact the shooter, such as HM3 Whiskey point ing the 
9mm pistol at the victim and pull ing the trigger, HM3 
Whiskey’s text message to a friend stating, “Yo being slight 
drunk around [ the victim] is hell” and the history of 
personal conflict between HM3 Whiskey and the victim.  
Ultimately, the military judge held that the defense 
could “impeach [ HM3 Whiskey ] with his confession on 
cross-examination but [could] not offer the confession for 
its truth.” At trial, under direct examination by the 
Government, HM3 Whiskey testified that he had falsely 
confessed to the shooting. He further testified that, while 
he was present when the victim was killed, he did not see 
the shooting occur. During cross-examination, trial defense 
counsel elicited from HM3 Whiskey, in detail, all relevant 
facts regarding his confession to SA Tango. 
The prosecution entered into evidence a Trace Evidence 
Report which concluded that the clothing worn by HM3 
Hotel, HM3 Whiskey, and Appellant was “in contact with 
a discharged firearm,” “in close proximity to a discharging 
firearm,” or “otherwise in an environment of gunshot 
residue.” No gunshot residue was found on HM2 Wilson or 
HM1 Davis. Prior to closing arguments, the military judge 
provided the members with instructions regarding the 
proper consideration of prior inconsistent statements. 
Specifically, the military judge instructed the panel 
that: 
You have heard evidence that before this trial, 
certain witnesses may have made statements that 
may be inconsistent with their—you can cross out 
his or her—their testimony here in court.  
If you believe that an inconsistent statement or 
statements was or were made, you may consider 
the inconsistency in deciding whether to believe 
that witness’s in-court testimony. You may not 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
consider the earlier statements as evidence of the 
truth of the matters contained in the prior 
statements. In other words, you may only use it or 
them as one way of evaluating the witnesses 
testimony here in court. You cannot use it or them 
as proof of anything else.  
For example, if a witness testifies in court that the 
traffic light was green and you heard evidence 
that the witness made a prior statement that the 
traffic light was red, you may consider that prior 
statement in evaluating the truth of the witness’s 
in court statement—in court testimony. You may 
not, however, use the prior statement as proof 
that the light was red.  
II. Discussion 
We review a military judge’s ruling on the admissibility 
of evidence for “an abuse of discretion.” United States v. 
McElhaney, 54 M.J. 120, 129 (C.A.A.F. 2000).  Military 
judges abuse their discretion when: (1) their findings of fact 
“are not supported by the evidence of record;” (2) they fail 
“to consider important facts;” (3) they use “incorrect legal 
principles;” or (4) their application of correct legal 
principles to the facts is “ clearly unreasonable .” United 
States v. Commisso , 76 M.J. 315, 321 (C.A.A.F. 2017). 
When the ruling involves mixed questions of fact and law, 
findings of fact are reviewed for clear error and conclusions 
of law are reviewed de novo. See United States v. Kelley, 45 
M.J. 275, 279- 81 (C.A.A.F. 1996). Courts are highly 
deferential when military judge s articulate their analysis 
on the record. See United States v. Manns, 54 M.J. 164, 166 
(C.A.A.F. 2000). 
“[T]he Constitution guarantees criminal defendants ‘a 
meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.’  ” 
Crane v. Kentucky , 476 U.S. 683, 690 (1986) (citations 
omitted) (quoting California v. Trombetta, 467 U.S. 479, 
485 (1984)). The exclusion of trustworthy exculpatory 
evidence may violate an accused’s constitutional right to 
present a defense. See Chambers v. Mississippi , 410 U.S. 
284, 294-95, 302 (1973); Holmes , 547 U.S. at 324-25, 331. 
However, this only occurs when an evidentiary rule by its 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
very terms, or a military judge’s application of the rule, 
“infring[es] upon a weighty interest of the accused and [is] 
arbitrary or disproportionate to the purposes [the rule is] 
designed to serve.” United States v. Beauge, 82 M.J. 157, 
167 (C.A.A.F. 2022) (quoting Holmes , 547 U.S. at 324-25). 
To meet this standard, an appellant cannot merely proffer 
that the military judge excluded evidence relevant to a 
defense. Instead, the excluded evidence must have 
“significantly undermined fundamental elements of the 
[appellant’s] defense.” United States v. Scheffer, 523 U.S. 
303, 315 (1998).  
A. Exclusion of the third-party confession infringed 
upon Appellant’s weighty interest 
Here, the military judge’s exclusion of HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession and letter infringed upon Appellant’s weighty 
interest. A primary focus of Appellant’s defense at trial was 
that he did not in fact shoot the victim. HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession and written letter were the primary pieces of 
evidence for Appellant’s defense. By only admitting this 
evidence for impeachment purposes, the military judge 
infringed upon Appellant’s weighty interest  in the 
presentation of his defense.  
B. The military judge’s application of 
M.R.E. 807 was arbitrary 
In his M.R.E. 807 analysis, the military judge relied 
upon United States v. Donaldson , 58 M.J. 477 (C.A.A.F. 
2003), in evaluating the reliability of HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession. In Donaldson, this Court instructed lower 
courts to consider several “indicia of reliability” in 
determining whether a hearsay statement is admissible 
under the residual hearsay exception.  Id. at 488. These 
indicia of reliability are as follows: “(1) the mental state of 
the declarant; (2) the spontaneity of the statement; (3) the 
use o f suggestive questioning; and (4) whether the 
statement can be corroborated.” Id.  
Appellant argues that under the circumstances of this 
case, the military judge’s reliance on Donaldson was inapt. 
First, Donaldson interpreted the previous version of 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
M.R.E. 807, which provides for the admission of hearsay 
not otherwise admissible under a hearsay exception in 
M.R.E. 803 or 804 if “the  statement has equivalent 
circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness” as the other 
hearsay exceptions. M.R.E. 807(a)(1) (20 00 ed.). As 
amended, M.R.E. 807 provides, in relevant part: that 
hearsay not otherwise admissible under one of the hearsay 
exceptions in M.R.E. 803 or 804 is admissible if “the 
statement is supported by sufficient guarantees of 
trustworthiness—after considering th e totality of the 
circumstances under which it is made and evidence, if any, 
corroborating the statement.” M.R.E. 807(a)(1) (2024  ed.). 
But “[e]vidence admitted under [M.R.E.] 807 is not 
required to be completely free from all questions.” United 
States v. Zamora, 80 M.J. 614, 629 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. 
2020); see also Schering Corp. v. Pfizer, Inc., 189 F.3d 218, 
233 (2d Cir. 1999) (observing that a hearsay statement 
“need not be free” of all “risk to be admitted” under the 
residual hearsay exception). To this end, “third- party 
culpability evidence, to be admissible, need not be 
sufficient to sustai n a guilty verdict against the third 
party.” Bradford v. Paramo, 100 F.4th 1088, 1098 (9th Cir. 
2024). “It need only have the potential, considered along 
with other evidence in the record, to raise a reasonable 
doubt as to the guilt of the defendant.” Id.; see also Fed. R. 
Evid. 807 a dvisory committee’s note to 2019 amendment  
(“the court should not consider the credibility of any 
witness who relates the declarant’s hearsay statement in 
court. . . . To base admission or exclusion of a hearsay 
statement on the witness’s credibility would usurp the 
jury’s role of determining the credibility of testifying 
witnesses”). Second, Donaldson is distinguishable on its 
facts. Donaldson involved a three- year-old child sexual 
abuse victim, and the Court derived its “indicia of 
reliability” from a series of cases involving child victims of 
sexual abuse. 58 M.J. at 488 (first citing United States v. 
Grant, 42 M.J. 340, 343- 44 (C.A.A.F. 1995) (seven -year-
old); then citing Kelley , 45 M.J. at 281 (six-year-old); and 
then citing United States v. Cox, 45 M.J. 153, 157 (C.A.A.F. 
1996) (six -year-old)). The “totality of circumstances” 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
includes additional considerations when evaluating the 
admissibility of an adult’s statements to law enforcement. 
This is particularly true where the new M.R.E. 807 
expressly requires military judges to consider other 
corroborating evidence, separate and a part from the 
circumstances under which the statement was made. Thus, 
it is not clear that Donaldson and its interpretation of the 
prior version of M.R.E. 807 was appropriate for the 
military judge to apply in the first instance. However, even 
if it was appropriate, the military judge still misapplied 
Donaldson. 
1. HM3 Whiskey’s confession was trustworthy 
In determining the confession  was not trustworthy, he 
pointed to four points: (1) the forensic evidence directly 
contradicted HM3 Whiskey’s confession; (2) SA Tango used 
suggestive questioning akin to coaching; (3) the 
circumstances surrounding the confession were indicative 
of unreliability; and (4) HM3 Whiskey’s confession was 
false. 
In Chambers, the Supreme Court found that a third  
party’s confession had assurances of trustworthiness 
because each statement was made spontaneously to a close 
acquaintance, each statement was corroborated by other 
evidence in the case, each statement was in a real sense 
against the third party’s interest, and the third party was 
present and available for cross -examination. 410 U.S. at 
300-01. Here, HM3 Whiskey’s confession had similar 
assurances of trustworthiness: (1) his confession was made 
in close temporal proximity to the crime—the day after the 
shooting; (2) the  confession was corroborated by other 
evidence such as his pointing the pistol and dry firing at 
the victim , the gunshot residue found on HM3 Whiskey 
when tested by law enforcement, and the letter he drafted 
to the family after confessing; (3) the confession was clearly 
against his penal interest; and (4) HM3 Whiskey was 
subject to cross -examination at Appellant’s trial. All this 
points toward HM3 Whiskey’s testimony having a strong 
indicia of reliability. He confessed shortly after the killing, 
“[two] times, in [two] forms, . . . . with no apparent ulterior 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
motive, and clearly against his penal interest.” Gable v. 
Williams, 49 F.4th 1315, 1330 (9th Cir. 2022). The military 
judge erred by failing to consider these indicia of reliability 
in ruling on the admissibility of the confession. 
Further, HM3 Whiskey gave his confession during a law 
enforcement interrogation, and, because of this, there is a 
question of whether it was voluntary. See Schneckloth v. 
Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218 , 225- 28 (1973) (explaining an 
involuntary confession occurs where an accused’s “will has 
been overborne” by law enforcement and is not admissible 
at trial); see also United States v. Freeman , 65 M.J. 451, 
453 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (“The voluntariness of a confession is a 
question of law. . . .”). The military judge found, and there 
is no reason to conclude otherwise, “[n]either of HM3 
[Whiskey’s] statements to NCIS were the product of NCIS 
coercion, unlawful  influence, or unlawful inducement.”  
Because HM3 Whiske y’s confession was voluntary as a 
matter of law, the “credibility and weight” of this 
confession should have been a “question [of fact] for the 
[members].” 23A C.J.S. Criminal Procedure and Rights of 
Accused § 1791 (updated May 2024); see also United States 
v. Hall, 93 F.3d 1337, 1344  (7th Cir. 1996) (writing that 
once a judge decided the defendant’s confession was 
voluntary “it was . . . within the jury’s province to assess 
the truthfulness and accuracy of the confession”).  
Here, the military judge infringed on the role of the fact 
finders by excluding the confession based on his evaluation 
of its truthfulness.  This conclusion is contrary to “[the] 
fundamental premise of our criminal trial system . . . . that 
‘the jury is the lie detector.’  ” Scheffer, 523 U.S. at 313 
(quoting United States v. Barnard, 490 F.2d 907, 912 (9th 
Cir. 1973)); see also id . (writing that the determination of 
the weight and credibility of witness testimony “has long 
been held” to belong to the jury).  
The military judge  incorrectly reached this conclusion 
by relying solely on the strength of the Government’s case. 
The military judge’s ruling made explicit reference to the 
fact that the “forensic evidence in this case directly 
contradicts HM3 [Whiskey’s] confession.” Outside of the 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
strength of the Government’s forensic evidence, the 
military judge largely failed to address the connection 
between HM3 Whiskey and the charged crime. The 
military judge considered SA Tango’s suggestive 
questioning and HM3 Whiskey’s mental state , but these 
facts do not directly address HM3 Whiskey’s connection to 
the charged conduct. See Holmes, 547 U.S. at 330 (stating 
that “[j]ust because the prosecution’s evidence, if credited, 
would provide strong support for a guilty verdict, it does 
not follow that evidence of third-party guilt has only a weak 
logical connection to the central issues in th e case”). In 
addition, the military judge explicitly stated that he was 
not considering the evidence proffered by Appellant that 
connected HM3 Whiskey to the crime because he found 
“HM3 [Whiskey’s] recanted confession is the only evidence 
[Appellant] . . . . pointed to indicating HM3 [Whiskey] was 
the shooter.” Under Holmes, evidence of third -party guilt 
may not be excluded merely because the prosecution’s 
evidence is robust. See  547 U.S. at 329. The Government 
argues that Holmes  is inapplicable because the military 
judge did not “solely consider [the] inculpatory forensic 
evidence and instead reviewed the totality of 
circumstances that made [HM3 Whiskey’s] statements not 
sufficiently trustworthy.” However, even the NMCCA 
acknowledged that the “clear implication” from the ruling 
is that the military judge “did not consider any of the 
purportedly corroborative evidence cited by the Defense.” 
Maebane, 2024 CCA LEXIS 171, at *19, 2024 WL 1954294, 
at *8. Thus, the military judge only considered the strength 
of the Government’s evidence—in violation of Holmes. 
Without any further justification, contrary to the 
military judge’s decision, this Court is left with a confession 
that bears Chambers’s  assurances of trustworthiness. 
Further, this Court has considered the question of the 
Sixth Amendment right to a complete defense and third -
party culpability evidence before. In Woolheater, this Court 
held that the military judge erred by excluding “legally and 
logically relevant evidence that someone else had the 
motive, knowledge, and opportunity to commit” the crime. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
15 
 
40 M.J. at 173. This Court described the military judge’s 
efforts there as “thwart[ing]” the defense theory. Id. at 174. 
The Court held the total preclusion of the defense theory 
violated appellant’s constitutional right to present a 
defense. Id. Here, the military judge similarly thwarted the 
defense’s theory by only allowing the evidence to come in 
as a prior inconsistent statement and instructing the panel 
that the previous confession should not be considered 
substantively. By only allowing the defense t o offer HM3 
Whiskey’s confession for impeachment, Appellant could not 
use the confession to support the circumstantial evidence 
of HM3 Whiskey’s “motive, knowledge, and opportunity.” 
This failure to consider Chambers and Holmes led to the 
exclusion of Appellant’s only direct evidence that a third 
party committed the charged conduct. Because of the 
importance of this evidence to Appellant’s defense, its 
exclusion infringed upon his weighty interest in the 
presentation of his defense and the clearest basis for 
members to find a reasonable doubt. “Fac ts give meaning 
to other facts, and certain pieces of evidence become 
significant only in the aggregate upon the proffer of other 
evidence.” State v. Wilson, 864 N.W.2d 52, 65  (Wis. 2015). 
With the confession, other evidence such as the gun residue 
and the dry firing becomes more potent. By rejecting the 
confession for its truth, the military judge inserted himself 
into the role of factfinder and changed how the members 
may have viewed that other evidence. Thus, the military 
judge infringed on Appellant’s w eighty interest, and, as 
such, erred. 
This is not to say that th is Court sanctions all third-
party culpability evidence, regardless of trustworthiness.  
In Burks, this Court considered the admissibility of an 
anonymous letter from a murder  victim’s purported lover, 
“Michael.” United States v. Burks, 36 M.J. 447, 449 (C.M.A. 
1993). The letter explained how the victim had died 
because the victim had “become entwined” with a 
“homosexual cult.” Id. This Court rejected the appellant’s 
arguments on both the residual hearsay and constitutional 
grounds, “because certain evidence—the fundamental 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
16 
 
trustworthiness of which is wholly unestablished by the 
defendant—is excluded from the trial.” Id . at 451 (citing 
United States v. Hinkson , 632 F.2d 382, 386 (4th Cir. 
1980)).  
A comparison between Burks and Woolheater places 
Appellant’s case in the realm of a reasonable version of 
events, supported by independent indicia of 
trustworthiness. Similar to Woolheater, HM3 Whiskey 
had: motive to harm the victim, knowledge of the shooting, 
and the opportunity to carry it out. Therefore, HM3 
Whiskey’s third-party confession should be subject to the 
factfinder’s determination as to weight. Burks, on the other 
hand, did not meet any indicia of trustworthiness as the 
defense’s theory as well as the supporting evidence were 
highly suspect. 
2. SA Tango’s interrogation of HM3 
Whiskey was appropriate 
The military judge’s finding on SA Tango’s 
interrogation of HM3 Whiskey is contradictory. In his 
Donaldson analysis, the military judge says SA Tango 
employed “suggestive questioning akin to coaching ”; 
however, he also stated that “[n]either of HM3 [Whiskey’s] 
statements to NCIS were the product of NCIS coercion, 
unlawful influence, or unlawful inducements .” This 
statement suggests the suggestive questioning would affect 
HM3 Whiskey less because he is an adult.
2 See United 
States v. Wilson , No. NMCCA 201800022, 2019 CCA 
LEXIS 276, at *52-53, 2019 WL 2745384, at *21 (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. July 1, 2019) (unpublished) (“All of the experts 
acknowledged that children are susceptible to suggestion 
and that they are capable of believing event s happened 
that did not happen.”). As a result, the military judge’s 
decision to attribute great significance to SA Tango’s use of 
suggestive questioning is unclear, especially when such 
tactics are regularly —and permissibly —used by law 
enforcement. See, e.g., Un ited States v. Monroe, 264 
 
2 HM3 Whiskey was twenty-one years old when the charged 
offense occurred. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
17 
 
F. Supp. 3d 376, 391 (D.R.I. 2017).  Additionally, 
interrogating officers can make false representations 
concerning a crime or investigation without rendering an 
ensuing confession coerced or unreliable. See Frazier v. 
Cupp, 394 U.S. 731, 739 (1969). There is nothing 
extraordinary about SA Tango’s questioning and no special 
characteristic of HM3 Whiskey that renders his confession 
suspect. Thus, the  truthfulness of the  confession should 
have been left to the members to evaluate. Hall, 93 F.3d at 
1345.  
Finally, the military judge made inconsistent findings 
as to HM3 Whiskey’s mental state when he confessed. On 
the one hand, the military judge found HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession and letter were unreliable because he was 
“unstable from grief, fear, and lack of sleep.” However, the 
military judge also found that HM3 Whiskey understood 
NCIS’s questions and had the wherewithal to ask for 
clarification on one occasion when he did not understand 
their cleansing warning. At a minimum, this inconsistency 
casts doubt on the military judge’s findings.  
C. The military judge’s application of 
M.R.E. 403 was arbitrary 
“In the alternative,” the military judge found that 
“admitting HM3 [Whiskey’s] confession under these 
troubling circumstances  . . . would serve to mislead the 
members and waste time in violation of M.R.E. 403.” 
Because the military judge largely failed to articulate his 
reasoning, his M.R.E. 403 ruling is entitled to less 
deference. See Manns, 54 M.J. at 166 (“This Court gives 
military judges less deference if they fail to articulate their 
balancing analysis on the record, and no deference if they 
fail to c onduct the Rule 403 balancing.”). The military 
judge erred in his M.R.E. 403 analysis because HM3 
Whiskey’s confession was probative and did not serve to 
mislead the members.  
First, in determining the probative value of third-party 
culpability evidence, courts have considered the “strength 
of the link between the exculpatory evidence and the case 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
18 
 
at hand.” United States v. Moore, 590 F. Supp. 3d 277, 284 
(D.D.C. 2022). Here, there is a strong link, as HM3 
Whiskey was present at the crime scene and confessed.  
Second, the evidence did not pose a risk of “sidetrack[ing] 
the jury into consideration of factual disputes only 
tangentially related” to the case. United States v. McVeigh, 
153 F.3d 1166, 1191 (10th Cir. 1998). The Government 
argues that Appellant killed the victim, whereas 
Appellant’s defense was based on creating a reasonable 
doubt someone else killed the victim. Thus, HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession possessed a strong logical connection to the 
case’s central issue because it provided a basis for members 
to find Appellant did not kill the victim. See Bradford, 100 
F.4th at 1100. Third, the proposed evidence was not 
excessively “complex or time-consuming.” United States v. 
Jordan, 485 F.3d 1214, 1221 (10th Cir. 2007). HM3 
Whiskey’s interrogation did not involve an esoteric or 
complex topic. Instead, it concerned the circumstances 
under which the charged conduct occurred, which directly 
implicates the members’ role as factfinders.  
The Government contends the military judge did not err 
because “Appellant was able to present equally useful 
evidence by cross -examining [HM3 Whiskey] on his 
admissions during the second interview.” So, it argues 
HM3 Whiskey’s confession and letter were unnecessary 
because they were cumulative of other evidence. However, 
after the cross -examination, the military judge later 
instructed members to only consider prior inconsistent 
statements such as HM3 Whiskey’s confession  as 
impeachment bearing on HM3 Whiske y’s credibility, and 
not as evidence for the truth of the matter asserted. 
Therefore, the military judge stripped the confession of its 
probative value. And this Court “presume[s] that members 
follow a military judge’s instructions,” so, absent some 
unapparent circumstance, this Court presumes the 
members did not consider the confession for an 
impermissible purpose. United States v. Taylor, 53 M.J. 
195, 198 (C.A.A.F. 2000). Without HM3 Whiskey’s 
confessions and letter, there was no direct  evidence 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
19 
 
showing HM3 Whiskey killed the victim. Thus, the 
confession and letter are not cumulative.  
Given the above, the military judge’s ruling “infring[ed] 
upon a weighty interest of [Appellant].” Holmes, 547 U.S. 
at 324. His M.R.E. 807 and 403 determinations were 
arbitrary because they excluded reliable and highly 
probative evidence. 
D. Appellant was prejudiced by this inability 
to put on a full defense 
Because the military judge’s ruling violated Appellant’s 
constitutional right to present a complete defense, the 
Government “must show that the error was harmless 
beyond a reasonable doubt to obviate a finding of 
prejudice.” United States v. Tovarchavez, 78 M.J. 458, 462 
(C.A.A.F. 2019). The Government  contends any error was 
harmless because the “confession and apology were 
introduced for impeachment and used to argue [HM3 
Whiskey] was the shooter.” Th us, the Government argues 
that excluded evidence was cumulative, and Appellant was 
still able to present his theory of third-party culpability. 
This is incorrect for three reasons.  
First, third-party culpability evidence, if believed, 
renders “reasonable doubt” an “almost  . . . forgone 
conclusion.” Bradford, 100 F.4th at 1096. HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession and letter, if belie ved, provide members with a 
basis to find reasonable doubt. Second, the confession and 
letter played a vital role in Appellant’s defense. “As is 
usually the case with pieces of evidence, each item of 
information [Appellant] sought to introduce gave meaning 
and coherence to [HM3 Whiskey’s] admission, put it in 
context, and explained it.” Lunbery v. Hornbreak, 605 F.3d 
754, 761 (9th Cir. 2010). By excluding HM3 Whiskey’s 
letter and evidence, the military judge eliminated “the 
probative force of the whole chain” of evidence underlying 
Appellant’s defense. Id. Moreover, by instructing the 
members that HM3 Whiskey’s confession was only relevant 
to his credibility, the military judge tacitly undermined 
Appellant’s defense by signaling to the jury that HM3 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
 
20 
 
Whiskey’s confession was not credible. Third, this Court 
“will reverse a conviction unless [it] find[s] that a 
constitutional error was not a factor in obtaining that 
conviction.” United States v. Kreutzer, 61 M.J. 293,  298-99 
(C.A.A.F. 2005). It is difficult to see how the exclusion of 
this evidence could not play a role in Appellant’s conviction. 
Thus, we conclude the military judge’s error was not 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
III. Conclusion 
The judgment of the United States Navy-Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal A ppeals is reversed.  The findings and 
sentence are set aside. The record is returned to the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy. A rehearing is authorized. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, 
dissenting. 
Hospital Corpsman Third Class (HM3) Delta  was shot 
and killed at  a gathering where several sailors were fool-
ishly playing with firearms and drinking alcohol. Accused 
of firing the fatal bullet, Appellant was charged with invol-
untary manslaughter. At his trial by general court-martial, 
Appellant moved for admission into evidence of several 
statements that another sailor, HM3 Whiskey, had made 
out of court. In these statements, HM3 Whiskey confessed 
that he was the one who had shot HM3 Delta. The military 
judge, however, ruled  that HM3 Whiskey ’s statements 
were inadmissible hearsay. The military judge rejected Ap-
pellant’s argument that the statements should be admitted 
under the residual hearsay exception in Military Rule of 
Evidence (M.R.E.) 807(a) because the military judge was 
not convinced that the statements were “supported by suf-
ficient guarantees of trustworthiness” as that exception re-
quires.1 The court-martial found Appellant guilty of the in-
voluntary manslaughter offense. The United States Navy-
Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) af-
firmed. United States v. Maebane, No. NMCCA 202200228, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 171, at * 34, 2024 WL 1954294, at * 13 
(N-M. Ct. Crim. App. May 3, 2024) (unpublished). 
 
1 M.R.E. 1102(a) provides that “[a]mendments to the Federal 
Rules of Evidence—other than Articles III and V — will amend 
parallel provisions of the Military Rules of Evidence by operation 
of law 18 months after the effective date of such amendments, 
unless action to the contrary is taken by the President.” On April 
25, 2019, the Supreme Court informed Congress that it had or-
dered an amendment to Fed. R. Evid. 807 with an effective date 
of December 1, 2019. Letters from Chief Justice John G. Roberts 
to Nancy Pelosi, Speaker of the House of Representatives, and 
Michael R. Pence, President, United States Senate, 
https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/courtor-
ders/frev19_774d.pdf (last visited Sept. 11, 20 25). Congress did 
not act to prevent the amendment from going into effect. There-
fore, by operation of M.R.E. 1102, M.R.E. 807 was automatically 
amended to match Fed. R. Evid. 807 eighteen months later, on 
May 1, 2021. This amended version of M.R.E. 807  was in effect 
when Appellant was tried on June 8, 2022. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
2 
 
This Court granted review to decide the question: “Does 
an accused have a Sixth Amendment right to present evi-
dence of a recorded third party’s confession to the crime for 
which the accused is on trial .” The Court answer s this 
question in the affirmative and sets aside the finding that 
Appellant is guilty of involuntary manslaught er. I write 
separately because my assessment of the issue is different. 
Like the military judge and the judges of the NMCCA, I 
conclude that HM3 Whiskey’s statements were inadmissi-
ble. They were hearsay, and they did not fit within the re-
sidual hearsay exception because the statements were not 
sufficiently trustworthy. And because the statements were 
not sufficiently trustworthy, I  also conclude that the 
United States Constitution did not require their admission 
into evidence. I therefore respectfully dissent. 
I. 
The Military Rules of Evidence state that it is the mili-
tary judge who “must decide any preliminary question 
about whether . . . evidence is admissible.” M.R.E. 104(a) 
(2019 ed.). In making the decision, the military judge is not 
bound by the rules of evidence. Id.  One preliminary ques-
tion is whether a hearsay statement is admissible evidence. 
Hearsay, as defined in M.R.E. 801(c), is a “statement that: 
(1) the declarant does not make while testifying at the cur-
rent trial or hearing; and (2) a party offers in evidence to 
prove the truth of the matter asserted in the statement.” 
Here, HM3 Whiskey was the declarant , and he did not 
make the statements at issue while testifying at trial. Ap-
pellant offered these statements for the truth of the matter 
asserted, namely, that HM3 Whiskey was the person who 
fired the shot that killed HM3 Delta . Therefore, HM3 
Whiskey’s statements were hearsay. 
The “rule against hearsay” in M.R.E. 802 provides that 
“[h]earsay is not admissible” unless some exception ap-
plies. Military Rules of Evidence 803 and 804 contain nu-
merous specific exceptions under which hearsay may be ad-
missible, but none applies here. Notably, the exception in 
M.R.E. 804(b)(3) for a “[s]tatement against interest” does 
not apply because one element of that exception is that the 
declarant be unavailable as a witness. Here, HM3 Whiskey 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
3 
 
was available as a witness, he did testify at trial, and in his 
testimony, he expressly answered the question whether he 
shot HM3 Delta. 
That leaves for consideration the issue of whether HM3 
Whiskey’s hearsay statements should have been admitted 
under the “residual exception” to the rule against hearsay 
under M.R.E. 807, the applicable version of which provides 
in relevant part: 
Rule 807. Residual Exception 
(a) In General. Under the following conditions, a 
hearsay statement is not excluded by the rule 
against hearsay even if the statement is not 
admissible under a hearsay exception in Rule 803 
or 804:  
(1) the statement is supported by sufficient 
guarantees of trustworthiness—after considering  
the totality of circumstances under which it was 
made and evidence, if any, corroborating the 
statement; and  
(2) it is more probative on the point for which 
it is offered than any other evidence that the pro-
ponent can obtain through reasonable efforts. 
The military judge, as previously noted, ruled that the re-
sidual exception did not apply because HM3 Whiskey ’s 
statements were not trustworthy.  Under M.R.E. 104(a), 
this d ecision regarding the trustworthiness of the state-
ments was for the military judge , not the members,  to 
make because M.R.E. 807(a) makes the admissibility of the 
statements contingent on this determination. 
This Court reviews a military judge’s decision on the ad-
missibility of evidence under the residual hearsay excep-
tion in M.R.E. 807 for abuse of discretion. United States v. 
Czachorowski, 66 M.J. 432, 434 (C.A.A.F. 2008).  In the 
light of concerns addressed by the NMCCA and this Court, 
I will assume without deciding  that the military judge 
abused his discretion by not considering certain facts and 
by impermissibly considering certain other facts. 2 A 
 
2 The NMCCA decided that the military judge abused his dis-
cretion when he concluded that the HM3 Whiskey’s “confession 
cannot be corroborated.” But as the NMCCA explained, the 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
4 
 
military judge’s evidentiary ruling , however, may be af-
firmed if any error in the military judge’s reasoning was 
harmless because “the military judge reached the correct 
result, albeit for the wrong reason.” United States v. Rob-
inson, 58 M.J. 429, 433 (C.A.A.F. 2003). In this case, I agree 
with the military judge’s conclusion that the hearsay state-
ments were inadmissible. 
M.R.E. 807(a)(1) restricts the residual exception only to 
hearsay statements that are “supported by sufficient guar-
antees of trustworthiness.”  In deciding whether these 
guarantees exist, the rule requires consideration of the “to-
tality of circumstances” under which the declarant made 
the hearsay statement and “evidence, if any, corroborating 
the statement.” I have considered the totality of the circum-
stances, with a special emphasis on the arguments that the 
parties make in their briefs. 
In my assessment, the strongest facts in favor of admit-
ting HM3 Whiskey’s statements under the residual excep-
tion to the rule against hearsay in M.R.E. 807(a) are that 
HM3 Whiskey was present at the gathering , that he  was 
playing with firearms , and that the statements he made 
went against his own interests. But in my opinion, neither 
these facts, nor any others in the record, are enough to con-
vince me that HM3 Whiskey ’s statements are “supported 
by sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness—after 
 
military judge should have considered the following corrobora-
tive evidence: (1) HM3 Whiskey’s presence in the room  where 
the shooting occurred; (2) HM3 Whiskey’s earlier hostile state-
ments toward HM3 Delta; (3) HM3 Whiskey’s dry firing of the 
weapon at the HM3 Delta; (4) the location of a dinner plate sug-
gestive of HM3 Whiskey’s position in the room; and (5) forensic 
evidence showing HM3 Whiskey was close to t he firing of a 
weapon. Maebane, 2024 CCA LEXIS 171, at *19-20, 2024 WL 
1954294, at *8. 
And in this appeal, this Court decides that the military judge 
abused his discretion when he concluded that HM3 Whiskey’s 
confession was not trustworthy  in part because  the military 
judge considered forensic evidence that contradicted it. The  
Court reasons that Supreme Court precedent precludes a trial 
judge from assessing the trustworthiness of the evidence based 
on the strength of the government’s evidence. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
5 
 
considering the totality of circumstances.” I reach this con-
clusion for three reasons. 
First, HM3 Whiskey’s unsworn statements that he shot 
HM3 Delta lack sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness 
because HM3 Whiskey recanted and repudiated those  
statements both before trial and under oath when testify-
ing at trial.  The “recantation or repudiation of the state-
ment after it was made” is an important factor to consider 
in deciding whether hearsay is too untrustworthy to be ad-
mitted under the residual hearsay exception. Paul F. Roth-
stein, Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 807. Residual Excep-
tion (2025 ed.); see also 30B Charles Alan Wright & Arthur 
R. Miller, Federal Practice & Procedure § 7063 (2025 ed.) 
(identifying “whether the witness ever recanted” as a factor 
to consider). “Evidence that a declarant subsequently re-
canted the story of course is an argument against its trust-
worthiness.” 5 Clifford S. Fishman  & Anne Toomey 
McKenna, Jones on Evidence § 37:15 (7th ed. Supp. 2024). 
Accordingly, numerous cases have denied admission of re-
canted or repudiated statements under the residual excep-
tion to the rule against hearsay. See, e.g., United States v. 
Redlightning, 624 F.3d 1090, 1118 (9th Cir. 2010) (holding 
a statement was not sufficiently trustworthy in part be-
cause the declarant recanted); United States v. Groce, 999 
F.2d 1189, 1190-91 (7th Cir. 1993) (same). 
To be sure, a recantation by itself does not disprove the 
truth of an earlier confession. The confession might be true, 
and the recantation might be false . But the  recantation 
calls into doubt the truth of the confession and thus makes 
the confession untrustworthy. In such situations, if the de-
clarant is available, the confession should not be admitted 
into evidence under the residual exception to the rule 
against hearsay for proof of the matter assert ed. Rather, 
the declarant should be called to testify so that the trier of 
fact can assess the witness’s credibility and decide what to 
believe, which is exactly what occurred here  when HM3 
Whiskey testified at trial. And if the declarant on the stand 
contradicts a past out -of-court confession, the past confes-
sion may be used for impeachment, which again is precisely 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
6 
 
what occurred in this case when trial defense counsel cross-
examined HM3 Whiskey. 
Second, HM3 Whiskey’s statements lack sufficient 
guarantees of trustworthiness because, before making the 
statements, HM3 Whiskey repeatedly said that he did not 
know or could not remember what happened.  Specifically, 
HM3 Whiskey made the following statements: 
“If I shot him, I don’t remember.” 
“I am scared. If I knew I did it, I would say it  
because I don’t lie.” 
“I don’t remember . . . . I do n’t think I shot 
him.” 
“I don’t know what happened. I’m not being de-
fensive, I literally do not know what happened 
. . . . Maybe I just blocked it out . . . . I don’t know 
what happened.” 
“If I knew it was me that did it, I would say it 
was me that did it.” 
The “personal knowledge of the declarant regarding the 
subject matter of [a]  statement” is also recognized as  an 
important factor in deciding whether hearsay is trustwor-
thy. Rothstein, supra, Rule 807. Residual Exception ; see 
also Wright & Miller, supra § 7063. Here, HM3 Whiskey’s 
denials of memory and knowledge called into doubt the 
truth of his later statements that he shot HM3 Delta. To be 
sure, HM3 Whiskey ’s denials of memory and knowledge 
may have been false. Again, the proper course in this situ-
ation, where out -of-court statements lack sufficient guar-
antees of trustworth iness, was not to admit the he arsay 
confession as substantive evidence  under the residual 
hearsay exception but instead to have  HM3 Whiskey tes-
tify at trial and be cross-examined, which is what occurred. 
The members then could assess the credibility of HM3 
Whiskey’s testimony. 
Third, HM3 Whiskey’s statements also lack sufficient 
guarantees of trustworthiness because HM3  Whiskey ex-
pressly indicated that he was confessing based not on his 
own knowledge but instead based on the information that 
the investigators provided to him. After the investigators 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
7 
 
told HM3 Whiskey  that forensic evidence showed he was 
the shooter, HM3 Whiskey responded with statements 
such as: 
“But if like the evidence . . . you can’t argue evi-
dence if the evidence and stuff come back and say 
I did it was an accident.” 
 “If all the evidence is pointing at me, I know I was 
the one . . . with the gun around that time, but I 
still don’t know how it got loaded. But I guess, I 
guess, I did it. There’s really no arguing it.” 
Whether the investigator’s statements about the forensic 
evidence were true or false, the exchange raises the possi-
bility that HM3 Whiskey did not have personal knowledge 
about what happened and only confessed based on what 
the investigator told him. 
For these reasons, I conclude that HM3 Whiskey ’s 
statements lack “sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness” 
to fit  within the residual exception to the rule against 
hearsay under M.R.E. 807(a) . My conclusion might have 
been different if HM3 Whiskey had made the  statements 
at issue in a different context. But here, HM3 Whiskey was 
interrogated overnight in two separate sessions for a total 
of six hours—with only a short interval in between—during  
which HM3 Whiskey was tired, distraught, and scared. The 
adverse conditions did  not necessarily make his hearsay 
statements untruthful. Yet M.R.E. 807 does not stand for 
the proposition that hearsay statements are to be admitted 
under the residual exception merely because they may be 
truthful. On the contrary , the rule dictates  that hearsay 
statements are admissible only if they are supported by 
“sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness” and are “more 
probative on the point for which it is offered than any other 
evidence that the proponent can obtain through reasonable 
efforts.” M.R.E. 807(a)(1)-(2). The manner i n which HM3 
Whiskey was questioned  during the investigatory 
interrogations did nothing to make his hearsay statements 
more trustworthy  nor were these hearsay statements 
“more probative” on the issue than HM3 Whiskey’s 
testimony at trial. 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
8 
 
II. 
Having concluded that HM3 Whiskey’s statements 
were not admissible under the residual exception in M.R.E. 
807, the question remains whether  the Sixth Amendment 
required their admission. I am unpersuaded that it did. 
Appellant relies o n Chambers v. Mississippi , 410 U.S. 
284 (1973). In that case, a state trial court barred witnesses 
in a murder trial from testifying that a third party had con-
fessed to a  murder. The Supreme Court held that the ex-
clusion of this evidence violated the right of “an accused to 
present witnesses in his own defense.” Id. at 302. Appellant 
asserts that the same conclusion  is required here.  Cham-
bers, however, is distinguishable from this case for two rea-
sons. First, a key factor in the Supreme Court’s conclusion 
that the hearsay evidence should be admitted was that the 
statement at issue “ bore persuasive assurances of trust-
worthiness.” Id. Here, as explained above, Appellant’s 
statement lacked sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness. 
See Wright & Miller , supra § 6795 (explaining that there 
are now few cases decided under the constitutional rule in 
Chambers because the residual hearsay exception to the 
rule against hearsay now provides for admission of trust-
worthy evidence). Second, Chambers is also distinguisha-
ble because the Mississippi procedural rules at issue pre-
vented the defendant from impeaching the third  party’s 
recantation of the confession. 410 U.S. at 295 -98. The ina-
bility of the defense to subject the third -party confessor to 
the crucible of cross -examination prevented the jury from 
deciding for itself whether the third party’s testimony was 
worthy of belief. In this case, unlike in Chambers, Appel-
lant was able to cross-examine HM3 Whiskey and impeach 
the credibility of his recantation. 
In United States v. Scheffer,  523 U.S. 303, 305 (1998), 
the Supreme Court reversed  this Court’s decision that a 
blanket exclusion of polygraph evidence in the Military 
Rules of Evidence violated due process. In so doing, the Su-
preme Court explained that this Court had misunderstood 
the decision in Chambers.  The Supreme Court stated: 
“Chambers . . . does not stand for the proposition that the 
defendant is denied a fair opportunity to defend himself 
United States v. Maebane, No. 24-0196/NA 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge HARDY joins, dissenting 
 
9 
 
whenever a state or federal rule excludes favorable evi-
dence.” Id. at 316. The Supreme Court reasoned that the 
President could exclude polygraph evidence in large part 
because there was no scientific consensus that it was relia-
ble. Id. at 309-10. Similarly here, and unlike in Chambers, 
sufficient guarantees of trustworthiness are absent. 
III. 
For these reasons, I conclude that the military judge 
reached the correct conclusion in excluding the hearsay in 
this case. I therefore would answer the granted question in 
the negative and affirm the decision of the NMCCA, which 
affirmed the findings and the sentence in this case. 