This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Bryce T. ROAN, Senior Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0104 
Crim. App. No. 22033 
 
Argued February 26, 2025—Decided September 15, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Mark F. Rosenow 
 
For Appellant:  Annie W. Morgan , Esq. (argued); 
Captain Jordan L. Grande and David P. Sheldon,  
Esq. (on brief); Major Matthew L. Blyth. 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. Liabenow 
(argued); Colonel Matthew D. Talcott  and Mary 
Ellen Payne,  Esq. (on brief); Colonel Zachary T. 
Eytalis. 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A special court -martial composed of officer  members 
convicted Appellant, contrary to his pleas, of one charge 
and specification of wrongful use of cocaine, in violation of 
Article 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § 912a  (2018). The military judge sentenced 
Appellant to a reduction to E -2, restriction to the limits of 
Little Rock Air Force Base  for forty-five days, hard labor 
without confinement for three months, and a reprimand. 
The convening authority disapproved the adjudged 
restriction to base  but approved the remainder of the 
adjudged sentence. The United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) affirmed Appellant’s 
conviction. United States v. Roan , No. ACM 22033 , 2024 
CCA LEXIS 6, at *20, 2024 WL 87633, at *7 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. Jan. 8, 2024) (unpublished).  
The first granted issue requires us to decide whether 
“the lower court’s erroneous resolution of a question of 
law—finding that withheld evidence was immaterial and 
there was no prejudice to appellant —violated Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963).” We hol d that the lower 
court erred and that  Appellant was  prejudiced by this 
misapplication of Brady. The second granted issue asks us 
to decide whether “the lower court’s erroneous resolution of 
a question of law —finding that the Government did not 
violate Appellant’s rights under R ule for Courts-Martial 
(R.C.M.) 701(a)(6)—violated binding precedent set by this 
Court.” Our disposition of Issue I moots Issue II. For these 
reasons, we set aside the decision of the AFCCA.  
I. Background 
On July 6, 2021, Appellant was ordered to provide a 
urine sample as part of a unit -wide inspection ordered by 
his commander after the Fourth of July weekend. 
Appellant and N .W. were friends and roommates and 
attended the same social function over the holiday  
weekend. Subsequently, both Appellant and N.W. tested 
positive for cocaine.  Because of their relationship, 
investigations into their alleged wrongful use of cocaine 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
were run concurrently  and their cases were considered 
“companion cases.” During the investigation, both were 
questioned by the Security Forces Office of Investigations 
(SFOI). Appellant invoked his Article 31(b) , UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 831(b) (2018), rights, but N.W. waived his rights 
and made a statement. In part, N.W. indicated that he did 
not use cocaine. He theorized that the positive test might 
have been the result of pre -workout powder that a third 
roommate, D .B., purchased while deployed.  Following 
these interviews, Capt ain W.A., the Chief of Military 
Justice, asked SFOI to seek corroborating evidence of 
cocaine use. 
The Government referred a single charge and 
specification of wrongful use of cocaine against Appellant 
on November 9, 2021. Ten days after referral of the charge, 
on November 19, 2021, trial defense counsel submitted 
Defense Discovery Request #1, requestin g exculpatory 
evidence, impeachment evidence, and evidence material to 
the preparation of the defense.  The defense requested 
“[a]ny evidence in the Government’s possession, including 
trial counsel or any military authorities, that may 
reasonably tend to: 1) Negate the Accused’s guilt.” The 
Government responded it would “provide[] the case file 
information for  [N.W.].” In addition to exculpatory 
material, the defense requested, inter alia, (1) all personal 
or business notes prepared by agents or investigators; 
(2)  any video or audio recording taken in the case; and 
(3) any derogatory information about any investigator in 
the case. In its response , the Government stated, “A copy 
of the entire [SFOI] case file will be provided to Defense.” 
The Government stated that it would request derogatory 
data for SFOI investigators involved in the investigation. 
Appellant’s court-martial took place from December 6  
through December 9, 2021. Appellant filed two motions: a 
defense motion requesting reconsideration of a previously 
filed and denied motion to compel a particular expert in the 
field of forensic toxicology and a motion to compel 
discovery. Outstanding discovery included unit  sweep 
documents and derogatory data for at least one 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
Government witness. Although trial counsel represented 
that “the government has complied with the discovery 
requirements to look for derogatory data,” counsel later 
conceded that derogatory data remained outstanding and 
affirmatively stated that “the government will make efforts 
to get that information.” Trial counsel provided derogatory 
data for one witness. However, information relating to 
“testing registries of the remainder of the accused unit 
involved in the sweep” had been destroyed and were 
determined to be unrecoverable. Derogatory data for SFOI 
investigators was neither disclosed nor produced. 
Ultimately, Appellant was convicted solely based on the 
positive urinalysis. There was no corroborating evidence of 
cocaine use. The Government relied on the permissive 
inference of knowing and wrongful use  to prove guilt. The 
defense did not present evidence at findings. 
Also on November 9, 2021, charges were referred 
against N.W. and he was tried at a special court -martial 
convened on January 24, 2022. At trial, N.W. filed a motion 
to dismiss the charge against him because of prosecutorial 
misconduct. Specifically, N .W. alleged that the 
Government failed to disclose and produce exculpatory 
evidence. Despite not granting N.W.’s requested relief, the 
military judge found that the Government was “grossly 
negligent” and “failed to comply with their discovery and 
notice obligations.” 
On July 20, 2021, SFOI had interviewed N.W. about his 
positive urinalysis, and he told the investigator, “I have no 
idea, why would I  . . . I take pre -workout, I don’t know if 
that could make me pop . . . my roommate brought [the pre-
workout] back from Africa. I ran out of mine and took his.” 
SFOI did not take any further investigative steps, and the 
original Report of Investigation ( ROI) was published on 
July 23, 2021. Upon review of the ROI, the Chief of Military 
Justice asked SFOI to conduct further inve stigation. On 
September 14, 2021, a separate investigator interviewed 
N.W. and D.B. and, during the interview, D .B. discussed 
purchasing online a  pre-workout powder made by 
Blackstone Labs while deployed. He stated that he stored 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
the pre-workout powder in a central location in the home 
he shared with N .W. and Appellant. D .B.’s interview was 
never disclosed to Appellant. 
On either September 14 or 15, a third investigator (Inv), 
N.M. conducted an internet search of Blackstone Labs’ 
pre-workout products and found only one pre -workout 
powder available for sale online through Blackstone Labs. 
This particular pre-workout powder contained a stimulant 
called dimethylhexylamine (DMHA). Inv N.M. contacted 
Drug Demand Reduction Program (DDRP), who informed 
him that DMHA was on the banned substance list and 
provided, via email, the “names of the two Medical Review 
Officers (MRO) who could discuss whether the banned 
substance could cause a positive result for cocaine.” DDRP 
also sent Inv N.M.  the banned substance list. That same 
day, Inv N.M. called one of the MROs and did not document 
that conversation but  did recall the MRO stating it was 
“possible if taken in the right quantities, within the right 
timeframe, that the stimulant ‘DMHA’ could cause a 
positive result for the metabolite of cocaine on a 
urinalysis.” None of this information was documented in 
any case file. However, Inv N.M. relayed the results of his 
investigation to the base legal office, wh ich determined 
there was sufficient evidence t o open a case against D .B. 
for an alleged violation of Article 92, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C . 
§ 892 (2018), using a substance on the banned substances 
list. 
The SFOI ultimately decided not to pursue the Article 
92, UCMJ, charges against D.B. and N.W., and that case 
was closed. D espite SFOI policy that requires files to be 
maintained for seventy -five years, Inv N.M.  deleted the 
electronic case file and the hard copy case file on the 
investigation into N .W. and D .B.’s alleged Article 92, 
UCMJ, violation. The second  investigator and Inv N.M.  
were subsequently verbally counseled in relation to their 
conduct regarding the deletion of D.B.’s case file and the 
second interview of N.W. No documentation on either 
verbal counseling was ever provided by trial couns el to 
Appellant’s defense counsel. At N.W.’s trial, the military 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
judge ruled the conversations between SFOI and the MRO 
and the conversation between SFOI and DDRP were 
“arguably exculpatory” and, regarding SFOI’s destruction 
of case files, stated “the lack of documentation definitely 
calls into question the training, et hical practices and 
integrity of investigators as those conversations were never 
documented.” Further, the military judge found that “the 
Government failed to comply with their discovery and 
notice obligations.” The military judge concluded that the 
Government was “grossly negligent, but not willful or 
intentional.” The military judge found a continuance was 
an adequate remedy and denied the motion to dismiss . 
N.W. was acquitted in his eventual court -martial for an  
Article 112a, UCMJ, violation. 
AFCCA opinion 
Before the A FCCA, Appellant asserted that the 
Government violated his due process rights under Brady 
and discovery rights under R.C.M. 701(a)(6). Roan , 2024 
CCA LEXIS 6, at *2, 2024 WL 87633, at *1. In its response, 
the Government attached the declaration of Maj or (Maj)  
A.N. Despite being trial counsel for both Appellant and 
N.W.’s courts-martial and a supervisory attorney, Maj A.N. 
claimed that “no member of the trial counsel [team] was 
aware that Inv [N .M.] had done this research or that he 
failed to document it.” Maj A.N.’s only explanation for the 
Government’s negligence was that his office was “dealing 
with minimal manning” at the time. 
Appellant attached a declaration from his trial defense 
counsel in which she  explained that, at the time of trial, 
the defense was: 
[N]ot aware the [SFOI] performed any 
investigation into [D.B.]. We were not aware that 
[D.B.]’s supplements were on a “banned substance 
list.” We were not aware that SFOI located [an 
MRO] that opined that the substance in [D .B.]’s 
possession, taken at the right time and in the 
right quantities, could cause a positive result for 
the metabolite of cocaine. We were not aware that 
[D.B.]’s file had been destroyed. 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
She went on to explain that such information could have 
been valuable, especially evidence that an MRO believed 
the pre -workout powder could create a false positive. 
Additionally, the circumstances could have provided 
impeachment material for “SFOI, the MRO, and the 
process more generally.” 
In its analysis, the AFCCA assumed without deciding 
that trial counsel should have known of the pre -workout 
powder investigation. 
Roan, 2024 CCA LEXIS 6, at *14, 2024 
WL 87633, at * 6. However, the AFCCA held the evidence 
was not material under Brady  because there was no 
“reasonable probability” of a different result. Id . at *16 , 
2024 WL 87633, at * 6. It rejected the value of the 
pre-workout powder because, to the AFCCA, the evidence 
only linked the pre -workout powder to N .W., not to 
Appellant. Id., 2024 WL 87633, at * 6. It also rejected the 
importance of the evidence as general impeachment 
evidence because the investigators did not testify at trial. 
Id. at *18, 2024 WL 87633, at *6. The AFCCA also rejected 
Appellant’s claim that the Government violated R.C.M. 
701(a)(6), focusing its analysis on a purported lack of 
evidence that Appellant used the pre -workout powder. Id. 
at *17-18, 2024 WL 87633, at * 6. The AFCCA held that, 
even if there was a violation, there was no prejudice under 
a reasonable probability standard. Id . at *18, 2024 WL 
87633, at * 7. The AFCCA also found no prosecutorial 
misconduct reasoning that  the prosecutor’s actions were 
not knowing or intentional. Id ., 2024 WL 87633, at * 7. 
Thus, the lower court  affirmed the findings and  sentence. 
Id. at *20, 2024 WL 87633, at *7. 
II. Discussion 
A. The lower court erroneously found that evidence of 
the protein powder was immaterial and did not 
prejudice Appellant in violation of Brady 
Brady, 373 U.S. at 90, establishes that the Government 
must turn over any evidence in its possession that might 
cast doubt on an accused’s guilt. “[T]he suppression by the 
prosecution of evidence favorable to an accused upon 
request violates due process where the evidence is material 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of the good 
faith or bad faith of the prosecution.” Id. at 87. We review 
discovery and disclosure process violations under a 
two-step analysis: “first, [the Court must determine] 
whether the information or evidence at issue was subject 
to disclosure or discovery; second, if there was 
nondisclosure of such information, [the Court tests] the 
effect of that nondisclosure on the appellant’s trial.” United 
States v. Roberts, 59 M.J. 323, 325 (C.A.A.F. 2004).  
Establishing a Brady  violation requires an appellant 
show: (1) that the evidence at issue was favorable, either 
because of its exculpatory nature or value as impeachment 
evidence; (2) that the favorable evidence was suppressed, 
either intentionally or inadvertently, by the government; 
and (3) the failure to disclose resulted in prejudice, i.e., the 
evidence was material. See Banks v. Dretke, 540 U.S. 668, 
691 (2004); Strickler v. Greene, 527 U.S. 263, 281-82 (1999); 
United States v. Hawkins, 73 M.J. 605, 610 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. 2014). 
1. The withheld evidence was material and 
favorable to SrA Roan’s defense 
“[F]avorable evidence” under Brady includes “evidence 
. . . that, if disclosed and used effectively, . . . may make the 
difference between conviction and acquittal.” United States 
v. Bagley , 473 U.S. 667, 676 (1985)  (citation omitted) . 
“[E]vidence is ‘material’ within the meaning of Brady when 
there is a reasonable probability that, had the evidence 
been disclosed, the result of the proceeding would have 
been different.” Cone v. Bell , 556 U.S. 449, 469- 70 (2009) 
(citation omitted). “[A] showing of materiality does not 
require demonstration by a preponderance that the 
disclosure of the suppressed evidence would have resulted 
ultimately in the defendant’s acquittal.” Kyles v. Whitley, 
514 U.S. 419, 434 (1995). A reasonable probability does not 
mean that the defendant “would more likely than not have 
received a different verdict with the evidence,” but only 
that the likelihood of a different result is great enough to 
“undermine confidence in the out come of the trial.” Id . 
(citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
“[T]he duty to disclose such evidence is applicable even 
though there has been no request by the accused  . . . and 
that duty encompasses impeachment evidence as well as 
exculpatory evidence.” Strickler, 527 U.S. at 280 (citations 
omitted). 
In evaluating materiality, the AFCCA based its decision 
on the fact that there is no “indication in the record that 
Appellant used his roommate’s supplement,” thus the 
lower court  found “no reasonable probability that 
disclosure of the MRO’s purported statement regarding 
DMHA would have produced a different result in 
Appellant’s trial.” Roan, 2024 CCA LEXIS 6, at * 16, 2024 
WL 87633, at * 6. However , this is an incorrect way to 
analyze the issue. The question is not what was raised at 
trial, but what could have been raised had this information 
been disclosed. In Kyles, the defendant’s capital murder 
conviction and death sentence were  affirmed on direct 
appeal after the government failed to turn over seven 
pieces of exculpatory evidence. 514 U.S. at  428-29. 
Ultimately, the Supreme Court overturned his conviction 
based on how the defense could have used this evidence 
and not whether said evidence would be outcome 
determinative. Id. at 454.  
Further, all withheld evidence must be considered 
cumulatively. Id. at 437. The list of withheld evidence in 
this case, as correctly stated by Appellant, is as follows: 
 
(1) [I]n the common area of Appellant’s apartment 
there was workout powder that was 
manufactured by Blackstone Labs; 
(2) some pre -workout powder from Blackstone 
Labs contained a banned substance— DMHA; 
(3) despite containing a banned substance, 
Blackstone Labs marketed itself to appear FDA 
approved and, as a result, had been the target of 
a Department of Justice investigation. 
(4) a MRO told a Security Forces investigator that 
DMHA could cause a false positive for cocaine; 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
(5) interviews with SSgt N.W. and SSgt [D.B.] 
were videotaped and the tapes were not provided 
to the defense; 
(6) SFOI destroyed SSgt [ D.B.’s] case file and 
deleted all references to the Article 92, UCMJ, 
investigations in SSgt N.W.’s case file; and 
(7) two Security Forces investigators were 
counselled for violating SFOI policies and 
destroying case files. 
     When viewed cumulatively, it is clear that Appellant 
was denied a potent defense strategy —the innocent 
ingestion defense. Being able to argue this defense  would 
have rebutted the permissive inference of knowing and 
wrongful use instruction given by the military judge.1 The 
AFCCA erred in assuming that to put forward an innocent 
ingestion defense there must have been something in the 
record connecting Appellant to the supplement.2 In United 
States v.  Lewis, this Court reversed a conviction for the 
wrongful use of cocaine based on the military judge’s 
erroneous ruling that the innocent ingestion defense 
requires the defense to put on corroborating evidence. 51 
M.J. 376 , 380  (C.A.A.F. 1999). “The very nature of an 
innocent ingestion defense means that [the defendant] 
could not prove the time or place of his innocent ingestion 
but could only suggest possible explanations. ” United 
States v. Brewer, 61 M.J. 425, 429 (C.A.A.F. 2005).  The 
defense of innocent ingestion inherently requires raising 
 
1 The military judge’s instruction was as follows:  
Use of a controlled substance may be inferred to 
be wrongful in the absence of evidence to the 
contrary. However, the drawing of this inference 
is not required. Knowledge by the accused of the 
presence of the substance and knowledge of its 
contraband natur e may be inferred from the 
surrounding circumstances. However, the 
drawing of any inference is not required. 
2 However, as an aside, we would note that the very reason 
this information is not in the record is because it was withheld.  
See Glossip v. Oklahoma, 145 S. Ct. 612, 623 n.4 (2025). 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
doubt in the minds of members that the presence of the 
drug in the defendant’s system came from “a knowing and 
wrongful use of the drug.” Id. 
Appellant is not required to show a link to himself and 
the protein powder. He need only point to it as a potential 
source to make a valid innocent ingestion claim, and, as 
such, provide a basis for the members to question whether 
to draw the inference that Appellant’s drug use was 
wrongful. 
2. The Government did not turn over any of this 
evidence in the run-up to the trial 
At the AFCCA, the Government relied on Maj A .N.’s 
testimony that “no member of the trial counsel [team]” was 
aware of the SFOI investigation into the workout powder. 
However, even if that was  the case, th at alone is not 
dispositive. “It is well accepted that a prosecutor’s lack of 
knowledge does not render information unknown for Brady 
purposes.” United States v. Perdomo, 929 F.2d 967, 970 (3d 
Cir. 1991); see also  United States v. Morris , 80 F.3d 1151, 
1169 (7th Cir. 1996) (finding it “improper for a prosecutor’s 
office to remain ignorant about certain aspects of a case or 
to compartmentalize information so that only investigating 
officers, and not the prosecutors themselves, would be 
aware of it”). “This prohibition against willful ignorance 
has special force in the military justice system, which 
mandates that an accused be afforded the ‘equal 
opportunity’ to inspect evidence.” United States v. Stellato, 
74 M.J. 473, 487 (C.A.A.F. 2015) ( first citing Article 46, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 846  (2012); and then citing R.C.M. 
701(e)). SFOI jointly investigated the Article 112a, UCMJ, 
violations in both N.W. and Appellant’s cases for use of a 
banned substance at the direction of and in coordination 
with the Chief of Military Justice in the legal office. Maj 
A.N., as a supervisory attorney and trial counsel in both 
Appellant and N.W.’s courts-martial, certainly should have 
known what joint investigative steps were taken in the 
“companion cases” he was prosecuting. Maj A.N. stated 
that it would have been difficult to “wall off” one trial team 
from the other due to staffing issues. Under the most 
United States v. Roan, No. 24-0104/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
charitable interpretation, Maj A .N. remained willfully 
ignorant as to SFOI’s investigation into the pre -workout 
powder. If Maj A .N. had exercised reasonable diligence in 
preparing the Government’s case, he would have been 
aware of the steps taken by SFOI,  the destruction of 
evidence, and the investigators’ derogatory data. Thus, he 
was responsible for turning over to the defense responsive 
material and exculpatory information.  In addition , there 
are some cases where “the loss or destruction of evidence is 
. . . so critical to the defense as to make a criminal trial 
fundamentally unfair.” Arizona v. Youngblood, 488 U.S. 51, 
61 (1988) (Stevens, J., concurring in the judgment). Such is 
the case here.  
III. Conclusion  
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is reversed . The findings and sentence 
are set aside. The record of trial i s returned to the Judge 
Advocate General of the Air Force. A rehearing is 
authorized. 