This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Nikolas S. CASILLAS, Airman First Class 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0089 
Crim. App. No. 40302 
 
Argued January 14, 2025—Decided August 20, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Colin P. Eichenberger 
 
For Appellant: Captain Samantha M.  Castanien 
(argued); Major Spencer R. Nelson (on brief); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Kate E. Lee (argued); Colonel 
Matthew D. Talcott, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A.  
Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Airman First Class SF, the victim in this case, fell 
asleep after hosting a party in her apartment for a fellow 
servicemember. Appellant, Airman First Class Nikolas S. 
Casillas, remained in SF’s apartment after most of the 
other guests went home. When SF woke up, Appellant was 
committing a sexual act upon her.  
Under the theory that SF did not consent to the sexual 
act, the Government charged Appellant with two specifica-
tions of sexual assault in violation of Article  120, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §  920 (2018).
1 
A general court-martial convicted Appellant of one of those 
specifications and acquitted him of the other. The United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) af-
firmed. United States v. Casillas, No. ACM 40302, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 527, at *25, 2023 WL 8678806, at *9 (A.F. Ct. 
Crim. App. Dec. 15, 2023) (unpublished). 
Before this Court, Appellant challenges multiple as-
pects of his conviction. First, Appellant brings both facial 
and as-applied challenges to the constitutionality of Arti-
cle 120(b)(2) and (g)(7), UCMJ. Second, Appellant argues 
that his conviction was legal ly insufficient. Third, Appel-
lant argues that the military judge abused his discretion 
when he denied Appellant’s challenges of a panel member 
for actual and implied bias. And finally, Appellant raises 
two issues related to 18 U.S.C. § 922, a provision of the Gun 
Control Act of 1968 that restricts the Second Amendment 
rights of various categories of people, including people con-
victed of certain crimes.
2 
 
1 Unless otherwise noted, all references in this opinion to the 
UCMJ are to the Manual for Courts -Martial, United States  
(2019 ed.) (MCM). 
2 The Court granted review of the following six issues: 
I. Whether Article 120(b)(2) and (g)(7), Uniform 
Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. §§  920(b)(2) 
and (g)(7), are unconstitutionally vague because 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
In light of this Court’s opinion in United States v. Men-
doza, 85 M.J. 213 (C.A.A.F. 2024), we deny Appellant’s con-
stitutional challenges to Article 120, UCMJ. We also reject 
Appellant’s challenge to the legal sufficiency of his convic-
tion because there was a period during the sexual assault—
after the victim awoke —when the victi m was capable of 
consenting, but she did not consent to sexual activity.  
With respect to Appellant’s challenge of Chief Master 
Sergeant (CMSgt) AG, a panel member, for actual and im-
plied bias, we conclude that the military judge did not err 
in denying those challenges. Finally, in accordance with 
 
they fail to put defendants on fair notice of the 
specific charge against them. 
II. As applied, whether Article 120(b)(2) and 
(g)(7), Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 920(b)(2) and (g)(7), gave Appellant constitu-
tional fair notice when the military judge denied 
defense counsel’s request for a tailored jury in-
struction. 
III. Whether Appellant’s conviction for sexual as-
sault without consent was legally sufficient. 
IV. In a sexual assault trial, did the military judge 
abuse his discretion when he denied the accused’s 
challenge for actual and implied bias for a mem-
ber whose wife had been raped? 
V. Whether the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Armed Forces has jurisdiction to direct modi-
fication of the 18 U.S.C. § 922 prohibition noted on 
the Staff Judge Advocate’s indorsement to the en-
try of judgment. 
VI. As applied to Appellant, whether the G overn-
ment can prove 18 U.S.C. §  922 is constitutional 
by “demonstrating that it is consistent with the 
nation’s historical tradition of firearm regulation” 
when he was not convicted of a violent offense 
(quoting New York State Rifle and Pistol Associa-
tion, Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 24 (2022)). 
United States v. Casillas, 84 M.J. 477 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
this Court’s decision in United States v. Johnson, __ M.J. 
__ (C.A.A.F. 2025), we decide that because this Court lacks 
the authority to act on the § 922 indication in the Entry of 
Judgment (EOJ), Appellant’s constitutional challenge to 18 
U.S.C. § 922 is moot. Accordingly, we affirm the judgment 
of the AFCCA. 
I. Background 
A. Factual Background 
SF, the victim in this case, held a birthday party at her 
apartment for ZM, a fellow servicemember. SF invited HC, 
also a servicemember, to the party, and HC in turn invited 
Appellant. MM, a civilian, was also present. During the 
party, SF became intoxicat ed. After the party, Appellant, 
ZM, and MM stayed in SF’s house. HC left but came back 
after SF told her she didn’t want Appellant at her house.  
When HC came back to SF’s apartment, HC asked SF if 
she was okay with Appellant being there, at which time SF 
at first did not answer, but then mumbled something to the 
effect that it was okay. After HC also talked to Appellant, 
who said he would be leavin g within half an hour, HC left 
the apartment again. 
After HC left the house, SF was feeling “super woozy” 
and “really tired.” SF lay down on her bed, and at that time, 
MM was also on her bed. After SF fell asleep, MM moved 
to sleep in another room. Later, SF woke up to Appellant 
penetrating her vulva with his penis. At trial, SF testified 
that in the moment she was awake, she did not consent to 
this. After SF woke up, Appellant pulled up SF’s pants and 
went to the bathroom. After Appellant came out of the 
bathroom, SF went into the bathroom to call her friend ES, 
another servicemember, to ask him to come over to get 
Appellant out of the house. SF testified that she called 
ES—“someone scary” and “a big dude” —because she was 
afraid and there was no better person to kick someone out 
of her apartment. After ES ar rived, Appellant left at ES’s 
direction. 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
B. Voir Dire and Panel Member Challenge 
During group voir dire, CMSgt  AG, a potential panel 
member, revealed that he had a family member who had 
been the victim of an offense similar to the one charged in 
this case. During individual voir dire, CMSgt AG disclosed 
that his wife had been raped about thirty years prior to the 
court-martial. The military judge asked CMSgt AG a series 
of questions about the circumstances of the rape, how often 
he and his wife spoke about it, and how the knowledge of 
what his wife went through affected him personally. The 
military judge then asked whether CMSgt AG could be im-
partial despite having a wife who had been a victim of rape, 
and CMSgt  AG stated that he could. The military judge 
asked CMSgt AG to explain, in his own words, why he be-
lieved that he could be impartial, and CMSgt AG said: 
I think that any incident that is separate from an-
other incident —you know, this we’ve lived with 
for a long time and I think we’ve processed it. And 
I just think— I think I can separate that incident 
from basically any other incident that I might 
hear of or try to assess, I guess, for lack of a better 
word. 
He provided a similar response when asked why he 
thought this would not have any impact on his determina-
tions if this case reached the sentencing stage.  After voir 
dire, trial defense counsel brought a for -cause challenge 
against CMSgt AG as a panel member for actual and im-
plied bias. The military judge denied this challenge on both 
grounds. 
C. Requested Instruction, Findings, and Sentence 
Before trial, trial defense counsel requested the follow-
ing special instruction to the panel: 
 You have heard evidence that [SF] consumed 
alcohol on the night in question and she may have 
been in some state of intoxication during the al-
leged sexual events at issue. You may have previ-
ously attended sexual assault training or briefings 
in which the to pic of consumption of alcohol and 
sex was addressed. In this sexual training or brief-
ings, you may have been informed that women 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
who are drinking or intoxicated are not capable of 
consenting to sex. That is a misstatement of the 
law. You are only to follow the law as I instruct 
you, and not be influenced in any way by training 
or briefings you may have received outside this 
courtroom. That is particularly important as it is 
possible the sexual assault training or briefings 
you have attended were not consistent with the 
law. In this case, there is no allegation that [SF] 
was too intoxicated to consent to sex. You are not 
permitted to consider whether she was too intoxi-
cated to consent to sex. That is not an issue before 
you. 
The military judge denied this instruction, stating that 
“[t]he Court does not find the instruction as written to be 
an accurate statement of the law.”  
A general court-martial composed of officer and enlisted 
members convicted Appellant, contrary to his pleas, of one 
specification of sexual assault in violation of Article  120, 
UCMJ, for “penetrating [SF’s] vulva with his penis, with-
out her consent.” He was acquitted of a second specification 
of sexual assault in violation of Article  120, UCMJ, for 
“penetrating [SF’s] vulva with his finger, with an intent to 
gratify his sexual desire, without her consent.” The mili-
tary judge sentenced Appellant to two years  of confine-
ment, a dishonorable discharge, reduction to E -1, and for-
feiture of all pay and allowances. 
II. Constitutional Challenges to Article 120, UCMJ 
The Government charged Appellant with violating Ar-
ticle 120, UCMJ, without specifying a specific subsection of 
that provision that Appellant violated. The specific subsec-
tion is important because in Mendoza, this Court rejected 
the government’s argument that Article  120 creates 
broadly overlapping offenses that give the government 
multiple ways to charge a criminal act. 85 M.J. at 215 
(holding that Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ , and Arti-
cle 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, established distinct offenses with 
separate theories of liability). Based on the language of the 
specification—that Appellant “commit[ted] a sexual act 
upon [SF] by penetrating her vulva with his penis, without 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
her consent”—we agree with Appellant that he must have 
been charged with violating Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ. 
See MCM pt. IV, para. 60.e .(2)(d); see also  MCM pt. IV, 
para. 60.b.(2)(d) (laying out the elements of sexual assault 
without consent). As we held in Mendoza, Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, “criminalizes the performance of a 
sexual act upon a victim who is capable of consenting but 
does not consent.” 85 M.J. at 220. 
Appellant makes two constitutional challenges to his 
conviction: first, a facial challenge to the constitutionality 
of Article 120(b)(2), UCMJ, and second, a challenge to the 
constitutionality of Article  120(b)(2), UCMJ, as applied to 
him because the milit ary judge denied trial defense coun-
sel’s proposed limiting instruction.  
A. Standards of Review 
We review the constitutionality of a statute de novo. 
United States v. Medina, 69 M.J. 462, 464 (C.A.A.F. 2011). 
To succeed in a facial challenge, an appellant must estab-
lish that no set of circumstances exists under which the Ar-
ticle would be valid. United States v. Castillo, 74 M.J. 160, 
162 (C.A.A.F. 2015); United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 
745 (1987).
3 
We also review questions of statutory interpretation de 
novo. United States v. Sager, 76 M.J. 158, 161 (C.A.A.F. 
2017). This Court reviews a military judge’s decision to 
deny a requested instruction for abuse of discretion, apply-
ing a three -pronged test: (1) whether the requested 
 
3 Although this Court has endorsed the “no set of circum-
stances” test from the Supreme Court’s decision in Salerno, we 
acknowledge that the Supreme Court itself has debated whether 
that is the correct standard for facial challenges. See Washington 
State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party , 552 U.S. 
442, 449 (2008) (“While some Members of the Court have criti-
cized the Salerno formulation, all agree that a facial challenge 
must fail where the statute has a plainly legitimate sweep.” (ci-
tation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted)). Our deci-
sion in this case would be the same if we applied the “plainly 
legitimate sweep” test. 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
instruction is correct; (2) whether it is substantially cov-
ered in the main instruction already given; and (3) whether 
it is on such a vital point in the case that the failure to give 
the instruction deprives the accused of a defense or seri-
ously impairs its effective presentation. United States v. 
Carruthers, 64 M.J. 340, 345- 46 (C.A.A.F. 2007). All three 
prongs must be satisfied for there to be reversible error. 
United States v. Barnett, 71 M.J. 248, 253 (C.A.A.F. 2012). 
B. Discussion 
After this Court issued its decision in Mendoza, we in-
vited the parties in this case to file supplemental briefs ad-
dressing the constitutionality of Article  120, UCMJ, in 
light of that decision. In Appellant’s supplemental brief, he 
argues that Article 120, UCMJ, remains facially unconsti-
tutional becau se Congress’s definition of consent in Arti-
cle 120(g)(7), UCMJ, allows military judges to instruct on 
improper theories of liability and allows factfinders to con-
vict on uncharged theories. We disagree. 
In Mendoza, we held that Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, 
only applies to sexual assaults upon victims who are capa-
ble of consenting and clarified that the government may 
not charge one offense under one factual theory and then 
argue a different offense and a different f actual theory at 
trial. 85 M.J. at 2 20. Thus, the government must choose 
which Article 120 offense it intends to charge, give the ac-
cused notice of that choice in the charge sheet, and pursue 
that same offense at trial. With the government now on no-
tice that Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ (sexual assault with-
out consent), is not an umbrella offense that includes every 
other type of sexual assault in which the victim is incapable 
of consenting, we believe that there are many circum-
stances under which Article 120, UCMJ, can be validly ap-
plied. Accordingly, Appellant’s facial  challenge to Arti-
cle 120, UCMJ, must fail. 
With respect to his as -applied challenge, Appellant ar-
gues that the Government violated his right to due process 
by arguing a different factual theory than the one it 
charged, and then the military judge exacerbated that 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
error by denying his requested instruction. Appellant’s ar-
gument is based on the fact that the sexual assault began 
when SF was asleep, a fact that the Government referenced 
repeatedly at trial. In Appellant’s view, this case is there-
fore analogous to Mendoza, because the Government 
charged him with one offense — committing a sexual act 
upon another without consent in violation of Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ—but obtained a conviction by argu-
ing a different offense at trial : committing a sexual act 
upon a perso n who is asleep in violation of Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ. 
Appellant’s argument fails because SF awoke during 
the sexual assault, creating a period when Appellant was 
penetrating her vulva with his penis while she was awake 
and capable of consenting. This is exactly the offense and 
factual theory that the Governmen t charged, giving 
Appellant sufficient notice of what he needed to defend 
against. Nothing in Congress’s definition of consent in 
Article 120(g)(7), UCMJ, prohibited the Government from 
proving that —at least for a brief time after SF awoke—
Appellant committed the charged sexual act upon SF and 
that SF did not consent to that act. 
This remains true even though the military judge 
denied trial defense counsel’s request for a tailored 
instruction. Had the military judge instructed the panel as 
trial defense counsel requested, the panel would have been 
instructed that they were “not per mitted to consider 
whether she was too intoxicated to consent to sex.” But that 
instruction is not an accurate statement of the law. When 
an accused is charged with a violation of 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, “[n]othing in the article bars 
the Government fr om offering evidence of an alleged 
victim’s intoxication to prove the absence of consent.” 
Mendoza, 85 M.J. at 222; see also Article 120(g)(7)(C) (“All 
the surrounding circumstances are to be considered in 
determining whether a person gave consent.”). To be clear, 
in Mendoza, we prohibited the government from proving 
the absence of consent by “merely establishing that the 
victim was too intoxicated to consent.” 85 M.J. at 222. But 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
here, the proposed instruction would have foreclosed the 
panel from even considering the extent of the victim’s 
intoxication, and neither Article  120, UCMJ, nor our case 
law endorses that result. Because the proposed instruction 
fails the first prong of the Carruthers test, 64 M.J. at 346, 
the military judge did not abuse his discretion in denying 
the instruction.
4 
III. Legal Sufficiency Analysis 
A. Standard of Review 
We review the question whether a conviction was 
legally sufficient de novo. United States v. King , 78 M.J. 
218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 2019). “The test for legal sufficiency is 
whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could 
have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Gutierrez , 73 M.J. 172, 175 
(C.A.A.F. 2014)). 
B. Discussion 
In this case, to establish that Appellant violated Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, the Government was required to 
prove: (1) that the accused committed a sexual act upon the 
victim, and (2) that the victim did not consent to that sex-
ual act. MCM para. 60(b)(2)(d)(i)-(ii). Consistent with our 
decision in Mendoza, 85 M.J. at 220, because Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ, establishes a separate offense for 
committing a sexual act upon a person who is asleep , the 
Government could not prove lack of consent by establishing 
that the victim was asleep at the time of the act. However, 
viewing the evidence presented at trial in the light most 
favorable to the Government, we conclude that a rational 
trier of fact could have found that the Government estab-
lished the Article 120(b)(2)(A) offense beyond a reasonable 
doubt.  
 
4 Because all three prongs must be satisfied in order for this 
Court to find reversible error, the Court need not address the 
other two prongs. Barnett, 71 M.J. at 253. 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
SF testified that, before she fell asleep, she felt “super 
woozy” and sick to her stomach. Feeling as though she 
couldn’t keep her eyes open, she lay down on her bed next 
to MM. SF testified that before falling asleep, she never 
told Appellant —who at that time was sitting on the 
couch—that he could pull down her pants or penetrate her 
vulva. SF further testified that she woke up to Appellant’s 
penis in her vagina. SF stated that she did nothing to re-
ciprocate Appellant’s actions, that she did not want him to 
be penetrating her, and that she did not consent to it. SF 
recalled Appellant getting up off of her, pulling up her 
pants, and going to the bathroom. SF testified that she 
“wanted to get up and run away,” that she was afraid, and 
that she went into the b athroom to call her “big” and 
“scary” friend so that he would kick Appellant out of her 
apartment.  
Critically, SF’s testimony establishes that she was 
awake and aware of what was happening for at least a 
short time when Appellant was penetrating her, as alleged 
in the specification. During that period, the evidence sup-
ports the rational conclusion that SF had the capacity to 
consent, but that she did not consent to the sexual act. Ac-
cordingly, a rational trier of fact could have found the es-
sential elements of the Article 120(b)(2)(A) offense beyond 
a reasonable doubt. 
IV. Panel Member Challenge 
A. Standard of Review 
Article 41(a)(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  841(a)(1) (2018), 
provides that “[t]he military judge and members of a gen-
eral or special court -martial may be challenged by the ac-
cused or the trial counsel for cause stated to the court.” 
This Court reviews a military judge’s decision to reject a 
challenge made on actual bias grounds for abuse of discre-
tion. United States v. Hennis, 79 M.J. 370, 384 (C.A.A.F. 
2020). Our review of implied bias challenges, in contrast, is 
“less deferential than abuse of discretion, but more defer-
ential than de novo review.” United States v. Keago, 84 M.J. 
367, 372 (C.A.A.F. 2024)  (citation omitted) (internal 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
quotation marks omitted).5 This is because while “[a]ctual 
bias is defined as ‘bias in fact,’ ” Hennis, 79 M.J. at 384 (ci-
tation omitted), “the test for implied bias is an objective one 
that is only partially based on the military judge’s credibil-
ity determinations and findings of fact,” Keago, 84 M.J. at 
372. As this Court explained in Keago: 
A military judge who cites the correct law and ex-
plains his implied bias reasoning on the record 
will receive greater deference (closer to the abuse 
of discretion standard), while a military judge who 
fails to do so will receive less deference (closer to 
the de novo standard). Accordingly, the more rea-
soning military judges provide, the more defer-
ence they will receive. 
Id. at 373 (citing United States v. Rogers, 75 M.J. 270, 273 
(C.A.A.F. 2016)). If a military judge finds an implied bias 
challenge to be a close question, the challenge must be 
granted under this Court’s “liberal grant mandate.” Id. at 
372 (citing United States v. Peters, 74 M.J. 31, 33 (C.A.A.F. 
2015)). 
B. Discussion 
Appellant argues that CMSgt AG could not serve as an 
impartial panel member in a sexual assault case (and the 
public would reasonably doubt his impartiality) because 
his wife was the victim of a rape about thirty years earlier. 
This particular concern —that  a member’s exposure to a 
crime similar to the one to be litigated before them will 
cause the member to be (or appear to be) biased —is an is-
sue that this Court has addressed many times. See United 
States v. Terry , 64 M.J. 295, 303- 04 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (col-
lecting cases). Two key principles we have recognized in 
these cases are that: (1) the fact that a member was close 
to someone who had been a victim of a similar crime is not 
grounds for per se disqualification; and (2)  regardless of a 
 
5 Appellant has invited this Court to disregard its current 
standard for reviewing implied  bias challenges and instead re-
view military judges’ denials of implied bias challenges de novo. 
Brief for Appellant at 45, United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089 
(C.A.A.F. July 22, 2024). We decline his invitation. 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
member’s prior exposure to a crime, it is often possible for 
a member to rehabilitate himself before the military judge 
by honestly claiming that he would not be biased. Id . at 
303. 
CMSgt AG’s situation in this case is very similar to the 
one presented to this Court in Terry. There, potential panel 
member Maj  H’s wife had been sexually assaulted as a 
teenager between ten and twenty years before the court -
martial and before Maj H and his wife had ever met. 64 
M.J. at 304. Maj  H and his wife had discussed the event 
only a few times, and not in the past five years. Id. at 
303-04. In the absence of any exacerbating circum-
stances—such as a particularly violent or traumatic 
crime—the Court held that the military judge did not 
abuse his discretion in finding no actual bias. Id. Similarly, 
the Court concluded that there were “a number of factors 
in Maj H’s situation that tend[ed] to ameliorate his expo-
sure to the crime, dispelling the appearance of implied 
bias.” Id. at 304.  
Here, CMSgt AG’s wife had been a rape victim thirty 
years prior to the trial, a longer time period in comparison 
to the panel member’s wife in Terry. As in Terry , 
CMSgt AG and his wife discussed the incident very rarely, 
only two or three times over three decades.  CMSgt AG ex-
plained why he thought he could be an impartial panel 
member and stated that he would not have a problem tell-
ing his wife if the panel were to find the defendant not 
guilty. 
The military judge observed CMSgt AG’s body language 
and demeanor during voir dire and rejected defense coun-
sel’s suggestion that they indicated that CMSgt AG was ex-
cessively emotionally impacted by his wife’s rape or was 
being less than truthful in his vo ir dire responses. To the 
contrary, the military judge found CMSgt  AG’s body lan-
guage and demeanor to be “clearly indicative of his 
thoughtfulness of the questions asked [and] his desire to 
answer them as candidly as possible.” Based on 
CMSgt AG’s “candid and credible” responses, the military 
judge found that CMSgt  AG had no actual bias. The 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
military judge separately considered whether CMSgt AG’s 
participation in the court -martial would damage the pub-
lic’s perception of fairness in the military justice system 
and concluded that it would not. Even considering the lib-
eral grant mandate, the mili tary judge denied Appellant’s 
challenge for implied bias, describing the question as not 
“a particularly close call.” 
We find nothing about CMSgt AG’s answers during voir 
dire, or the circumstances of his wife’s prior experience 
with sexual assault, that gives us cause to deviate from our 
precedent in Terry . This is especially true given that the 
military judge in this case: (1)  placed his observations of 
CMSgt AG’s body language, demeanor, and credibility on 
the record; (2)  identified that implied bias is an objective 
standard; (3) explained his reasoning on the record, includ-
ing why these circumstances would not “do damage to this 
trial, in the eyes of the public in the perception of fairness” 
in our system of military justice; and (4) expressly took the 
liberal grant mandate into consideration in finding that the 
implied bias question was not a close call. Given that well-
developed record, we conclude that the military judge did 
not abuse his discretion in denying Appellant’s challenge 
for actual bias. Furthermore, we agree with the military 
judge that Appellant’s implied bias challenge was not a 
close call and find it appropriate, under these circum-
stances, to defer to the military judge’s denial of Appel-
lant’s implied bias challenge.
6  
V. 18 U.S.C. § 922 Challenges 
The EOJ in Appellant’s case indicates that the finding 
of guilty in his general court -martial subjects him to 
 
6 Appellant asserts that the military judge’s voir dire of 
CMSgt AG was insufficient. However, as Appellant acknowl-
edges, the military judge permitted trial defense counsel to ask 
additional follow -up questions to explore any inadequate re-
sponses. Therefore, we find no error on the part of the military 
judge. See United States v. Wiesen, 57 M.J. 48, 49 (C.A.A.F. 2002) 
(per curiam) (citing cases) (“[T]he burden of establishing 
grounds for a challenge for cause rests upon the party making 
the challenge.”). 
United States v. Casillas, No. 24-0089/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
restriction of his Second Amendment rights under 18 
U.S.C. § 922, a provision of the Gun Control Act of 1968. 
Appellant argues that 18 U.S.C. §  922 is unconstitutional 
as applied to him and urges this Court to modify the EOJ 
to remove the § 922 indication. 
In Johnson, we recently held that this Court lacks au-
thority to act on the § 922 indication in an appellant’s EOJ. 
__ M.J. at __ (8-9) (holding that neither Article 67(c)(1)(A), 
UCMJ, nor Article 67(c)(1)(B), UCMJ, gives this Court au-
thority to act on the §  922 indication). Accordingly, Appel-
lant’s constitutional challenge to 18 U.S.C. § 922 is moot. 
VI. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 