This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Monica R. ARROYO, Senior Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0212 
Crim. App. No. 40321 
 
Argued February 25, 2025—Decided August 19, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Christopher D. James (arraignment 
and pretrial motions) and Thomas A. Smith (trial) 
 
For Appellant:  Major Heather M. Bruha (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Kate E. Lee (argued); Colonel 
Matthew D. Talcott, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. 
Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Amicus Curiae in Support of  Appellee: Captain 
Aaron D. Sanders and Devon A. R. Wells,  Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge JOHNSON joined.  
_______________ 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
In this case , Appellant entered into a negotiated plea 
agreement, voluntarily pleading guilty to assault consum-
mated by a battery and accepting a bad-conduct discharge 
and a minimum confinement of fourteen days in exchange 
for the dismissal of sexual assault charges that carried the 
potential for a dishonorable discharge , decades of confine-
ment, and mandatory sex offender registration. The United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) , in 
assessing the appropriateness  of Appellant’s sentence, 
acknowledged this bargained- for benefit, noting that the 
agreement “reduced Appe llant’s criminal exposure” and 
ensured that Appellant “would not be exposed to additional 
significant collateral consequences that were possible un-
der the dismissed specifications.” United States v. Arroyo , 
No. ACM 40321 (f rev), 2024 CCA LEXIS 242, at *30, 2024 
WL 3045505, at *10 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. June 18, 2024)  
(unpublished). 
We granted review to decide whether the AFCCA erred 
by recognizing the benefit Appellant received from her plea 
agreement when reviewing the appropriateness of her sen-
tence.
 United States v. Arroyo, 85 M.J. 188 (C.A.A.F. 2024) 
(order granting review) . An accused’s own sentence pro-
posal is a reasonable indication of the sentence’s probable 
fairness to the accused. Accordingly , the AFCCA may —to 
ascertain the fairness and thus the appropriateness of a n 
adjudged sentence—consider the context in which the par-
ties reached the plea agreement, including the benefits 
from that agreement to the accused . We therefore affirm 
the decision of the AFCCA.  
I. Background 
At the time of her  offense, Appellant was a s enior air-
man in the United States Air Force stationed at Tinker Air 
Force Base, Oklahoma. On December 31, 2020, Appellant 
attended a New Year’s Eve party hosted at the off-base res-
idence of a fellow s enior airman. The gathering included 
six airmen, all from the same squadron, some of whom, in-
cluding the victim, Airman First Class (A1C) LP, were 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
junior in rank  to Appellant. Allegations of misconduct at 
the gathering led the Government to charge Appellant with 
two specifications of sexual assault in violation of Arti-
cle 120, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § 920 (2018). 
Prior to trial, the parties jointly presented to the mili-
tary judge an Offer for Plea Agreement. Under the pro-
posed agreement and as relevant here, Appellant offered to 
plead not guilty to the two specifications of sexual assault, 
but to plead guilty to an additional charge and specification 
of assault consummated by a battery in violation of Arti-
cle 128, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 928 (2018), to be preferred and 
referred by the convening authority. Appellant also offered 
to enter into a stipulation of fact supporti ng the new as-
sault charge, to  refrain from objecting to the stipulation’s 
use during the guilty plea inquiry or sentencing proceed-
ings, and to accept a sentence that included at least four-
teen days of confinement and a bad -conduct discharge. In 
exchange, the convening authority agreed to withdraw and 
dismiss the two specifications of sexual assault  upon 
A1C LP, and to move to dismiss those offenses with preju-
dice after the announcement of Appellant’s sentence. 
During the plea colloquy, the military judge confirmed 
that Appellant fully understood the agreement’s conse-
quences, including a bad -conduct discharge’s stigma, its 
impact on employment and educational opportunities, and 
the resulting loss of military benefits.  The military judge 
also confirmed that Appellant had thoroughly discussed 
the decision with defense counsel. At the conclusion of this 
inquiry, the military judge asked Appellant whether it was 
her “express desire to be discharged from the service wi th 
a bad conduct discharge ,” and she confirmed that it was.  
Finding the plea agreement legally sound, the military 
judge accepted it. 
In the stipulation of fact, Appellant agreed that she 
committed an offensive touching and did bodily harm to 
A1C LP by intentionally touching her on the leg without 
legal justification or A1C  LP’s consent. During the Care  
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
inquiry,1 Appellant further explained why she believed she 
was guilty of violating Article 128, UCMJ: 
[A1C LP] had not told me she was comfortable 
with physical contact and I had not seen anyone 
else touch [A1C LP] that night. I knew it was of-
fensive because she had not acted in any manner 
that indicated to me that she wanted to be 
touched. She did not ask me to touch her leg, I did 
not ask her before I touched her leg, and she had 
not previously given me permission to touch her 
leg.  
 The setting was not one that would typically 
involve physical contact and it was not part of a 
game or sporting event. I have no excuse for my 
behavior. 
The military judge accepted Appellant’s plea and found her 
guilty of one specification of assault consummated by a bat-
tery in violation of Article 128, UCMJ.  
During sentencing, the Government requested that Ap-
pellant be sentenced to a reduction in rank, two months of 
confinement, and a bad -conduct discharge. The Govern-
ment argued that a bad-conduct discharge was warranted 
because Appellant “deserve[d] that sort of punishment, 
that lifelong punishment for her actions.” Defense counsel 
requested that Appellant receive only fourteen days of con-
finement and a bad-conduct discharge, describing this sen-
tence as “significant punishment and deterrence” that 
would send a compelling message. The military judge sen-
tenced Appellant to a bad -conduct discharge, thirty-seven 
days of confinement, and a reduction in grade to E-2. 
Consistent with the plea agreement, the Government 
then moved to dismiss with prejudice the two specifications 
of sexual assault under Article 120, UCMJ. In the absence 
of any objection from Appellant, the military judge granted 
 
1 United States v. Care, 18 C.M.A. 535, 40 C.M.R. 247 (1969). 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
the motion. The convening authority took no action regard-
ing the findings or sentence.2 
On appeal before the AFCCA, Appellant argued that a 
bad-conduct discharge was an inappropriately severe sen-
tence for the single specification of assault consummated 
by a battery to which Appellant pleaded guilty.  Arroyo, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 242, at *3-4, 2024 WL 3045505, at *1. In 
addressing this argument, the AFCCA began by reviewing 
the plea agreement, the military judge’s Care inquiry, and 
the parties’ sentencing arguments. Id. at *22-27, 2024 WL 
3045505, at *7-9. Then, after reviewing the appropriate un-
derlying law, the AF CCA announced: “After conducting a 
thorough review of the entire record, specifically consider-
ing the Appellant, the nature and seriousness of the of-
fense, Appellant’s record of service, and all matters con-
tained in the record of trial, we find Appellant’s sentence is 
inappropriately severe and provide appropriate relief.” Id. 
at *29, 2024 WL 3045505, at *9. However,  the AFCCA de-
clined to set aside the bad -conduct discharge, and instead 
reduced Appellant’s term of confinement from thirty-seven 
to fourteen days and affirmed the bad -conduct discharge 
and the reduction to the grade of E -2.
3 Id. at *31-32, 2024 
WL 3045505, at *10-11. 
The AFCCA then offered the following explanation: 
 
2 Before the convening authority’s final decision in Appel-
lant’s case, the AFCCA had remanded the case back to the Chief 
Trial Judge, Air Force Trial Judiciary, to provide Appellant an 
opportunity to rebut statements made by the victim in a letter 
sent to the convening authority in response to Appellant’s clem-
ency request. United States v. Arroyo , No. ACM 40321, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 358, at *7-8, 2023 WL 5501538, at *3 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. Aug. 25, 2023) (unpublished). 
3 Judge Ramirez dissented in part disagreeing with the ap-
propriateness of the bad- conduct discharge. Arroyo, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 242, at *32 -33, 2024 WL 3045505, at *11 (Ramirez, J., 
concurring in part and dissenting in part). He stressed that Ap-
pellant’s conviction stemmed solely from touching A1C LP’s leg 
at a party and that the record lacked details on the nature or 
severity of the contact. Id. at *36-37, 2024 WL 3045505, at *12. 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
 Here, Appellant, consistent with her pleas, 
was found guilty of assaulting another Air Force 
member at a New Year’s Eve party. The assault 
occurred after the victim had been drinking and 
in the presence of Appellant’s peers and subordi-
nates. We note that Appellant did not provide any 
extenuating circumstances for touching LP on the 
leg during her guilty plea inquiry or through any 
evidence admitted at sentencing. The record also 
suggests that Appellant’s conduct impacted LP in 
a negative way and that she now finds it difficult 
to trust other people. 
Id. at *29, 2024 WL 3045505, at *10. 
Importantly, the AFCCA then offered the following ad-
ditional observation, which forms the basis for Appellant’s 
appeal: 
 It is also worth noting in this case that Appel-
lant, with the assistance of competent counsel, ne-
gotiated and secured a plea agreement, where she 
received the benefit of having two specifications of 
sexual assault withdrawn and dismissed with 
prejudice, in exchange for her plea of guilty to a 
separate offense. This benefit not only reduced Ap-
pellant’s criminal exposure, but it also ensured Ap-
pellant would not be exposed to additional signifi-
cant collateral consequences that were possible 
under the dismisse d specifications. In exchange 
for this benefit, Appellant agreed to a minimum 
punishment that would include at least 14 days of 
confinement and a bad-conduct discharge. 
Id. at *29-30, 2024 WL 3045505, at *10 (emphasis added). 
II. Standard of Review  
Congress has dictated that  the service courts “may af-
firm only . . . the sentence or such part or amount of the 
sentence, as the Court finds correct in law and fact and de-
termines, on the basis of the entire record, should be ap-
proved.” Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C.  § 866(d)(1) 
(2018).
4 “[I]t is a ‘settled premise’ that in exercising this 
 
4 In 2021, Congress passed the National Defense Authoriza-
tion Act for Fiscal Year 2022, Pub. L. No. 117-81, § 539E(d), 135 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
statutory mandate, a CCA has discretion to approve only 
that part of a sentence that it finds ‘ should be approved, ’ 
even if the sentence is ‘correct’ as a matter of law.” United 
States v. Kelly , 77 M.J. 404, 406 (C.A.A.F. 2018) (quoting 
States v. Nerad , 69 M.J. 138, 142 (C.A.A.F. 2010) ). This 
Court has described the service courts’ authority to conduct 
sentence appropriateness as an “awesome, plenary, de novo 
power of review .” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Cole, 31 M.J. 270, 272 (C.M.A. 
1990)). 
Congress declined to grant this Court the same author-
ity, so our review of a service court’s decision on sentence 
appropriateness is limited to the narrow question of 
whether there has been an obvious miscarriage of justice 
or an abuse of discretion. United States v. Swisher, 85 M.J. 
1, 4 (C.A.A.F. 2024). Service courts abuse their discretion 
when they act arbitrarily, capriciously, or unreasonably as 
a matter of law.  United States v. Flores, 84 M.J. 277, 282 
(C.A.A.F. 2024). 
III. Discussion 
Appellant argues that the AFCCA abused its discretion 
in two ways  when it reviewed the appropriateness  of her 
sentence. First, Appellant asserts that the AFCCA violated 
her constitutional right to a presumption of innocence by 
considering the benefit that Appellant received when the 
Government withdrew the two specifications of sexual as-
sault. Second, Appellant argues that the AFCCA erred by 
comparing the severity of her adjudged sentence to the 
maximum punishment that she co uld have received had 
she been c onvicted of the two withdrawn sexual assault 
specifications. We disagree with both assertions. 
 
Stat. 1541, 1703 (2021), which replaced this provision with new 
language describing the service courts’ authority to review sen-
tence appropriateness. Because those amendments do not apply 
to this case, w e express no opinion about whether or how they 
might affect this Court’s sentence-appropriateness review juris-
prudence. 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Underlying both of Appellant’s arguments is a thresh-
old premise that the AFCCA could not —while performing 
its sentence appropriateness review—legally recognize the 
existence of the plea agreement between Appellant and the 
Government. Although we agree that a service court could 
err by improperly using a plea agreement during its sen-
tence appropriateness review (as Appellant suggests in her 
assigned issues before this Court), we do not agree that the 
AFCCA was prohibited from acknowledging the plea agree-
ment’s existence or discussing the context in which the par-
ties reached the agreement. As Appellant concedes in her 
brief, this Court has long recognized that , “[a]bsent evi-
dence to the contrary, [an] accused’s own sentence proposal 
is a reasonable indication of its probable fairness to [her].” 
United States v. Hendon , 6 M.J. 171, 175 (C.M.A. 1979)  
(plurality opinion) (citing United States v. Johnson , 19 
C.M.A. 49, 40, 41 C.M.R. 49, 50 (1969)) . Accordingly, the 
AFCCA did not err merely by  discussing the plea agree-
ment while performing its sentence appropriateness re-
view. 
But that does not necessarily resolve Appellant’s argu-
ments about how the plea agreement factored into the 
AFCCA’s analysis. Appellant argues that the AFCCA im-
properly and unconstitutionally presumed her guilt on the 
dismissed offenses when it noted that the plea agreement 
not only “reduced Appellant’s criminal exposure, but it also 
ensured Appellant would not be exposed to additional sig-
nificant collateral consequences that were possible under 
the dismissed specifications. ” Arroyo, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
242, at *30, 2024 WL 3045505, at *10. In Appellant’s view, 
this language demonstrates that the AFCCA implicitly pre-
sumed Appellant would have been found guilty of the sex-
ual assault specifications and improperly compared her ad-
judged sentence to the sentence she would have received if 
she was convicted of sexual assault. We disagree. 
As noted above, the sentence agreed to by Appellant in 
the plea agreement is a reasonable —but not dispositive —
indication of the sentence’s fairness to Appellant. Hendon, 
6 M.J. at 175. Because the service courts conduct sentence 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
appropriateness review de novo, the AFCCA had a duty to 
determine on its own whether the sentence agreed to by the 
parties is appropriate . To make that determination, the 
AFCCA may evaluate the context in which the plea agree-
ment arose, to understand why the parties—including Ap-
pellant—believed that the agreed -upon sentence was fair. 
In our view, the AFCCA did nothing more in its analysis 
than acknowledge the factors that led the Government and 
Appellant to agree that Appellant should be sentenced to a 
bad-conduct discharge. The Supreme Court has long recog-
nized that guilty pleas and plea agreements “are important 
components of this country’s criminal justice system” that, 
when properly administered, “can benefit all concerned.” 
Blackledge v. Allison, 431 U.S. 63, 71 (1977).
5 The potential 
benefits for the accused include the ability to avoid “the 
anxieties and uncertainties of a trial,” id ., which in this 
case included the possibility of being found guilty of two 
specifications of sexual assault in violation of Article  120, 
UCMJ. 
By bargaining to have those charges withdrawn and 
dismissed and pleading guilty to assault consummated by 
a battery , the AFCCA is correct that Appellant signifi-
cantly reduced her maximum potential punishment.  Ap-
pellant originally faced up to sixty  years of confinement 
and a dishonorable discharge, Manual for Courts-Martial, 
United States pt. IV, para. 60.d.(2) (2019 ed.) (MCM), but 
the plea agreement capped Appellant’s maximum sentence 
at six months of confinement and a bad-conduct discharge, 
MCM pt. IV, para. 77.d.(2)(a). The AFCCA was also correct 
that the plea agreement eliminated the possibility that Ap-
pellant would face the significant collateral consequence of 
qualifying as a sex offender. The AFCCA’s recognition  of 
 
5 See also United States v. Furth , 81 M.J. 114, 117- 18 
(C.A.A.F. 2021) (observing that a plea agreement “significantly 
limited sentencing exposure” where an appellant’s agreement 
“protected him from convictions for desertion and larceny” ); 
United States v. Bradley , 71 M.J. 13, 17 (C.A.A.F. 2012)  (ac-
knowledging that an appellant’s plea agreement allowed him to 
avoid a possible life sentence). 
United States v. Arroyo, No. 24-0212/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
these benefit s in assessing why Appellant agreed to the 
terms of the plea agreement was entirely proper as part of 
the AFCCA’s de novo determination of whether the punish-
ment dictated by the plea agreement and imposed by the 
military judge was appropriate. 
To be clear, we do not suggest that it would be impossi-
ble for a service court to violate an appellant’s presumption 
of innocen ce when performing sentence appropriateness 
review or to improperly compare an adjudged sentence to a 
theoretical maximum sentence from withdrawn specifica-
tions. But nothing in the AFCCA’s opinion suggests that it 
presumed Appellant committed the sexual assaults or used 
the dismissed charges to justify a harsher sentence than it 
would otherwise have approved as appropriate. At most,  
the AFCCA considered why Appellant agreed that a bad-
conduct discharge was a fair punishment for her assault of 
A1C LP. Because the existence of a plea agreement is a ma-
terial consideration in a service court’s sentence appropri-
ateness review under Hendon, the AFCCA did not abuse 
its discretion when it acknowledged the benefits Appellant 
received under the plea agreement. 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Air Force  Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 