This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Dominic L. RUIZ, Corporal 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0158 
Crim. App. No. 202300007 
 
Argued March 18, 2025—Decided August 8 , 2025 
 
Military Judges: Adam M. King (arraignment and 
motions), Cory M. Picton (motions), Melanie J. Mann 
(trial), and Benjamin C. Robertson (entry of judgment) 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Raymond E. Bilter , 
JAGC, USN  (argued); Major Colin W. Hotard , 
USMC (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Commander James P. Wu 
Zhu, JAGC, USN (argued); Colonel Iain D. Pedden, 
USMC, Lieutenant Colonel  Candace G. White, 
USMC, and Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief); Colonel 
Joseph M. Jennings, USMC. 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined.  
_______________ 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
In this abusive  sexual contact case, Appellant argues 
the military judge erred by admitting the complaining wit-
ness’s statement to law enforcement as a prior consistent 
statement pursuant to Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 
801(d)(1)(B)(ii) to rehabilitate her  faulty memory at trial. 
We conclude the military judge did not abuse her discre-
tion. Accordingly, we affirm the decision of the United 
States Navy -Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals 
(NMCCA). 
I. Background  
In May 2020, Appellant arrived at Marine Corps Base 
Camp Lejeune, North Carolina , on temporary duty. Look-
ing to “meet up with people” while he was in town, he con-
tacted several friends  he had met several years earlier 
when they were “poolees” in the Marine Corps Delayed En-
try Program. One of those poolees, Ms. Sierra,
1 responded. 
Appellant and Ms. Sierra made plans to “hang out.” When 
he arrived at her house to pick her up , she told him her 
husband would not be joining them because he was in the 
brig. 
Appellant and Ms. Sierra pick ed up a couple of bottles 
of wine and some takeout and returned to her house to eat 
dinner and catch up.  They drank the wine  and then went 
outside to “shotgun”
2 a couple of beers and alcohol -spiked 
iced teas apiece. 
By this time, Ms. Sierra was intoxicated. She testified 
that Appellant helped her inside and sat her at the kitchen 
table. The next thing she remembered was sitting on his 
 
1 Ms. Sierra was an active duty lance corporal at the time of 
the alleged offense but had separated from the Marine Corps at 
the time of the trial.  In this opinion, we use the pseudonyms 
adopted by the lower court. 
2 Ms. Sierra explained, “Shotgunning is where you poke a 
hole in the side of the can and then you put it up to your mouth 
and then you crack it open and chug it.” 
 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
lap on the couch, trying  to pull away while he held on to 
her and “shushed” her. She described fragmented memo-
ries of waking up in her b ed with Appellant hovering over 
her and seeing him go into the bathroom. She believed they 
were both clothed at that time , although she did not re-
member clearly. Her next memory was of Appellant lying 
in bed with her, running his hand over her body. 
[Ms. Sierra]: . . . And then after that, I just remem-
ber him rubbing himself against me from my vag-
inal area to my buttocks. And I just remember him 
saying how he just wanted to make me feel good. 
And that my husband didn’t deserve me. 
[Assistant Trial Counsel] (ATC): What did he rub 
in your vaginal area to your buttocks?  
[Ms. Sierra]: His genitals. 
ATC: His penis? 
[Ms. Sierra]: Yes, sir. 
ATC: Did you say anything to him? 
[Ms. Sierra]: I did when he tried to kiss me, he 
kept trying to put his hand against my cheek and 
kept on trying to bring my face over to kiss him. 
And I said, “No, stop.” And I pushed his face away. 
ATC: Did he continue to grind against your but-
tocks after that? 
[Ms. Sierra]: Yes, sir.  
ATC: Were you crying at the time?  
[Ms. Sierra]: Yes, sir. 
ATC: Why? 
[Ms. Sierra]: Because I didn’t want it to happen.  
ATC: What is your very next memory? 
[Ms. Sierra]: I remember just crying out for my  
husband, just wanting him to be there. And then 
I remember just blacking out. 
Ms. Sierra testified that when she came to , Appellant 
was asleep in bed next to her. She slid off the bed, crawled 
out of the bedroom and down the stairs, and made her way 
to the neighbors’ house. She banged on the door and called 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
for help until they let her in. The neighbors gave her a shirt 
to wear “because I guess I was naked.” She had no recollec-
tion of when or how her clothes came off. 
Ms. Sierra testified that she recalled riding in an ambu-
lance, and then waking up in a hospital. She  recalled 
speaking with various people while she was at the hospital, 
including a police officer. Later, after she had slept, Ms. Si-
erra submitted to a sexual assault forensic exam (SAFE). 
On cross-examination, Ms. Sierra acknowledged there 
were significant gaps in her memory of the night of the as-
sault. She acknowledged  it was “possible” she had made 
statements to law enforcement and the SAFE nurse soon 
after the incident , but at the time of trial  she did not re-
member what she told them.
3 
Both trial counsel and trial defense counsel questioned 
Deputy Frank, a civilian sheriff’s deputy who spoke with 
Ms. Sierra at the hospital  in the immediate aftermath of 
the alleged assault.  Trial counsel asked Deputy Frank , 
“What did she say happened?”  The military judge sus-
tained a defense objection to hearsay , rejecting trial coun-
sel’s attempt to admit the statement as an excited utter-
ance. However, the military judge allowed the defense to 
cross-examine Deputy Frank on Ms. Sierra’s hospital state-
ments as prior inconsistent statements offered to impeach 
by contradiction  her trial testimony . After reviewing his 
notes on the interview, Deputy Frank testified that Ms. Si-
erra told him she sat on Appellant’s lap, she drank two 
glasses of wine and shotgunned two beers, and she recalled 
Appellant’s pants coming off. 
On redirect, trial counsel sought to admit additional 
statements Ms. Sierra made to Deputy Frank during the 
hospital interview , including statements  that Appellant 
 
3 Ms. Sierra also acknowledged that her testimony described 
details she had not previously reported to anyone, including that 
Appellant hovered over her in the bed; she was clothed at that 
time; he went into the bathroom; and he “shushed” her when she 
was sitting on his lap. 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
“was rubbing his genitals against her and that she said, 
‘No’ and that she doesn’t recall how she got to the bedroom.”  
Because the defense had cross -examined Ms. Sierra on 
“statements made to others that were either left out of her 
in-court testimony or about new statements she made in -
court,” trial counsel argued these additional statements 
were admissible under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii) as prior con-
sistent statements to rehabilitate her credibility. 
The defense objected, arguing the additional state-
ments were beyond the scope of the prior inconsistent 
statements elicited on cross-examination. Trial counsel dis-
agreed, arguing: 
[T]he defense has opened the door through asking 
about her story. This happened in a 10- minute 
conversation. They’re pointing out . . . what they 
wish to impeach her on inconsistent, but there’s a 
lot of consistency there and now they have opened 
the door through impeachment for us to rehabili-
tate. We have consistent statements. This all hap-
pened in the same conversation. Sentences right 
next to each other in partial sentences. It’s even a 
completeness issue, even. 
The military judge initially sustained the defense objec-
tion, noting, “I’m not seeing how there has been . . . a gen-
eral attack on the credibility. Period.” However,  after re-
viewing trial counsel’s bench brief and hearing additional 
arguments on the issue, she ruled Ms. Sierra’s statements 
“that the accused was  rubbing her genitals with his penis 
and that she said, ‘No’ and that Ms. [Sierra] did not know 
how she got up the stairs” were admissible prior consistent 
statements because they  “add context to the inconsistent 
statements that were elicited on cross-examination . . . and 
. . . they demonstrate that Ms. [Sierra] has a memory of key 
events and details that have been consistent.” 
Following the military judge’s ruling, trial counsel (TC) 
questioned Deputy Frank as follows: 
TC: Okay. Did she tell you that she doesn’t re-
member how she got to the bedroom?  
[Deputy Frank]: Yes, sir.  
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
TC: Did she tell you that he rubbed his genitals 
against her?  
[Deputy Frank]: Yes, sir.  
TC: And that she said, “No”? 
[Deputy Frank]: Yes, sir. 
On July  29, 2022, a panel of officer and enlisted 
members sitting as a general court -martial convicted 
Appellant, contrary to his plea, of one specification of 
abusive sexual contact in violation of Article 120, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice , 10 U.S.C. § 920  (2018). The 
military judge sentenced him to a bad -conduct discharge 
and reduction to E-1. The NMCCA affirmed the findings 
and sentence. United States v. Ruiz , No. 202300007, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 114, at *2, 2024 WL 1190555, at *1 (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. Mar. 20, 2024) (unpublished). 
We granted review to determine whether the military 
judge abused her discretion in admitting Ms. Sierra’s state-
ment to Deputy Frank as a prior consistent statement un-
der M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii). United States v. Ruiz , 85 M.J. 
203 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order granting review). For the rea-
sons stated below, we answer the granted issue in the neg-
ative and affirm the decision of the NMCCA.
 
II. Standard of Review  
“This Court reviews a military judge’s decision to admit 
evidence for an abuse of discretion.” United States v. Frost, 
79 M.J. 104, 109 (C.A.A.F. 2019)  (citing United States v. 
Humpherys, 57 M.J. 83, 90 (C.A.A.F. 2002)) . A military 
judge abuses her discretion when her “findings of fact are 
clearly erroneous, the court’s decision is influenced by an 
erroneous view of the law, or the military judge’s decision 
on the issue at hand is outside the range of choices 
reasonably arising from the applicable facts and  the law.” 
Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted). 
The abuse of discretion standard requires “more than a 
mere difference of opinion. The challenged action must be 
arbitrary . . . , clearly unreasonable, or clearly erroneous.” 
United States v. Wicks, 73 M.J. 93, 98 (C.A.A.F. 2014) 
(alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
(citation omitted).  “[W]hen reviewing a military judge’s 
ruling for an abuse of discretion, [this Court] pierce[s] the 
CCA’s opinion and examine[s] the military judge’s ruling 
directly.” United States v. Carpenter, 77 M.J. 285, 287 n.5 
(C.A.A.F. 2018) (citing United States v. Shelton, 64 M.J. 32, 
37 (C.A.A.F. 2006)). 
III. Law  
“As a general rule, hearsay, defined as an out of court 
statement offered into evidence to prove the truth of the 
matter asserted, is not admissible in courts -martial.” 
United States v. Ayala, 81 M.J. 25, 28 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (first 
citing M.R.E. 801(c); and then citing M.R.E. 802). However, 
M.R.E. 801(d) (1)(B) provides that certain out of court 
statements are excluded from the prohibition on hearsay. 
A declarant witness’s prior consistent out of court 
statement is not hearsay if offered “(i) to rebut an express 
or implied charge that the declarant recently fabricated it 
or acted from a recent improper influence or motive in so 
testifying; or (ii) to rehabilitate the declarant ’s credibility 
as a witness when attacked on another ground .” M.R.E. 
801(d)(1)(B)(i)-(ii). It is the latter exclusion that is at issue 
in this case. 
A prior consistent statement is  admissible under 
M.R.E. 801(d)( 1)(B)(ii) if it  satisfies the following  factors 
(hereinafter, the Finch factors): 
(1) the declarant of the out -of-court statement 
must testify,  
(2) the declarant must be subject to cross -exami-
nation about the prior statement,  
(3) the statement must be consistent with the de-
clarant’s testimony,  
(4) the declarant’s credibility as a witness must 
have been “attacked on another ground” other 
than the ones listed in M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i), and  
(5) the prior consistent statement must actually 
be relevant to rehabilitate the witness’s credibility 
on the basis on which he or she was attacked.  
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
United States v. Finch , 79 M.J.  389, 396 (C.A.A.F. 2020). 
Additionally, “ ‘to be admissible for rehabilitation, a prior 
consistent statement must satisfy the strictures of Rule  
403,’ ” id. (quoting Manual for Courts- Martial, United 
States, Analysis of the Military Rules of Evidence app. 16 
at A22-61 (2016 ed.)), which provides that “[t]he military 
judge may exclude relevant evidence if its probative value 
is substantially outweighed by a danger of one or more of 
the following: unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, mis-
leading the members, undue delay, wasting ti me, or need-
lessly presenting cumulative evidence.” M.R.E. 403.                     
“ ‘Where a military judge properly conducts the balancing 
test under Military Rule of Evidence 403, we will not over-
turn [her] decision unless there is a clear abuse of discre-
tion.’ ” United States v. Ediger, 68 M.J. 243, 248 (C.A.A.F. 
2010) (quoting United States v. Ruppel , 49 M.J. 247, 251 
(C.A.A.F. 1998)). The party seeking admission of the prior 
consistent statement bears the burden of proving its ad-
missibility. United States v. Norwood , 81 M.J. 12, 17 
(C.A.A.F. 2021). 
IV. Discussion  
Appellant argues Ms. Sierra’s out of court statement to 
Deputy Frank was inadmissible because it was neither con-
sistent with her testimony  nor relevant to rehabilitating 
her credibility on the basis on which she was attacked. Ac-
cording to Appellant , Ms. Sierra testified  that she said 
“[n]o” only when he tried to kiss her —testimony that was 
inconsistent with her prior statement to Deputy Frank that 
she said “[n]o” when Appellant rubbed his genitals on her. 
Additionally, Appellant contends the prior statement did 
not rehabilitate Ms. Sierra’s credibility on the basis on 
which she was attacked because the defense never chal-
lenged her testimony that Appellant rubbed his penis 
against her. Instead, according to Appellant, trial counsel  
put Ms. Sierra’s credibility in issue by “fram[ing] his ques-
tions . . . to highlight her lack of memory,” and then, taking 
advantage of the door he had opened, trial counsel offered 
the prior statement to reh abilitate her credibility in gen-
eral. Appellant claims he was prejudiced by the erroneous 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
admission of the prior statement because it was the only  
evidence Ms. Sierra articulated nonconsent to the charged 
conduct—a fact of central importance to an otherwise-weak 
Government case.4 
The Government responds that it offered Ms. Sierra’s 
statement to Deputy Frank only after the defense attacked 
her faulty memory, to show that her memory at trial was 
not faulty and her statements were largely consistent.  
Moreover, the Government argues that even if erroneously 
 
4 The parties agree that a prior consistent statement must 
have been made before any alleged fabrication, influence, or mo-
tive came into being. They disagree as to when any such fabrica-
tion, influence, or motive actually came into being in this case , 
and therefore, they disagree as to whether the  statement pre-
ceded the alleged fabrication, influence, or motive. 
It is true that a prior consistent statement “must precede any 
motive to fabricate or improper influence that it is offered to re-
but.” Frost, 79 M.J. at 110 (citing M.R.E.  801(d)(1)(B)(i)). How-
ever, the prior consistent statement at issue here was not offered 
to rebut a charge of recent fabrication or improper influence or 
motive; it was offered to rehabilitate an attack based on faulty 
memory. We have never held that a prior consistent statement 
must precede the onset of a faulty memory in order to be admis-
sible under M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(ii), and we decline to do so now, 
for three reasons: 
First, if the charge is a lack of credibility based on 
a faulty memory or any “[]other ground,” then a 
prior consistent statement made at any point . . . 
will “rehabilitate” the witness. Second, it is almost 
impossible to pinpoint a specific point in time 
when a faulty memory arises, unlike a motive to 
lie or other improper influence, so it would not 
“make[] . . . sense” to import a timing requirement. 
And finally, timing has never mattered for cate-
gory-two prior consistent statements , at common 
law or now. 
United States v. Begay, 116 F.4th 795, 801 (8th Cir. 2024) (first, 
second, fourth, and fifth alterations in original) (first quoting 
Tome v. United States, 513 U.S. 150, 158 (1995); and then quot-
ing United States v. Andrade , 788 F.2d 521, 532- 33 (8th Cir. 
1986)). 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
admitted, Appellant suffered no prejudice because the 
prior statement was corroborated by Ms. Sierra’s testimony 
and independent evidence. 
As explained in greater detail below,  we conclude the 
Government met its burden of establishing Ms. Sierra’s 
statement to Deputy Frank was admissible under M.R.E. 
801(d)(1)(B)(ii) as a prior consistent statement to rehabili-
tate her credibility regarding her expression of nonconsent 
to the charged conduct . Therefore, we hold the military 
judge did not abuse her discretion by admitting Ms. Si-
erra’s prior consistent statement. 
As an initial matter, we note t here is no dispute  that 
the Government met its burden of establishing the first two 
Finch factors. First, Ms. Sierra—the declarant of the out of 
court statement—testified at trial . Second, she was subject 
to cross-examination about the prior statement. 
Similarly, we discern no meaningful dispute as to the 
fourth Finch factor. Although t he parties disagree as to 
who placed Ms. Sierra’s credibility at issue first,
5 Appellant 
concedes that “the Defense’s attack on cross-examination 
and its case theory was always that Ms. [Sierra]  had a 
faulty memory” due to alcohol-induced amnesia.6 Addition-
ally, Appellant concedes “ the Defense’s attack on Ms. 
 
5 Appellant argued at trial that the defense did not attack 
Ms. Sierra’s credibility at all, as the defense did not challenge 
her testimony that Appellant rubbed his penis against her and 
that she said no when he tried to kiss her. In his brief to this 
Court, Appellant argues that trial counsel “framed his questions 
to [Ms. Sierra] to highlight her lack of memory,” and then, “un-
der the guise of rehabilitating [her] credibility,” admitted hear-
say testimony that she expressed nonconsent to the charged con-
duct. In his reply brief, Appellant continues to assert that the 
Government “opened the door” to testimony about Ms. Sierra’s 
intoxicated state and her ability to remember, but acknowledges 
the defense then attacked her credibility based on her faulty 
memory due to alcohol-induced amnesia. 
6 Trial defense counsel told the panel members during open-
ing statements that they would hear “multiple versions” of what 
happened after Ms. Sierra became intoxicated. 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
[Sierra]’s credibility was not based on recent fabrication or 
any other improper influence or motive that arose between 
the night in question and the trial. ” Thus, there is no dis-
pute that  Ms. Sierra’s “credibility as a witness was  ‘at-
tacked on another ground ’ other than the ones listed in 
M.R.E. 801(d)(1)(B)(i).” Finch, 79 M.J. at 396. Therefore, 
the first, second, and fourth Finch factors favor admissibil-
ity of the prior statement. 
Appellant argues the remaining Finch  factors weigh 
against admissibility because Ms. Sierra’s prior statement 
was neither consistent with her testimony  (Finch factor 
three) nor relevant to rehabilitating her credibility on  the 
basis on which she was attacked (Finch factor five). We dis-
agree with both of these contentions. 
With regard to Finch factor three, Appellant argues Ms. 
Sierra’s statement to Deputy Frank that she said “ [n]o” 
when Appellant touched her buttocks and vaginal area is 
inconsistent with a fact of central importance to the trial—
specifically, her testimony that she said “[n]o” when Appel-
lant tried to kiss her. The NMCCA rejected this argument, 
raised for the first time on appeal,7 concluding it “mischar-
acterizes the nature of the evidence by creating a sequence 
of events that the testimony does not support.” Ruiz, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 114, at *20, 2024 WL 1190555, at *8. 
“ ‘[A] prior consistent statement need not be identical in 
every detail to the declarant’s . . . te stimony at trial. ’ Ra-
ther, the prior statement need only be ‘ for the most part 
consistent’ and in particular, be ‘consistent with respect to 
. . . fact[s] of central importance to the trial. ’ ” Finch, 79 
M.J. at 395 (second, third, and fourth alterations in 
 
7 Trial defense counsel did not challenge the consistency of 
Ms. Sierra’s prior statement with her trial testimony, telling the 
military judge, “really, the only factor that is at issue here is the 
fifth one, which is ‘the prior consistent statement must actually 
be relevant to rehabilitate the witness’[s] credibility on the basis 
on which she was attacked.’ ” The military judge correctly cited 
the Finch factors, but did not explicitly address the consistency 
of the prior statement and Ms. Sierra’s trial testimony. 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
original) (quoting United States v. Vest , 842 F.2d 1319, 
1329 (1st Cir. 1988)); see also Griggs v. State, 2016 WY 16, 
¶ 100, 367 P.3d 1108, 1136 (Wyo. 2016) (explaining that 
“[a] prior consistent statement cannot be used as a means 
of proving ‘new points not covered in the testimony’ of the 
declarant” (citation omitted)). 
We conclude that  Ms. Sierra ’s prior statement  to 
Deputy Frank is “generally consistent” with her in -court 
testimony. Finch, 79 M.J. at 398 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted) . Deputy Frank testified that 
Ms. Sierra told him Appellant rubbed his genitals against 
her, and she said “[n]o.” Ms. Sierra’s testimony described 
an ongoing interaction in which Appellant was “ rubbing 
himself against me from my vaginal area to my buttocks ”; 
he “kept trying to put his hand against my cheek and kept 
on trying to bring my face over to kiss him. And I said, ‘No, 
stop.’ And I pushed his face away”; and he continued to rub 
against her after she pushed his face away. While Deputy 
Frank’s testimony was not as detailed as Ms. Sierra’s 
testimony, it was “generally consistent” with “Ms. Sierra’s 
earlier testimony that she told Appellant ‘no’ as he 
assaulted her.” Ruiz, 2024 CCA LEXIS 114 , at * 12, * 21, 
2024 WL 1190555, at * 5, *8 (emphasis added). Moreover, 
Ms. Sierra’s prior consistent statement did not prove 
important details beyond what was established in her 
initial testimony. See Christopher B. Mueller & Laird C. 
Kirkpatrick, 4 Federal Evidence § 8:38 (4th ed. 2023) (Rule 
801(d)(1)(B)(ii) should not “enable a party to prove 
important details lying beyond that testimony” through a 
prior statement “merely because they are consistent with 
its general tenor.”); State v. Farrah, 735 N.W.2d 336, 344 
(Minn. 2007) (Rule 801(d)(1)(B) “should not be the means 
to prove new points not covered in the testimony of the 
speaker” (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted)). Therefore, we conclude the Government met its 
burden of establishing Finch factor three. 
With respect to Finch factor five, the Government bears 
the burden of demonstrating the prior consistent state-
ment is relevant to rehabilitating the witness’s credibility 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
on the basis on which she was attacked. Finch, 79 M.J. at 
396 (stating that t he proponent of the prior consistent 
statement must articulate “the relevancy link between the 
prior consistent statement and how it will rehabilitate” the 
witness’s in-court testimony “with respect to the particular 
type of impeachment that has occurred” (citation omitted)). 
We conclude the military judge did not abuse her discretion 
in determining the Government met its burden. 
The defense theory of the case was that Ms. Sierra was 
not a credible witness because she was unable to recall 
much of what happened on the night in question. Con-
sistent with this theory, the defense attacked Ms. Sierra’s 
credibility on cross-examination by highlighting her faulty 
memory. After establishing that Ms. Sierra had not spoken 
with defense counsel prior to this cross -examination, the 
defense began by asking, “Ma’am, that night, it’s fair to say 
that your memory is not completely clear as to what tran-
spired—what occurred; fair to say?”  The defense then me-
thodically questioned her about her inability to remember 
facts and statements she had previously provided to law 
enforcement, the SAFE nurse, and prosecutors, as well as 
her trial testimony to new facts she disclosed only days be-
fore trial.  The defense specifically questioned her  about 
whether she remembered anything she told Deputy Frank; 
she responded, “Not as of right now, sir. I don’t really re-
member.” 
The Government subsequently sought to admit Deputy 
Frank’s testimony about what Ms. Sierra said soon after 
the charged conduct to show “that her memory, in fact, is 
not that bad, that she is credible.”  Deputy Frank’s testi-
mony was relevant to rehabilitating her credibility regard-
ing her memory of a fact of central importance to the trial: 
whether she ever expressed nonconsent to the charged con-
duct. This is true even though the defense did not specifi-
cally cross-examine Ms. Sierra on her testimony that Ap-
pellant rubbed his penis on her and that she said “ [n]o,” 
because it countered the broader defense attack on her 
memory of the night as a whole . In that context, we con-
clude Ms. Sierra’s prior consistent statement was relevant 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
to rehabilitate her credibility when attacked on the basis 
that she could not remember details  surrounding the 
charged conduct and the night in question. 
Appellant argues that Ms. Sierra’s statement to Deputy 
Frank could not rehabilitate her credibility because she 
was already suffering from alcohol-induced amnesia when 
she spoke to Deputy Frank. Appellant asserts that Ms. Si-
erra’s statements to Deputy Frank therefore had the same 
credibility problem as her later testimony in the court-mar-
tial. Accordingly, Appellant contends that the consistency 
of her statements to Deputy Frank and her testimony in 
the court-martial was irrelevant. Although we understand 
the logic of this argument, we are unpersuaded that the 
military judge abused her discretion in viewing Appellant’s 
challenge to Ms. Sierra’s credibility and the Government 
efforts at rehabilitation in a different way. The record 
shows that trial defense co unsel extensively attacked dif-
ferences between Ms. Sierra’s testimony at trial and the 
accounts of the assault that she gave to various law en-
forcement officials, prosecutors, and medical personnel, 
and that trial defense counsel did not solely focus on Ms . 
Sierra’s inability to register memories. 
“ ‘[W]here the military judge places on the record [her] 
analysis and application of the law to the facts, deference 
is clearly warranted. ’ ” United States v. Flesher, 73 M.J. 
303, 312 (C.A.A.F. 2014) (quoting United States v. Down-
ing, 56 M.J. 419, 422 (C.A.A.F. 2002)) . Here, t he military 
judge placed her analysis on the record, finding the prior 
statement added “context” to inconsistent statements elic-
ited on cross -examination and demonstrated that Ms. Si-
erra had consistent memories of significant facts an d de-
tails. Additionally, the military judge found the prior 
statement was relevant and probative because it was made 
“during the same statement to the same agent on the night 
of the allegation.” Finally, the military judge concluded the 
probative value of the prior consistent statement was not 
outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice or confusion. 
Affording the military judge due deference, we find no 
abuse of discretion in her admission of Ms. Sierra’s 
United States v. Ruiz, No. 24-0158/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
statement to Deputy F rank. As discussed above, the  prior 
statement was consistent with her testimony on a fact of 
central importance, and it was relevant to rehabilitating 
her credibility after the defense attempted to show she was 
an unreliable witness because she could not remember 
facts of central importance to the case. Accordingly, we con-
clude that the military judge did not abuse her discretion. 
V. Judgment  
The decision of the United States Navy -Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 