This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Joseph D. SUAREZ, Corporal 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0004 
Crim. App. No. 202300049 
 
Argued April 8, 2025—Decided August 5, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Melanie Mann (arraignment), 
Cory Picton (motions), Stephen Keane (motions), 
and Andrea Goode (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant  Colonel Todd Eslinger , 
USMC (argued); Major Colin W. Hotard, USMC (on 
brief); Lieutenant Commander Alaric A. Piette,  
JAGC, USN. 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Colonel Candace G. White, 
USMC (argued); Colonel Iain D. Pedden , USMC,  
Lieutenant Commander James P. Wu Zhu , JAGC, 
USN, and Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief).  
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined.  
_______________ 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Appellant was convicted, pursuant to his pleas, of one 
specification each of wrongful use, introduction on base, 
and distribution of cocaine, and two specifications of distri-
bution of a Schedule I controlled substance, in violation of 
Article 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § 912a (2018), as well as one specification of conspir-
acy to distribute cocaine, in violation of Article 81, UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 881 (2018). Consistent with the plea agree-
ment, one specification of attempted prosti tution in viola-
tion of Article 80, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 880 (2018), and one 
specification of solicitation to distribute cocaine in violation 
of Article 82, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 882  (2018), were with-
drawn and dismissed. The military judge sentenced Appel-
lant to a dishonorable discharge, total confinement for 
sixty months, and reduction to E-1. 
This appeal concerns the effect of Appellant’s guilty 
plea on his previously litigated unlawful command influ-
ence (UCI) claim. Appellant argues that the United States 
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) 
erred in concluding his guilty plea waived adjudicative 
UCI. He also contends the NMCCA erred in concluding he 
was not prejudiced by the deficient performance of trial de-
fense counsel, who advised Appellant that his guilty plea 
would not waive UCI and would avoid the risk of registered 
sex offender status for the attempted prostitution offense.  
We granted review of two issues raised by Appellant 
and specified a third issue:  
I. Did unlawful command influence affect Appel-
lant’s court-martial?  
II. Was trial defense counsel’s deficient perfor-
mance prejudicial?  
III. Did Appellant waive review of the question 
whether unlawful influence affected his court -
martial?  
United States v. Suarez, 85 M.J. 239 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
Addressing the specified issue first, we hold Appellant 
waived review of the question whether unlawful influence 
affected his court -martial by entering a plea agreement 
with a “waive all waivable motions ” provision and affirm-
ing during his providence inquiry that he understood the 
meaning and effect of this provision. As a result, we decline 
to answer Issue I, which has been rendered moot by our 
resolution of the specified issue. Turning to Issue II, we are 
unconvinced the NMCCA appl ied the correct legal princi-
ples in determining Appellant was not prejudiced by trial 
defense counsel ’s deficient performance. Accordingly, we 
set aside the lower court’s decision and remand the case for 
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.  
I. Background 
Appellant was apprehended on January 11, 2022, after 
he tested positive for cocaine use in a random command 
urinalysis. Battalion Commanding Officer (CO) Lieutenant 
Colonel (LtCol) W and Sergeant Major (SgtMaj) C had co-
ordinated with N aval Criminal Investigative Service 
(NCIS) Special Agent (SA) W to execute the apprehension  
during a scheduled command climate survey debrief.  Ap-
pellant arrived late for the event and was led into a  class-
room where LtCol W was briefing the company. Upon being 
notified of Appellant’s arrival, SgtMaj C called out to Ap-
pellant to identify himself. LtCol W pointed out Appellant’s 
location to SA W , who apprehended Appellant and placed 
him in handcuffs. As Appellant was being escorted from the 
classroom, LtCol W referred to him as a “drug kingpin” and 
told the assembled company, “That’s the guy selling co-
caine in my barracks.” SgtMaj C added, “This piece of crap 
drug kingpin has been selling drugs in your barracks and 
no one has the nut sack to say anything about it.” 
On January 19, 2022, an Inspector General (IG) inves-
tigation was opened in response to an anonymous com-
plaint against LtCol W and SgtMaj C which  cited, among 
other things, the circumstances of Appellant’s apprehen-
sion. In response to the IG complaint, t he regimental CO 
immediately replaced LtCol W as the convening authority 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
for Appellant’s case. Shortly thereafter, an investigating of-
ficer (IO) was appointed to investigate the complaint.  
The IO interviewed fifty -five Marines, including LtCol 
W and SgtMaj C. He  found that LtCol W coordinated Ap-
pellant’s apprehension with NCIS; LtCol W and SgtMaj C 
made the reported comments  about Appellant to the com-
pany; and both “exercised poor judgment” in effectuating 
the apprehension in such a public forum and commenting 
on Appellant’s conduct. The IO found sufficient evidence to 
substantiate other unrelated allegations that SgtMaj C 
“exercised poor judgment in using tailored language based 
on [First Sergeant (1stSgt) M’s] ethnic background,” LtCol 
W was derelict in his duties by consuming alcohol and 
providing alcohol to personnel during training exercises , 
and the command improperly withheld liberty privileges 
from Lance Corporal (LCpl) L. Accordingly, in a report is-
sued on March 8, 2022, the IO recommended: 
Based upon LtCol [W’s] poor judgment in conduct-
ing [Appellant’s apprehension], poor judgment in 
comments during and immediately after the [ap-
prehension], improper restriction of LCpl [L’s] 
normal liberty . . . , and dereliction of duty in vio-
lation of Article 92, UCMJ, I recommend the Com-
manding General, 3d Marine Division, take ap-
propriate administrative action against LtCol 
[W]. 
. . . Based on SgtMaj [C’s] poor judgment in mak-
ing unprofessional comments following [Appel-
lant’s apprehension] and towards 1stSgt [M], I 
recommend the Commanding General informally 
counsel SgtMaj [C]. 
On March 31, 2022, the c ommanding general relieved 
LtCol W of his command. Additionally, although the IO had 
recommended that SgtMaj C receive only informal counsel-
ling, the commanding general also relieved SgtMaj C of his 
leadership position.  
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
On April 24, 2022, the  charges against Appellant were 
referred to a general court-martial.1 
The Motion to Dismiss 
On May 31, 2022, Appellant filed a motion to dismiss all 
charges and specifications with prejudice due to actual and 
apparent UCI. Appellant argued that LtCol W’s comments 
to the company  “branded [Appellant] as a ‘drug kingpin’ 
among all members in the unit,” inhibiting anyone who 
otherwise would have come forward in support of Appellant 
during the investigation or court-martial. Additionally, he 
argued that  SgtMaj C’s comments “inappropriately and 
negatively influenced the perception of members of the 
command—prejudice that cannot be undone.”  
Appellant disputed the notion that the removal of LtCol 
W and SgtMaj C from their leadership positions cured the 
taint from UCI, noting that these measures “did not affect 
the lower enlisted and the battalion”: 
[T]he last that they have heard . . . about [Appel-
lant] was from a member of their leadership, that 
he was a drug kingpin, and he did these things—
they have heard no evidence to the contrary. They 
have heard no attempts to cure—attempts by the 
new CO to say that they were free from retaliation 
if they spoke on behalf of [Appellant].  
According to Appellant, t he comments  by LtCol W and 
SgtMaj C and the circumstances of Appellant’s  public 
apprehension precluded a fair trial, as evidenced by 
widespread media coverage of his apprehension  and the 
fact that witnesses and brig staff echoed the “drug kingpin” 
moniker.2 
 
1 Charges were preferred on February 3, 2022, after the reg-
imental CO stepped in as  the convening authority. Additional 
charges were preferred on April 6 and  18, 2022, after LtCol W 
and SgtMaj C were relieved of their leadership positions. 
2 The defense argued that the same facts constituted unlaw-
ful pretrial punishment—an argument the CCA rejected and 
which Appellant did not raise on appeal to this Court. 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
The military judge  denied the motion.  In a July 25, 
2022, email supplementing his ruling, the military judge  
found that Appellant presented “some evidence” of UCI: 
 The manner in which [Appellant] was brought 
forth, [apprehended], and subsequently dispar-
aged, could have created an impression amongst 
the unit, and perhaps others outside the unit due 
to publicity of the [apprehension], that the Battal-
ion CO and SgtMaj [C] had prejudged [Appellant] 
as guilty instead of maintaining their required im-
partiality and [Appellant’s] presumption of inno-
cence.  
 The effect of the public [apprehension] and dis-
paraging commentary was that potential wit-
nesses and potential members received a message 
that [Appellant] was guilty and should be re-
moved from the Unit/Marine Corps. Such actions 
have a chilling effect on potential witnesses, po-
tential members and creates [sic] the perception 
of unfairness and illegitimacy of the proceedings.  
However, the military judge concluded the Government 
had proven beyond a reasonable doubt: 
a) that the facts did not amount to actual [UCI] 
. . . ; and 
b) . . . that the [apparent] UCI did not place an 
intolerable strain on the public’s perception of mil-
itary justice such that an objective disinterested 
observer, fully informed of all the facts and cir-
cumstances, would harbor a significant doubt 
about the fairness of the proceeding. 
The military judge cited the command -initiated reme-
dial measures to  support his conclusion that actual UCI 
would not affect the proceedings. First, the regimental CO 
removed LtCol W as the convening authority for  Appel-
lant’s case before charges were preferred. Then, the com-
manding general removed both LtCol W and SgtMaj C from 
their leadership positions before charges were referred. 
To ensure there was no  apparent UCI, the military 
judge ordered two additional remedial measures: 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
(1) the [convening authority] will issue a directive 
to encourage any member of the command to serve 
as a witness in support of [Appellant] without any 
repercussions; and 
(2) the defense will be authorized liberal voir dire 
of the members concerning  whether they know 
about the 11 January 2022 incident involving the 
accused at the command climate brief, or anything 
about views of [Appellant] by members of the com-
mand in 3d Battalion, 3d Marine Littoral Regi-
ment (including LtCol [W] and SgtMaj [C]). 
A second military judge who was detailed to replace the 
first ordered a third remedy: “[T]o ensure that unlawful 
command influence won’t affect the proceedings beyond 
reasonable doubt. . . . I’m going to order that no members 
come from 3d Battalion, 3d Marines.” 
The Guilty Plea 
The military judges’ remedial measures were never im-
plemented. On August 9, 2022, Appellant entered into an  
agreement to waive all waivable motions  and plead guilty 
(with exceptions) to the Article 112a , UCMJ,  offenses as 
well as the Article 81, UCMJ, offense. In exchange, the con-
vening authority agree d to withdraw and dismiss the re-
maining offenses (including attempted prostitution) and to 
limit Appellant’s total confinement to a minimum of twenty 
four months and a maximum of sixty  months for each of-
fense, to run concurrently .3 In a post -trial affidavit, trial 
defense counsel stated that he advised Appellant that the 
attempted prostitution offense could be “considered as a 
sex offense” and that if Appellant was convicted of this of-
fense, he could be subject to mandatory sex offender regis-
tration.  
During the providence inquiry conducted on October 18, 
2022, Appellant affirmed that trial defense counsel had ex-
plained the waive r provision; he understood it may 
 
3 The plea agreement also provided that a dishonorable dis-
charge and reduction  to E -1 “will be adjudged, ” “[f]orfeitures 
may be adjudged,” and “[n]o fine shall be adjudged.” 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
preclude any appellate court from determining if he was 
entitled to relief based upon such a motion; no one forced 
him to agree to this provision; and he freely and voluntarily 
entered into this term in order to get the benefit of the plea 
agreement. Trial defense counsel  stated that the waive r 
provision originated with the defense. 
The military judge  questioned Appellant about the 
impact of his plea on previously litigated  motions, 
including UCI: 
[MJ]: So there were some motions that were pre-
viously litigated in this court -martial. There was 
a motion to dismiss for unlawful command influ-
ence; a motion to preclude evidence pursuant to 
M.R.E. 404(b); a motion to get you released from 
pre-trial confinement; and a motion to compel ex-
perts; and, finally, a motion to suppress evidence 
that was seized when the investigators did their 
search. 
 Do you understand that by this provision in 
your agreement, you’re waiving your right to ap-
pellate review of these issues? 
[APP]: Yes, Your Honor. 
[MJ]: Do you agree with that, [trial defense coun-
sel]? 
[TDC]: Yes, Your Honor. 
After confirming that he understood his guilty plea also 
gave up the right to bring certain waivable motions that 
had not been raised, Appellant affirmed that he did not 
have any questions about the “waive all waivable motions” 
provision; he understood he would be bound by the terms 
of the plea agreement; he had adequate time to discuss the 
agreement with his counsel; he was satisfied with trial de-
fense counsel’s advice; he entered into the agreement of his 
own free will; he had no questions about the agreement; he 
fully understood its terms and how they would affect his 
case; and he was pleading guilty both in the hope that he 
would receive a lighter sentence and because he was in fact 
guilty. Finally, trial defense counsel  affirmed his agree-
ment with the military judge’s interpretation of the plea. 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
On appeal, Appellant submitted a post -trial affidavit 
stating that his counsel advised him that the guilty plea 
would not waive appellate review of the UCI issue and that 
he would not have pleaded guilty if it were not for this as-
surance. Appellant’s trial defense counsel also submitted a 
post-trial affidavit confirming that he had told Appellant 
“that the UCI issue was preserved and would be reviewed” 
and that trial defense counsel did not believe the UCI mo-
tion was waivable. 
The NMCCA’s Opinion 
On appeal to the NM CCA, Appellant argued the Gov-
ernment failed to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that 
UCI did not affect the court -martial. He also argued trial 
defense counsel rendered ineffective assistance of counsel  
in various ways, including (1) negotiating a plea agreement 
to avoid sex offender registration on the  prostitution of-
fense even though registration was not required, and (2) in 
the event the court determined the UCI claim was waived, 
advising Appellant to waive all waivable motions, includ-
ing UCI.  
The NMCCA held that Appellant waived his UCI claim, 
despite Appellant’s desire to preserve the issue, and even 
if not waived, the Government proved beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the UCI did not materially prejudice Appellant’s 
rights. United States v. Suarez , No. NMCCA  202300049, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 348, at *11-16, 2024 WL 3911929, at *4-6 
(N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 23, 2024)  (unpublished). As to 
the ineffective assistance claim, the NMCCA concluded 
trial defense counsel was deficient in both respects, but Ap-
pellant failed to show he was prejudiced. Id. at *25-29, 2024 
WL 3911929, at *9-10. 
II. Waiver of UCI 
We first address the specified issue: did Appellant 
waive review of the question whether UCI affected his 
court-martial? We hold Appellant waived review of his UCI 
claim by entering into a plea agreement with a “ waive all 
waivable motions” provision and affirming during the prov-
idence inquiry his understanding that the provision waived 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
appellate review of his UCI claim. Because we conclude Ap-
pellant waived review of his UCI claim, we do not reach the 
first granted issue, whether the UCI affected Appellant’s  
court-martial. 
A. Standard of review and applicable law 
“A criminal defendant may knowingly and voluntarily 
waive many of the most fundamental protections afforded 
by the Constitution.” United States v. Mezzanatto, 513 U.S. 
196, 201 (1995). However, “[t]here is ‘ a presumption 
against the  waiver of constitutional rights, and for 
a waiver to be effective it must be clearly established that 
there was an intentional relinquishment of a known right 
or privilege. ’ ” United States v. Smith , 85 M.J. 283, 287 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) (quoting United States v. Sweeney, 70 M.J. 
296, 303-04 (C.A.A.F. 2011)). 
“We review whether an appellant has waived an issue, 
a question of law, de novo.” United States v. Givens, 82 M.J. 
211, 215 (C.A.A.F. 2022). Whether a waiver of a right was 
“knowing and intelligent” is “a question of law [assessed] 
under a  de novo standard of review.” United States v. 
Rosenthal, 62 M.J. 261, 262 (C.A.A.F. 2005). The voluntar-
iness of a waiver is also reviewed de novo; voluntariness 
“ ‘is measured by reference to the surrounding circum-
stances.’ ” United States v. Hasan , 84 M.J. 181, 198 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) (citation omitted). “When . . . an appellant 
intentionally waives a known right at trial, it is extin-
guished and may not be raised on appeal.” United States v. 
Gladue, 67 M.J. 311, 313 (C.A.A.F. 2009). 
B. Discussion 
Appellant’s unconditional guilty plea waived appellate 
review of his UCI claim. “An unconditional guilty plea gen-
erally waives all pretrial and trial defects that are not ju-
risdictional or a deprivation of due process of law.” United 
States v. Jones, 69 M.J. 294, 299 (C.A.A.F. 2011)  (citation 
omitted); United States v. Bradley , 68 M.J. 279, 281 
(C.A.A.F. 2010) (“An unconditional plea of guilty waives all 
nonjurisdictional defects at earlier stages of the proceed-
ings.”). The plea agreement in this case included a “ waive 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
all waivable motions” provision originated by the defense. 
The military judge conducted a thorough inquiry into Ap-
pellant’s understanding of, and agreement with, the terms 
of the agreement in accordance with R ule for Courts-Mar-
tial 910(f)(4) and specifically advised Appellant the waiver 
provision would waive appellate review of his  UCI claim. 
In response, Appellant unequivocally stated his under-
standing of the term, and trial defense counsel agreed with 
the military judge’s interpretation of the effect of the term. 
We conclude Appellant affirmatively, knowingly , and 
intentionally waived the UCI claim by negotiating and en-
tering into the  plea agreement. We reach this conclusion 
notwithstanding Appellant’s post-trial affidavit stating 
that trial defense counsel  assured him his guilty plea 
would not waive the UCI issue and averring he would not 
have pled guilty but for that assurance. Similarly, trial de-
fense counsel ’s post-trial affidavit acknowledged he ad-
vised Appellant “that the UCI issue was preserved and 
would be reviewed,” and stat ed that he did not intend to 
waive the UCI motion and did not believe it was waivable. 
Although the post-trial affidavits provide “some affirm-
ative indication” that Appellant did not understand the 
waiver provision, see United States v. Weasler, 43 M.J. 15, 
19 (C.A.A.F. 1995) (quoting Mezzanatto, 513 U.S. at 210), 
the surrounding circumstances convince us his waiver was 
knowing and voluntary. “In the military justice system, an 
accused’s ‘misunderstanding as to a material term’ in a 
plea agreement invalidates a plea.” Bradley, 68 M.J. at 285 
(Effron, C.J., concurring in result) (quoting Unite d States 
v. Smith, 56 M.J. 271, 27 3 (C.A.A.F. 2002)). Here, e ven if 
Appellant was erroneously advised by trial defense counsel 
regarding the effect of the plea agreement on his UCI 
claim, he was accurately advised by the military judge dur-
ing the providence inquiry and he affirmed that he under-
stood the meaning and effect of the waive r provision and 
had entered into the agreement freely and voluntarily. See, 
e.g., id. at 282 (finding the accused’s unconditional guilty 
plea waived objection to trial counsel remaining on the case 
even though t here was evidence that the civilian defense 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
counsel believed the guilty plea did not waive review of the 
objection). Under these circumstances, the waiver was both 
knowing and voluntary. Accordingly, w e hold Appellant 
waived his UCI claim. 
In reaching this result, we reject Appellant’s contention 
that adjudicative UCI—that is, command interference with 
witnesses, judges, members, or  counsel—can never be 
waived. “Unlawful command influence  is generally re-
viewed as an accusatory (preferral, forwarding, and refer-
ral of charges) or adjudicative (interference with witnesses, 
judges, members, and counsel) claim.” Givens , 82 M.J. at 
215. In Weasler, we held that a “pretrial agreement initi-
ated by appellant waived any objection to improper inter-
ference with the preferral and referral of charges.” 43 M.J. 
at 16; see id. at 18 (“This case does not involve the adjudi-
cative process.”). The NMCCA subsequently extended Wea-
sler’s holding, ruling that an accused may waive adjudica-
tive UCI to secure the benefits of a plea agreement. United 
States v. Gattis, 81 M.J. 748, 755 n.35 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 
2021).
4 
Quoting United States v. Day, 83 M.J. 53, 56 (C.A.A.F. 
2022), Appellant argues this Court should not extend Wea-
sler’s holding to adjudicative UCI because adjudicative UCI 
tends to deprive servicemembers of due process of law and 
“[a]n unconditional guilty plea does not waive defects re-
sulting in a ‘deprivation of due process of law.’ ” “ ‘Whether 
a particular right is waivable; whether the defendant must 
participate personally in the waiver; whether certain pro-
cedures are required for waiver; and whether the defend-
ant’s choice must be particularly informed or voluntary, all 
depend on the rig ht at stake.’ ” United States v. Harcrow , 
 
4 A few years e arlier, the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals reached a different result. See United States 
v. Hill, No. ACM 38979, 2017 CCA LEXIS 477, at * 8, 2017 WL 
3309663, at *2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. July 12, 2017) (unpublished) 
(holding that “claims of [UCI] that interfere with the adjudica-
tive process may not be waived”). 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
66 M.J. 154, 156 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (quoting United  States v. 
Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993)). 
The right at stake in this case is the right to a proceed-
ing free from the taint of UCI surrounding Appellant’s ap-
prehension and the subsequent investigation and prosecu-
tion of his case. We note that Appellant received some relief 
in the form of command -implemented remedial measures 
even before he filed his UCI motion. 5 Then, after the mo-
tion was litigated , two military judges ordered additional 
remedies to cure any lingering UCI.6 Although the conven-
ing authority did not issue the military judge -ordered di-
rective encouraging members of the command to serve as 
witnesses in support of Appellant without fear of repercus-
sions, Appellant did not attempt to enforce this remedy in 
the nearly three months that elapsed between the date the 
military judge ordered it and the date Appellant entered 
his pleas. Suarez, 2024 CCA LEXIS 348, at * 15, 2024 WL 
3911929, at *6. Additionally, the remedies concerning the 
composition and voir dire of the panel were never imple-
mented because Appellant elected to plead guilty and forgo 
his right to a court -martial composed of a panel of mem-
bers. But these remedies were still available to him, and 
had Appellant contested the charges, he could have availed 
himself of the military judge-ordered remedies. Instead, af-
ter being advised by the military judge that his guilty plea 
 
5 As noted above, the command-initiated remedies included 
removal of LtCol W as the convening authority for Appellant’s 
case, a command investigation into the circumstances of Appel-
lant’s apprehension, and removal of LtCol W and SgtMaj C from 
their battalion leadership positions. 
6 The military judges ordered the convening authority to is-
sue a directive encouraging members of the command to speak 
as witnesses in support of Appellant without fear of reprisal, au-
thorized liberal voir dire of the  members, and provided that no 
member could come from the battalion. Cf.  United States v. 
Mizgala, 61 M.J. 122, 126  (C.A.A.F. 2005) (holding that an un-
conditional guilty plea did not waive review of a n “unsuccess-
fully” litigated Article 10, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 810 (2000), speedy 
trial motion where the military judge did not provide the accused 
any relief for the speedy trial claim). 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
would waive the UCI claim, 7 Appellant entered his plea. 
Under these circumstances, we agree with the lower court’s 
conclusion that the unconditional guilty plea waived adju-
dicative UCI. As the lower court reasoned: 
In the absence of an explicit prohibition, a party 
may knowingly and voluntarily waive rights in a 
plea agreement. Although the President has pro-
hibited the waiver of certain fundamental rights 
in a plea agreement, the right to have proceedings 
free from UCI is not among them. By negotiating 
and entering into a plea agreement after the UCI 
motion was heard, Appellant’s actions leave us 
satisfied he affirmatively, knowingly and con-
sciously waived the UCI claim in his case. There-
fore, based on the totality of  the record before us 
we find Appellant  intentionally relinquished a 
known right, leaving no error to correct on appeal. 
Id. at *11, 2024 WL 3911929, at *4 (footnotes omitted). 
III. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
Having determined that Appellant waived UCI, thereby 
mooting the first granted issue, we turn to the second 
granted issue: whether Appellant was prejudiced by trial 
defense counsel’s deficient performance in advising him his 
guilty plea would avoid sex offender registration and would 
not waive UCI. Because the NMCCA did not apply the cor-
rect legal principles in concluding there was no prejudice, 
we set aside the lower court’s decision and remand for fur-
ther proceedings in accordance with this opinion. 
A. Standard of review and applicable law 
We review i neffective assistance of counsel claims de 
novo. United States v. Metz, 84 M.J. 421, 428 -29 (C.A.A.F. 
2024). “Under Strickland, an appellant bears the burden of 
demonstrating that (a) defense counsel’s performance was 
deficient, and (b) this deficient performance was 
 
7 Cf. Day, 83 M.J. at 56-57 (holding that the appellant’s un-
conditional guilty plea with a “waive all waivable motions” pro-
vision did not waive a motion for failure to state an offense where 
“the military judge unambiguously advised Appellant that a mo-
tion to dismiss for failure to state an offense is not waivable”). 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
prejudicial.” United States v. Furth , 81 M.J. 114, 117 
(C.A.A.F. 2021) (citing Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 
668, 687 (1984)).   
“When a defendant alleges his counsel ’s deficient per-
formance led him to accept a guilty plea rather than go to 
trial, we do not ask whether, had he gone to trial, the result 
of that trial ‘would have been different ’ than the result of 
the plea bargain. ” Lee v. United States, 582 U.S. 357, 364 
(2017) (quoting Roe v. Flores- Ortega, 528 U.S. 470, 482 
(2000)). Instead, “the defendant can show prejudice by 
demonstrating a ‘reasonable probability that, but for coun-
sel’s errors, he would not have pleaded guilty a nd would 
have insisted on going to trial.’ ” Id. at 364-65 (quoting Hill 
v. Lockhart, 474 U.S. 52, 59 (1985)); Furth, 81 M.J. at 117; 
Denedo v. United States, 66 M.J. 114, 128 (C.A.A.F. 2008). 
The prejudice test for ineffective assistance of counsel in 
the guilty plea context —whether there is a reasonable 
probability that, but for counsel’s errors, Appellant would 
have pleaded not guilty —is an objective test which we re-
view de novo. Furth, 81 M.J. at 117. 
“[S]tanding alone, an appellant’s ‘ post hoc asser-
tions . . . about how he would have pleaded but for his at-
torney’s deficiencies’ are not enough to establish prejudice.” 
Id. at 117 (alteration in original) (quoting Lee, 582 U.S. at 
369). The Court “must also ‘look to contemporaneous evi-
dence to substantiate [ an appellant’s] expressed prefer-
ences,’ ” because “  ‘the [appellant] has an incentive to 
claim, in retrospect, that the result of the plea process 
would have been different regardless of whether that claim 
is, in fact, true.’ ” Id. (alterations in original) (first quoting 
Lee, 582 U.S. at 369; and then quoting United States v. Mu-
rillo, 927 F.3d 808, 815 (4th Cir. 2019)).  
B. Discussion 
The NMCCA found “nothing in the record to indicate 
that, but for his counsels’ alleged error, Appellant would 
not have pleaded guilty and would have insisted on going 
to trial.” Suarez, 2024 CCA LEXIS 348, at * 22, 2024 WL 
3911929, at *8. Turning to the specific alleged deficiencies, 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
the court held trial defense counsel was deficient in negoti-
ating a plea agreement to avoid sex offender registration, 
which was not required by any of the charged offenses, but 
Appellant could not establish prejudice because he could 
not show “the plea agreement reached would have been 
more beneficial (e.g. less confinement time or some other 
bargained for benefit) without the negotiation related to 
the attempted prostitution charge.” Id. at *25-26, 2024 WL 
3911929, at * 9. Similarly, the court found trial defense 
counsel’s “understanding and explanation of the scope of 
what the ‘waive all waivable motions’ provision covered 
was below the standard expected and was deficient” but 
concluded the deficiency “did not adversely impact Appel-
lant” because “the Government proved beyond a reasonable 
doubt that the UCI did not affect the proceedings.” Id.  at 
*29, 2024 WL 3911929, at *10. 
The NMCCA made two significant errors in its preju-
dice analysis. First, the finding that “nothing in the record” 
demonstrates prejudice is clearly erroneous. Second, the 
lower court articulated the correct prejudice standard but 
then erred when it applied a different standard, concluding 
as a matter of law that there was no prejudice because Ap-
pellant would not have fared better absent trial defense 
counsel’s advice. 
With respect to the first error, the post -trial affidavits 
from Appellant and trial defense counsel support Appel-
lant’s claim he would not have pled guilty but for trial de-
fense counsel ’s advice. Appellant ’s post-trial affidavit  
states that he decided to plead guilty in part because trial 
defense counsel had advised him his guilty plea would 
avoid the risk of sex offender registration. He averred: 
I did not want to plead guilty. I did not think 5 
years of confinement was a good deal. But I also 
did not trust that I would get a fair trial. . . . Ad-
ditionally, I was charged with prostitution and I 
did not want to risk registering as a sex offender 
as my defense counsel told me I would have to. 
Weighing these factors, I reluctantly decided to 
plead guilty to the drug charges. 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
Appellant averred his decision was also influenced by 
trial defense counsel’s advice that a guilty plea would not 
waive UCI. According to Appellant: 
I asked my trial counsel if pleading guilty would 
prevent the appellate court from deciding the un-
lawful command influence issue. One counsel as-
sured me that the court would still review the is-
sue and pleading guilty does not prevent the 
appellate court from deciding differently than the 
judge. This was very important to me and I would 
not have pled guilty without knowing that I could 
appeal the judge’s unlawful command influence 
ruling. 
While Appellant’s post-trial affidavit, standing alone, 
would be insufficient to establish prejudice, Furth, 81 M.J. 
at 117, it does not stand alone. Trial defense counsel’s affi-
davit confirms that he advised Appellant the attempted 
prostitution offense could be “considered as a sex offense” 
subjecting Appellant to mandatory sex offender registra-
tion, which  “was something that we wanted to avoid.” 
Therefore, trial defense counsel advised “that it was pru-
dent to accept a plea agreement that would limit his risk to 
sex offender registration and limit his risk to more confine-
ment time.” 
Trial defense counsel also corroborated Appellant’s reli-
ance on his advice that a guilty plea would not waive UCI, 
stating:  
Prior to entering into the plea agreement, [Appel-
lant] asked if the military judge’ s denial of the 
UCI motion would be reviewed on appeal. I ad-
vised [Appellant] that the UCI issue was pre-
served and would be reviewed. . . . I do not remem-
ber, nor did I intend, waiving the UCI motion as 
the UCI motion that I raised was unable to be 
waived. 
Therefore, the lower court’s finding that nothing in the 
record demonstrates Appellant would not have pled guilty 
but for trial defense counsel ’s erroneous advice is clearly 
erroneous. 
United States v. Suarez, No. 25-0004/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
With respect to the second  error, the court held Appel-
lant could not establish prejudice as a result of trial defense 
counsel’s advice because he could not show “the convening 
authority would have accepted less than 60 months regard-
less of trial counsel’s advice or negotiation” concerning sex 
offender registration or that the UCI adversely affected the 
proceedings. Suarez, 2024 CCA LEXIS 348,  at *26, 2024 
WL 3911929, at *9. As noted above, the relevant question 
is not whether Appellant would have achieved a  better re-
sult absent the erroneous advice but whether he would 
have chosen to plead guilty in the first place. Lee, 582 U.S. 
at 364. The NMCCA’s prejudice analysis applied incorrect 
legal principles and failed to address  whether there was a 
“reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s errors, [Ap-
pellant] would not have pleaded guilty and would have in-
sisted on going to trial.” Lee, at 364-65 (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (citation omitted) . Accordingly, we set 
aside the lower court’s decision and remand for a new Ar-
ticle 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (Supp. II 2019-2021), re-
view applying correct legal principles.  
IV. Judgment 
     We answer the specified issue in the affirmative, 
thereby mooting the first assigned issue. We decline to an-
swer the second assigned issue. The decision of the United 
States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals is set 
aside. The case is returned to the Judge Advocate General 
of the Navy for remand to the Court of Criminal Appeals 
for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion . A 
hearing is authorized  under Article 66(f)(3), UCMJ , 10 
U.S.C. § 866(f)(3) (2018), if the lower court determines that 
it is necessary to further develop the record. 