This opinion is subject to revision before publication 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Alex J. SECORD, Staff Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0217 
Crim. App. No. 20210667 
  
Argued January 28, 2025—Decided July 30, 2025 
 
Military Judges: G. Brett Batdorff (arraignment) 
and Travis L. Rogers (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Scott R. Hockenberry , Esq. (argued); 
Captain Amir R. Hamdoun  and Daniel Conway , 
Esq. (on brief); Major Robert D. Luyties. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Dominique L. Dove (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini  (on brief); Major Patrick 
S. Barr. 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a sep-
arate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
  
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Government charged Appellant with multiple of-
fenses related to alleged use of cocaine with junior enlisted 
soldiers and related conduct. Pursuant to a search and sei-
zure authorization, the Government seized Appellant’s cell 
phone but was unable to access any of the cell phone’s data 
because the phone was encrypted and passcode protected. 
Citing Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 701(a)(2), Appel-
lant moved to compel the Government to give Appellant 
unilateral and unrestricted access to the cell phone, argu-
ing that the Government had a duty to do so because the 
data on the cell phone was “within the possession, custody, 
or control of military authorities.”  The military judge de-
nied Appellant’s motion but offered  Appellant the oppor-
tunity to obtain the data if the Government was provided 
equal access. Appellant rejected this offer, and the parties 
proceeded to trial without either having access to the cell 
phone data. A general court-martial convicted Appellant of 
all the charged offenses and the United States Army Court 
of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) affirmed  the convictions. We 
granted review of three issues: 
I. Where the Government seized and held Appel-
lant’s phone pursuant to a narrow search author-
ization, but could not access the data without Ap-
pellant’s passcode, was the data within the 
possession, custody, or control of military author-
ities for purposes of R.C.M. 701? 
II. Did the military judge err by ruling Appellant 
could not access the data without simultaneously 
providing the Government with full access to all 
his personal data? 
III. If the military judge erred, did the error con-
stitute prejudicial error? 
United States v. Secord, 85 M.J. 195 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
Because we agree with the military judge that 
R.C.M. 701(a)(2) did not require the Government to give 
Appellant access to the data on the seized cell phone, we 
answer the first granted issue in the negative and therefore 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
do not reach the second and third granted issues. Accord-
ingly, we affirm the decision of the ACCA. 
I. Background 
At the time of his offenses, Appellant  was a staff ser-
geant assigned to the same unit as MB, a junior enlisted 
soldier. Appellant communicated with MB via his cell 
phone to facilitate their use of cocaine. On three occasions 
in August 2020, MB paid Appellant via CashApp on her cell 
phone for cocaine that they used together at MB’s off-post 
apartment. Appellant’s CashApp account recorded the re-
ceipt of funds on the same dates. At least two other junior 
enlisted soldiers, Specialist s BA and AF, observed Appel-
lant’s cocaine use at MB’s apartment in August 2020. Ap-
pellant separately tested positive for cocaine use in Sep-
tember 2020 and March 2021 after a command-directed 
urinalysis test. 
During the investigation into Appellant’s  cocaine-re-
lated activities, the Army Criminal Investigation Division 
(CID) seized Appellant’s cell phone pursuant to a search 
and seizure authorization and placed it into airplane mode. 
The authorization ordered a forensic search of Appellant’s 
cell phone for “SMS, MMS messages, photos, and videos for 
evidence pertaining to the wrongful use, possession and 
distribution of cocaine.” Despite having physical possession 
of Appellant’s phone, the Government’s efforts to search for 
digital evidence of his alleged crimes failed because the 
Government could not unlock his phone. Appellant’s phone 
was protected by a  password or personal identification 
number (PIN), which Appellant refused to provide to the 
Government. The Government attempted to forcibly ex-
tract the cell phone  data without the PIN but was unable 
to do so because its extraction software was not compatible 
with Appellant’s iPhone. 
Seeking access to his own cell phone data, Appellant 
filed a discovery request with the Government requesting 
“an immediate opportunity to inspect [Appellant’s] cell 
phone and for the Defense’s Digital Forensic Examiner to 
conduct a digital extraction of [Appellant’s] cell phone 
within the bounds of confidentiality.” After the Govern-
ment denied the request, Appellant filed a motion with the 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
military judge to compel discovery of the cell phone  data 
arguing that he was entitled to as equal an opportunity as 
the Government to examine the cell phone data in the prep-
aration of his defense. The motion demanded that the Gov-
ernment provide Appellant’s digital forensic examiner  
(DFE) with the cell phone to comport with the requirement 
that Appellant have equal opportunity to examine the de-
vice for evidence that could be favorable, be used for the 
purposes of impeachment, or be otherwise material. Appel-
lant also demanded that the defense DFE’s inspection be 
confidential, and that the Government not be permitted to 
install any tracking software on the cell phone. Appellant’s 
motion to compel discovery provided no facts about what 
specific data was on the phone or how that data might as-
sist Appellant’s defense. 
The Government responded, arguing that it had not un-
reasonably impeded access to the cell phone  because the 
phone was evidence of criminal activity and the Govern-
ment had a legitimate interest in maintaining sole custody 
and control over the phone. Further, the Government ar-
gued that—because it could not break into the phone—both 
parties had equal access to the digital evidence (i.e., none), 
and granting the defense motion would result in Appellant 
having greater access to the cell phone data than the Gov-
ernment. Finally, the Government argued that forcing the 
provision of the phone to Appellant without Appellant  
providing the PIN to the Government would run contrary 
to defense counsel’s obligation to disclose evidence. 
The military judge granted Appellant’s motion in part 
and denied Appellant’s motion in part, ruling that both 
parties had equal access to the data, which was no access.  
Additionally, he made no clear determination whether Ap-
pellant had met his burden to prove by a preponderance of 
the evidence that the data was relevant, only stating that 
it was “understandable that the Government would be re-
luctant to completely turn over sole physical possession of 
that which is evidence of a crime.” The military judge then 
held that if Appellant provided the defense DFE with the 
PIN to the cell phone, then both parties’ forensic examiners 
could inspect the cell phone in concert, with equal and sim-
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
ultaneous access to any data that would be extracted. Spe-
cifically, the military judge would allow “the Defense DFE 
to inspect the cell phone in concert with a CID representa-
tive at CID headquarters.” Under the military judge’s pro-
posal, Appellant himself would not be provided with access 
to the cell phone, and the Government would be prohibited 
from installing any tracking software. However, the mili-
tary judge also held that if Appellant declined  to provide 
his PIN to allow the mutual collection of his cell phone data 
by both the Government and the defense, then Appellant’s 
motion would be denied in its entirety. Appellant was pro-
vided with one week to make the decision, and Appellant 
ultimately decided not to provide his PIN. 
The Government never succeeded in  gaining access to 
the cell phone, so both parties proceeded to trial without 
the benefit of the data stored on the phone. A n enlisted 
panel sitting as a general court -martial convicted Appel-
lant, contrary to his pleas, of one specification of violation 
of a lawful general regulation and five specifications of 
wrongful use of a controlled substance (cocaine) in violation 
of Articles 92 and 112a, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 892, 912a (2018). 
On appeal, Appellant challenged the military judge’s 
ruling in response to Appellant’s motion to compel discov-
ery as an abuse of discretion. Reviewing the Rules of 
Courts-Martial governing the disclosure of discovery by the 
Government and defense, the ACCA observed that: 
 Rules for Courts-Martial 701(a) and 701(b) ap-
pear to contemplate that the data in question is in 
the current physical “possession, custody, or con-
trol” (ie [sic]: capable of being immediately re-
viewed and in a format that it could be presented 
as an exhibit for identification at trial) of one of 
the parties at the time of the discovery request by 
the party not in possession. 
United States v. Secord , No. ARMY 20210667, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 263, at *7, 2024 WL 3200593,  at *3 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. June 26, 2024) (unpublished). Based on this interpre-
tation, the ACCA held that the cell phone data was not sub-
ject to the disclosure requirements of R.C.M.  701(a), and 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
that the military judge’s ruling on the defense’s motion was 
not an abuse of discretion. 
II. Standard of Review 
The interpretation of a provision of the R.C.M. is a ques-
tion of law that this Court reviews de novo. United States 
v. Hunter, 65 M.J. 399, 401 (C.A.A.F. 2008). 
III. Discussion 
Appellant’s primary argument before this Court is a 
simple one based on the plain language of R.C.M.  701(a). 
He argues that because his cell phone is undisputedly in 
the physical “possession, custody, or control of military au-
thorities,” R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A), the encrypted data stored 
on that phone must also be within the Government’s pos-
session, custody, or control. Accordingly, under a straight-
forward application of the rule, the Government must per-
mit Appellant to inspect the data, in this case, by allowing 
the defense DFE to extract and review the data without 
sharing it with the Government. Appellant also argues that 
the ACCA’s decision conflicts with this Court’s recent deci-
sion in United States v. Strong, 85 M.J. 58 (C.A.A.F. 2024). 
Appellant asserts that under Strong , the Government 
seized his cell phone data and therefore had the data 
within its possession, custody, or control. For the reasons 
set forth below, we disagree with both arguments. 
A. Rule 701(a)(2)(A) 
R.C.M. 701 governs discovery in courts -martial, and 
R.C.M. 701(a) imposes obligations on trial counsel to pro-
vide certain things —including electronic data —to the de-
fense. As relevant to this case, the rule states: 
 (A) After service of charges , upon request of 
the defense, the Government shall permit the de-
fense to inspect any books, papers, documents, 
data, photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or 
places, or copies of portions of these items, if the 
item is within the possession, custody, or control 
of military authorities and—  
   . . . . 
   (iv) the item was obtained from or belongs 
to the accused. 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) (emphasis added). With respect to ac-
cess to evidence, the rule further requires that “[e]ach 
party shall have adequate opportunity to prepare its case 
and equal opportunity to interview witnesses and inspect 
evidence.” R.C.M. 701(e). When analyzing R.C.M.  701, we 
have observed that “[t]he military rules pertaining to dis-
covery focus on equal access to evidence to aid the prepara-
tion of the defense and enhance the orderly administration 
of military justice.” United States v. Roberts, 59 M .J. 323, 
325 (C.A.A.F. 2004). 
Noting R.C.M. 701(a)’s use of the disjunctive “or,” Ap-
pellant argues that the rule applies if the data on his phone 
is either within the Government’s “possession,” within the 
Government’s “custody,” or within the Government’s “con-
trol.” Given this broad language and the Government’s un-
disputed possession, custody, and  control of Appellant’s 
physical cell phone, Appellant argues that —under the 
plain language of R.C.M.  701(a)—the data on the cell 
phone must also be within the Government’s possession, 
custody, or control. 
We agree with Appellant about the disjunctive  nature 
of the language in R.C.M. 701(a). But like the vast majority 
of federal civilian courts that  have considered the same 
question in the context of the nearly identical Federal Rule 
of Criminal Procedure 16,
1 we disagree with the premise 
 
1 See United States v. Gray, No. 21-CR-713 (PAE), 2024 U.S. 
Dist. LEXIS 64314, at *12 n.6, 2024 WL 1526368,  at *5 n.6 
(S.D.N.Y. Apr. 9, 2024) (“the contents of an encrypted device are 
not within the Government’s possession, custody, or control for 
purposes of Rule 16 or Brady ”); United States v. Reid , No. 
20-CR-00626 (PMH), 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 87761, at *26- 28, 
2024 WL 2159848, at *8 (S.D.N.Y. May 14, 2024) (same); United 
States v. Young, No. 23 -cr-208 (MJD /ECW), 2024 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 36922, at *12- 16, 2024 WL 913308, at *4- 5 (D. Minn. 
Mar. 4, 2024) (same); United States v. Abouammo , No. 
19-cr-00621-EMC-1, 2022 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 223931, at *67- 72, 
2022 WL 17584238, at *21-23 (N.D. Cal. Dec. 12, 2022) (same) ; 
United States v. Case, No. 1:19-cr-00360-BLW-2, 2020 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 131397, at *6- 10, 2020 WL 4227554, at *3- 4 (D. Idaho 
July 23, 2020) (same) . But see United States v. Andrade, No. 
20-cr-00249-RS (LB), 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 85342, at *2-5 (N.D. 
Cal. May 10, 2024) (discovery order).
 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
that when the government has physical possession of a cell 
phone, it is also automatically in “possession, custody, or 
control” of the cell phone’s data for the purposes of 
R.C.M.701. 
We acknowledge that there is an appealing, plain lan-
guage approach to this question based on the broad lan-
guage in the rule, especially if one analogizes a  password-
protected cell phone to a locked container. But we note that 
the Supreme Court has differentiated the data stored on a 
cell phone from physical records and has described efforts 
to draw such an analogy as “a bit strained.” See Riley v. 
California, 573 U.S. 373, 393-97 (2014) (observing that the 
search of a person’s cell phone would expose to the govern-
ment far more than the most exhaustive search of the per-
son’s house). Following this logic, this Court has recognized 
that the digital contents of a cell phone and the physical 
cell phone itself are distinct with respect to legal questions 
such as admissibility, search, and seizure. See, e.g., United 
States v. Mitchell, 76 M.J. 413, 420 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (hold-
ing that although the appellee’s physical iP hone was ad-
missible, the digital contents of the phone were inadmissi-
ble); Strong, 85 M.J. at  65 (holding that “the seizure of 
Appellant’s iPhone did not constitute seizure of the digital 
content of the iPhone”). Accordingly, we do not accept Ap-
pellant’s assertion that the Government’s possession, cus-
tody, or control of a physical cell phone necessarily estab-
lishes the Government’s possession, custody, or control of 
the data on that cell phone for the purposes of R.C.M. 701. 
Lawyers often describe property rights as a “bundle of 
sticks,” referring to the aggregate collection of powers and 
rights associated with a property  interest. See United 
States v. Craft , 535 U.S. 274, 278 (2002)  (first citing 
Benjamin Cardozo, The Paradoxes of Legal Science 129 
(Lawbook Exchange 2000) (1928); then citing Dickman v. 
Commissioner, 465 U.S. 330, 336 (1984) ). Among these 
rights, the Supreme Court has noted that “the right to 
exclude is ‘universally held to be a fundamental element of 
the property right,’ and is ‘one of the most essential sticks 
in the bundle of rights that are commonly characterized as 
property.’ ” Cedar Point Nursery v. Hassid , 594 U.S. 139, 
150 (2021) (quoting Kaiser Aetna v. United States, 444 U.S. 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
164, 176, 179-180 (1979)). In this case, both Appellant and 
the Government had  the power to exclude the other from 
accessing the cell phone data. Only Appellant knew the 
PIN that would unlock the phone, but the  Government 
controlled all physical and electronic access. 
Considering this stalemate, it is not clear why the Gov-
ernment would be considered to have any greater posses-
sory interest in the cell phone data than Appellant for dis-
covery purposes. Beyond being able to exclude Appellant 
from the cell phone data, the Government’s relationship to 
the data was extremely limited. Without Appellant’s coop-
eration, the Government had no access of any kind to the 
cell phone data. Indeed, the Government did not know for 
certain whether there was any data on the Appellant’s cell 
phone at all. But assuming that the cell phone did contain 
digital data, the Government could not review the data, use 
the data in its investigation, proffer the data as evidence at 
trial, or share the data with anyone else. The ability to ex-
clude others (including Appellant) from accessing the cell 
phone data was the lone “stick” in the Government’s prop-
erty rights bundle. 
In our view, this one property right (which was equally 
shared with Appellant) was not a sufficient level of “pos-
session, custody, or control” to trigger the Government’s 
discovery obligations under R.C.M.  701(a). Moreover, 
R.C.M. 701(e) requires that both the Government and the 
defense shall have equal opportunity to inspect evidence as 
it prepares their respective cases for trial. See also Roberts, 
59 M.J. at 325 ( highlighting the discovery rules’ focus on 
equal access to evidence). Concluding that inaccessible cell 
phone data is in the “possession, custody, or control” of the 
Government, and thereby r equiring the Government to 
provide an accused with unilateral access to that data, 
would be inconsistent with the requirements  of 
R.C.M. 701(e). 
B. United States v. Strong 
Appellant also argues that under this Court’s decision 
in Strong, 85 M.J. at 64-65, the Government had seized and 
therefore possessed the data on his cell phone.  In Strong, 
we held that law enforcement had not yet seized cell phone 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
data—despite having seized the physical cell phone —when 
the cell phone’s owner retained the ability to remotely de-
lete the data. Id. at 67 (noting that “law enforcement had 
not yet established ‘a fair degree of dominion or control over 
the [digital content]’ ” (alteration in original) (citation omit-
ted)). Appellant argues that under Strong’s logic, the Gov-
ernment in this case has seized his cell phone data be-
cause—unlike in Strong —the Government ha d cut off 
Appellant’s access to the data including his ability to delete 
it. Appellant makes a compelling case that his cell phone 
data had been seized under the Fourth Amendment, but 
we disagree that it was therefore necessarily also within 
the Government’s possession, custody, or control for the 
purposes of R.C.M. 701(a). 
We reject this argument because we do not believe that 
seizure under the Fourt h Amendment and “possession, 
custody, and control” under R.C.M. 701(a) are coterminous 
legal standards. Rather, they are different  concepts with 
distinctly different aims. The Fourth Amendment guaran-
tees “[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches 
and seizures.” U.S. Const. amend. IV. Because “the rights 
of privacy and personal security protected by the Fourt h 
Amendment . . . are to be regarded as of the very essence of 
constitutional liberty,” Harris v. United States, 331 U.S. 
145, 150 (1947) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quot-
ing Gouled v. United States, 255 U.S. 298, 304 (1921)) , 
courts rigorously enforce this constitutional protection 
from unreasonable seizures. Accordingly, this Court has  
held that “[a] seizure of property occurs when there is some 
meaningful interference with an individual’s possessory in-
terests in that property.” United States v. Hahn , 44 M.J. 
360, 362 (C.A.A.F. 1996) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (quoting United States v. Jacobsen , 466 U.S. 109, 113 
(1984)). Nothing more is required. 
However, even if data has been seized under the Fourth 
Amendment, that does not demand that the data is in the 
“possession, custody, or control of military authorities” for 
purposes of R.C.M. 701. This is because discovery is a prac-
tical process focused on fairness and “intended to eliminate 
pretrial gamesmanship, minimize pretrial litigation, and 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
reduce the potential for surprise and delay at trial.” R.C.M. 
701(a)(1) Discussion. As noted above, the goal of 
R.C.M. 701 is to provide the parties with equal access to 
the evidence, not to protect the accused from unreasonable 
government searches and seizures. We see no reason why 
property must be considered in the Government’s “posses-
sion, custody, or control” for discovery purposes any time 
there is “some meaningful interference” with an accused’s 
possessory interests in that property. Hahn, 44 M.J. at 362. 
C. Conclusion 
In this case , the Government lawfully seized Appel-
lant’s cell phone pursuant to a search and seizure authori-
zation based upon probable cause. However, because the 
Government could neither unlock nor break  into the cell 
phone, the Government had no access to the data stored on 
the phone. The ACCA concluded that the cell phone data 
was therefore not within the “possession, custody, or con-
trol of military authorities” under R.C.M. 701(a). Secord, 
2024 CCA LEXIS 263, at *8-9, 2024 WL 3200593, at *3. We 
agree that the mere fact that the Government possessed 
Appellant’s cell phone and had the ability to exclude Appel-
lant from any data on that phone did not— without more—
trigger the Government’s discovery obligations under 
R.C.M. 701(a) with respect to the cell phone data.
2 Because 
R.C.M 701(a) did not impose any requirements on the Gov-
ernment, Issues II and III are moot. 
IV. Decision 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 
 
2 Appellant also argues that the ACCA erred in concluding 
that that electronic data must be in a military authority’s “cur-
rent physical ‘possession, custody, or control’ ” for the require-
ments of R.C.M. 701(a) to apply. Secord, 2024 CCA LEXIS 263, 
at *7, 2024 WL 3200593, at *3 (emphasis added). It is not clear 
what “physical” possession of electronic data means in a practi-
cal sense or how physical possession would be relevant to the 
R.C.M. 701(a) analysis. We accordingly express no opinion on 
the relevance of the physical possession of electronic data and 
leave that as an open question for a future case. 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting. 
I think that the Court should answer all three granted 
questions in the affirmative and set aside , rather than af-
firm, the decision of the United States Army Court of Crim-
inal Appeals. I therefore respectfully dissent. 
Granted Issue I 
Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 701(a)(2)(A) grants 
the accused a right to “inspect any . . . data . . . within the 
possession, custody, or control of military authorities.” 1 
The first granted issue is: “Where the Government seized 
and held Appellant’s phone pursuant to a narrow search 
authorization, but could not access the data without Appel-
lant’s passcode, was the data within the possession, cus-
tody, or control of military authorities for purposes of 
R.C.M. 701?” I answer this question in the affirmative be-
cause, in my view, the data on the phone was in the “cus-
tody” of the Army Criminal Investigation Command (CID). 
The disjunctive listing of the words “possession, 
custody, or control” in R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) impl ies that 
military authorities can have “custody” of data even if the 
military authorities do not “possess” or “control” the data. 
But what does it mean for military authorities  to have 
“custody” of data? Neither the Manual for Courts-Martial, 
United States (2019 ed.) (MCM), nor the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ), contains a relevant definition of 
 
1 R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) states in relevant part: 
(A) After service of charges upon request of the 
defense, the Government shall permit the defense 
to inspect any books, papers, documents, data , 
photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or 
places, or copies of portions of these items, if the 
item is within the possession, custody, or control 
of military authorities and—  
 . . . . 
 (iv) the item was obtained from or belongs 
to the accused. 
R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) (emphasis added). 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
2 
 
“custody.”2 The Government, in its brief, also does not offer 
any definition of the term. T he Court, therefore,  must 
interpret the term  “custody” according to its ordinary 
meaning. 
For helpful guidance in determining the ordinary mean-
ing of words, the Court typically consults dictionaries. 
United States v. Valentin -Andino, __ M.J. __, __ (5) 
(C.A.A.F. 2025). The first definition of “custody” in a lead-
ing legal dictionary is “care and control of a thing or person 
for inspection, preservation, or security .” Custody, Black’s 
Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). And the first definition of 
“custody” in a leading nonlegal dictionar y is similar: “the 
act or duty of guarding and preserving  (as by a duly au-
thorized person or agency) : Safekeeping.” Merriam Web-
ster’s Unabridged Dictionary, https://unabridged.merriam-
webster.com/unabridged/custody (last visited Ju ly 30, 
2025). 
Based on the general tenor of these definitions, I agree 
with Appellant’s argument that CID had “custody” of the 
data on his phone even if it could not access the data. CID 
held Appellant’s phone specifically for the purpose of  
guarding, preserving, and safekeeping the data on the  
phone. Trial counsel  argued to the military judge: “ Our 
purpose of maintaining sole custody and control of the 
phone is to maintain the phone’s evidentiary value for use 
and further prosecution of other individuals both known 
and unknown to the government, who may have conducted 
dealings with [Appellant].” Trial counsel further expressly 
stated that CID had “sole custody of the information on the 
phone.” I agree with t rial counsel’s assessment. Because 
the data belonged to Appellant and because CID was in 
 
2 The President has defined “custody” with respect to per-
sons. MCM pt. IV, para. 12.c.(4)(a) (“Custody is restraint of free 
locomotion imposed by lawful apprehension. . . . Custody is tem-
porary restraint intended to continue until other restraint (ar-
rest, restriction, confinement) is imposed or the person is re-
leased.”); see also  R.C.M. 30 5(d) Discussion (“Custody is 
restraint which is imposed by apprehension and which may be, 
but is not necessarily, physical.”). 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
3 
 
“custody” of the data, Appellant had a right to inspect the 
data under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A). 
Granted Issue II 
The second granted issue is: “Did the military judge err 
by ruling Appellant could not access the data without sim-
ultaneously providing the G overnment with full access to 
all his personal data?” Although the Court does not reach 
this question, I answer it in the affirmative. The military 
judge’s order went too far, in my opinion, because it condi-
tioned Appellant’s right to inspect his phone on his giving 
the Government access to more data than the Govern-
ment’s search authorization allowed. 
Under R.C.M. 701(g)(1), the military judge could “spec-
ify the time, place, and manner of making discovery and 
. . . prescribe such terms and conditions as are just.”  And 
under R.C.M. 702(g)(2) , the military judge could “order 
that the discovery or inspection be denied, restricted, or de-
ferred, or make such other order as is appropriate.”  Here, 
in response to Appellant’s motion to inspect the data in 
CID’s custody, the military judge ruled: 
This motion is partially granted only in the 
event the accused voluntarily decides to disclose 
his PIN to your expert. In that voluntary event, 
your expert would then need to go down to CID as 
you described, to access the phone, but they would 
do so in concert with the government’s forensics 
expert. Together, the government and your expert 
would have equal and simultaneous access to the 
data and information that is extracted. The phone 
will not be surrendered to defense in this event, 
only offered for mutual inspection and extraction.  
(Emphasis added.) 
The conditions that the military judge placed on Appel-
lant’s right to inspect the data on his phone were neither 
“just” under R.C.M. 702(g)(1) nor “appropriate” under 
R.C.M. 702(g)(2). A magistrate in this case had issued a 
search authorization that only allowed the Government  to 
view “SMS, MMS messages, photos, and videos for evi-
dence pertaining to the wrongful use, possession and dis-
tribution of cocaine.” The military judge’s order, however, 
allowed the Government to look at anything  in the phone 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
4 
 
that the defense chose to inspect. As Appellant argues, 
nothing in R .C.M. 701 or the UCMJ required the defense 
to provide the Government with access to data  for which 
the Government had not shown probable cause and had not 
obtained a search authorization. The military judge’s order 
left Appellant with two choices: either to forgo his right of 
inspection or to provide the Government with access to 
data on his phone beyond the scope of its search authoriza-
tion. Under such circumstances, Appellant’s right to in-
spect evidence was made contingent on giving up his pro-
tections under the R.C.M., UCMJ, and Fourth 
Amendment. The military judge’s order was therefore an 
abuse of discretion. 
The Government , for its part, does not argue that it 
could exceed the search authorization when inspecting the 
phone. The Government asserts in its brief that “[o]nce ap-
pellant had access to the phone, the government was le-
gally allowed to access and view the responsive data on the 
phone pursuant to the magistrate’s search authorization .” 
(Emphasis added.) Similarly, the Government argues that 
its right under R.C.M. 701(e) to an “equal opportunity” to 
“inspect [the] evidence,” would only be exercised “pursuant 
to the magistrate’s authorization.” (Emphasis added.) If the 
military judge had limited the Government’s access to only 
the data within the search authorization, the answer to the 
second granted question might very well be different . But 
that is not how the military judge ruled in this case. 
Granted Issue III 
The third granted question is: “If the military judge 
erred, did the error constitute prejudicial error?” Although 
the Court also does not address this question, I answer it 
in the affirmative. The Government had the burden to 
prove the discovery violation was not prejudicial, and it did 
not meet this burden. 
This Court’s precedents have established: “Where an 
appellant demonstrates that the Government failed to dis-
close discoverable evidence in response to a specific request 
. . . , the appellant will be entitled to relief unless the Gov-
ernment can show that nondisclosure was harmless beyond 
a reasonable doubt.” United States v. Roberts, 59 M.J. 323, 
United States v. Secord, No. 24-0217/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
5 
 
327 (C.A.A.F. 2004) (citing United States v. Hart , 29 M.J. 
407, 410 (C.M.A.1990)). The Court has further stated that 
its “appellate assessment of [the] impact [of a discovery vi-
olation] is no different regardless of whether the discovery 
issue was ruled on by the military judge under R.C.M. 
701(g)(2) or whether it arose from a Government decision 
to withhold certain evidence that was not discovered until 
after trial.” Id. at 327 n.3. 
Because Appellant’s phone remains locked, the record 
obviously does not establish its contents. The Government, 
however, acknowledged at trial that Appellant may have a 
good faith basis for believing that the phone contains  ex-
culpatory evidence. Given this possibility, the Government 
has not met its burden  to prove that the discovery error 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Conclusion 
For these reasons, I would set aside the decision of the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals and set 
aside the findings and sentence in this case. 