This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Leo J. NAVARRO AGUIRRE, Airman First Class 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0146 
Crim. App. No. 40352 
 
Argued February 26, 2025—Decided July 24, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Elijah F. Brown  
 
For Appellant: Major Frederick J. Johnson (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams and Major 
Spencer R. Nelson.  
 
For Appellee: Major Vanessa Bairos (argued); Colo-
nel Matthew D. Talcott, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. 
Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, and 
Judge HARDY joined. Judge JOHNSON filed a sep-
arate opinion, concurring in part and dissenting in 
part.  
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
Appellant received from his medical provider a valid 
prescription for the sleep medication commonly known as 
Ambien. At approximately 6:00 p.m. the next day, he was 
seen driving erratically near his apartment complex. Dur-
ing an encounter with the police, Appellant  acknowledged 
that he had recently taken Ambien, and he also admitted 
to “huffing” an aerosol spray at some unspecified time. He 
later was charged with, among other offenses, wrongful use 
of the controlled substance z olpidem (Ambien’s chemical 
name), as well as reckless driving after using both 
zolpidem and aerosol inhalants. Appellant subsequently 
sought to plead guilty to the reckless driving specification. 
During the providence inquiry, Appellant stated that after 
he took his prescribed dose of Ambien, he fell asleep in his 
bed and the next thing he remembered was waking up be-
hind the wheel of his car . The military judge accepted Ap-
pellant’s plea.
1 Separately, and contrary to his pleas, a 
panel of officer and enlisted members found Appellant 
guilty of, among other  offenses, wrongful use of z olpidem 
(hereinafter referred to as Ambien). 
We granted review of the following issues: 
I. Whether Appellant’s conviction for wrongful 
Ambien use is legally sufficient when: (1) he had 
a valid prescription for Ambien, and (2) the basis 
for his conviction was a medically -known side 
effect. 
II. Whether Appellant’s guilty plea for reckless 
driving was provident when he took his prescribed 
dose of Ambien, fell asleep in his bed, and “the 
next thing [he] remembered is being behind the 
wheel of [his] car.” 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, 85 M.J. 200 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (order granting review) (alterations in original). 
 
1 Appellant’s plea of guilty to the reckless driving specifica-
tion excepted the language concerning aerosol inhalants. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
For the reasons set forth below, w e conclude that  
Appellant’s conviction for wrongful use of Ambien was not 
legally sufficient, but his guilty plea to reckless driving was 
provident. 
I. Background 
Appellant was stationed at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, 
Washington. On September 30, 2021, he received a pre-
scription for Ambien from his medical provider. The next 
day (a Friday), at approximately 6:00 p .m., a witness ob-
served Appellant driving erratically. When Appellant’s ve-
hicle stopped for an extended period in a turn lane, the wit-
ness got out of his car to check on him. The witness saw 
Appellant dressed in his military uniform (although with-
out the blouse), rocking back and forth with a can in his lap 
and what appeared to be a smile on his face. Appellant 
eventually turned into his apartment complex and bumped 
into a lamppost, which caused him to stop for several 
minutes before he drove off.  
Local police officers soon responded to a report of a sus-
pected case of “driving under the influence.” When they dis-
covered Appellant partially parked in a parking stall, they 
asked him if he had been drinking or using drugs. Appel-
lant responded that he had taken Ambien. One officer, who 
had seen aerosol cans in the back seat of Appellant’s car, 
asked him their purpose . Appellant admitted to  “huffing” 
them but did not say when he had done so.  
A. Appellant’s Guilty Plea 
At his general court-martial, Appellant sought to plead 
guilty to reckless driving after taking  Ambien. During the 
providence inquiry conducted in accordance with United 
States v. Care, 18 C.M.A. 535, 40 C.M.R. 247 (1969), 
Appellant told the military judge that he had been 
prescribed Ambien the day before the incident to help him 
sleep. He further explained that on the day of the incident, 
he left work and arrived at his apartment around 2:30 p.m. 
He then took the “prescribed dose of one pill” of Ambien 
because he “hadn’t slept in almost two days. ” Appellant 
stated that he then fell asleep in his bed and the next thing 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
he remembered was being in the driver’s seat of his car, 
parked in the wrong parking spot, with his foot on the gas 
pedal and “revving the engine.” He said that a police car 
was behind him and that when he spoke to the officers, he 
told the m that he was not drunk but that he had taken 
Ambien. 
In the course of the Care inquiry, Appellant told the mil-
itary judge that he did not remember driving his car but 
that he had reviewed the statements of witnesses and the 
police. Having done so, he acknowledged that his car had 
been seen “ recklessly weaving and blocking traffic” and 
veering on and off roads, and “that the swerving is what 
eventually led [him] to swerve onto the sidewalk and hit [a] 
lamppost.” Based on his review of this evidence, Appellant 
admitted that he had operated his car in a reckless  man-
ner. During follow up questions from the military judge, 
Appellant also acknowledged that he had taken Ambien 
“after arriving home from work,” and he agreed with the 
military judge that the Ambien caused him to not remem-
ber being in control of the vehicle. 
The military judge questioned Appellant about his men-
tal state during the time of the offense. Appellant said that 
he “was not in complete control of [ his] faculties” and 
acknowledged that he was driving recklessly because his 
actions of swerving on the road, blocking traffic, riding on 
top of a sidewalk, and hitting a lamppost were unsafe for 
himself and others. He also conceded that the Ambien 
could have affected his ability to safely control the vehicle. 
He told the military judge that when his “memory came to” 
he recalled feeling “dazed, groggy, slow, and having a hard 
time understanding the police officers.” Appellant specifi-
cally denied having a justification or excuse for driving his 
vehicle in the manner alleged , and he told the military 
judge that he was pleading guilty voluntarily and of his 
own free will. 
The military judge accepted Appellant’s guilty plea to 
reckless driving in violation of Article 113, Uniform Code 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 913 (2018). 2 How-
ever, the military judge told Appellant that he could seek  
to withdraw his plea of guilty at any time before his sen-
tence was announced. 
B. The Contested Offenses 
With regard to the contested offenses (as well as to the 
contested language of “and aerosol inhalants” in the reck-
less driving specification), Appellant elected trial by mem-
bers with enlisted representation. In seeking to prove Ap-
pellant’s wrongful use of Ambien, t he prosecution offered 
photos of the interior of Appellant’s car. These photos were 
taken from outside of the  car more than two months after 
the charged incident. One of the photos of the front passen-
ger seat showed what appeared to be pharmacy paperwork 
that had accompanied Appellant’s Ambien prescription. 
Another photo showed a  small brown paper bag in the 
backseat. 
The prosecution also offered the testimony of an expert 
witness in the field of forensic toxicology. He testified that 
a prescription for Ambien would have instructed the pa-
tient to take the medication “[j]ust before one desires to go 
to sleep.” He also testified, among other things,  to the fol-
lowing facts: (a) Ambien is a medication that assists a per-
son in getting a full night’s sleep, rather than sleep for a 
short period of time; (b) the purpose of Ambien is to put the 
user to sleep and  to help the user stay asleep; (c) Ambien 
can be misused and abused if a user takes a higher dosage 
than prescribed or if the medication is taken with other in-
toxicants; and (d) Ambien is a senses suppressant which 
can “turn[] off pieces of your body that are quite im-
portant.” 
 
2 Additionally, and consistent with Appellant’s pleas, the 
military judge found Appellant guilty of one specification of vio-
lating a lawful order (a no- contact order) in violation of Article 
92, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 892 (2018), and one specification of 
wrongful use of a controlled substance ( oxycodone) in violation 
of Article 112a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 912a (2018). 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
Along with other evidence, the defense offered the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) data sheet for Ambien  
which states that “[c]omplex sleep behaviors including . . . 
sleep-driving, and engaging in other activities  while not 
fully awake , may occur following the  first or any subse-
quent use of AMBIEN .” The defense also called as a wit-
ness the nurse practitioner who had prescribed Ambien to 
Appellant. She testified to the following facts: (a) she pre-
scribed Appellant Ambien on September 30, 2021; (b) she 
would instruct patients to take Ambien thirty minutes be-
fore bedtime and about seven to eight hours before they 
planned to wake up; (c) Appellant had a medical purpose 
and authorization to use the medication on the charged 
date; (d) the use of Ambien an hour or two before bedtime 
does not invalidate the prescription or make it “illegal”; (e) 
users can abuse their prescriptions for Ambien by taking 
Ambien “at a time when they are not trying to go to sleep, 
but rather trying to have some other effect”; and (f) t here 
is a “whole list” of different effects that people might expe-
rience after taking Ambien, such as “complex sleep behav-
iors,” but they are not common. 
At the close of evidence, the defense moved for a finding 
of not guilty pursuant to Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 
917 (2019 ed.) on the wrongful use of Ambien specification. 
Defense counsel argued that the prosecution had failed to 
provide any evidence during its case -in-chief that Appel-
lant had wrongfully used Ambien as he had a valid pre-
scription for it. The military judge disagreed.  He reasoned 
that when the evidence was viewed in the light most favor-
able to the prosecution, Appellant’s wrongful use could be 
inferred from the erratic way he had been driving, the time 
the offense occurred  (i.e., Appellant took the Ambien late 
in the afternoon rather than at night), his attire when he 
was arrested (i.e., Appellant still was partially dressed in 
his military uniform  rather than in sleepwear ), and his 
work schedule (i.e., Appellant was not taking the Ambien 
in the afternoon to accommodate “shift work”). 
The military judge subsequently provided the panel 
members with findings instructions . In doing so, he took 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
judicial notice that the incident occurred on a Friday. Con-
trary to Appellant’s pleas, the panel found Appellant guilty 
of wrongful use of Ambien in violation of Article 112a, 
UCMJ. However, the panel found Appellant not guilty of 
the language “and aerosol inhalants” in the reckless driv-
ing specification.
3 
After the members returned their findings, the defense 
asked the military judge to reconsider his prior R.C.M. 917 
ruling. In arguing why reconsideration was warranted, the 
defense asked the military judge to consider Appellant’s 
statements during his Care inquiry. The military judge de-
clined the defense’s invitation and denied the request for 
reconsideration. The military judge emphasized that “there 
was evidence Ambien should be taken exactly as pre-
scribed” right before bedtime, and that a user should not  
take Ambien if they cannot get a full night’s sleep. The mil-
itary judge concluded that “[the] manner in which [Appel-
lant] was driving, the time of day it was, and what [Appel-
lant] was wearing,” as well as other factors, supported the 
inference that Appellant had not taken Ambien for its pre-
scribed purpose. 
C. Appellant’s Guilty Plea Revisited 
Although the military judge denied the defense’s 
request regarding the panel’s findings , he found the 
“subject of the motion” raised “some concerns” about the 
providence of Appellant’s earlier guilty plea to reckless 
driving. Specifically, the military judge observed that 
Ambien’s FDA information sheet referenced “sleep driving” 
as a known side effect of the m edication. He further noted 
that military law recognizes “something of a defense of 
 
3 The panel also found Appellant guilty, contrary to his pleas, 
of one specification of assault consummated by a battery and one 
specification of aggravated assault with a loaded firearm—both 
committed against his wife—in violation of Article 128, UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 928 (2018). However, the panel found Appellant not 
guilty of a specification of failing to obey a lawful general regu-
lation that prohibited using an aerosol inhalant with the intent 
to alter mood or function, and two specifications of assault con-
summated by a battery. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
automatism, so if someone has sort of an involuntary 
action, [like] a seizure or an involuntary act, then there’s 
no reason for the law to criminalize that.” Considering the 
foregoing, the military judge reopened the providence 
inquiry to explore whether Appellant had been “sleep 
driving” at the time of the incident and thus was not aware 
that he was operating a vehicle. 
At the outset of  the renewed providence inquiry, the 
military judge explained to Appellant that voluntarily tak-
ing a drug is not a defense to reckless driving. The military 
judge then asked Appellant, “Why do you think that your 
control of the vehicle was voluntary if you were under the 
influence of Ambien and have no memory of the driving?”  
Appellant replied with a variety of  reasons. First, he said 
that even though he had no memory of driving, he  obvi-
ously must have taken a number of actions to get into the 
car and then to drive it.  (“I would have had to put some 
kind of shoes on, get my car keys, get in my car, start my 
car, turn music on . . . stop[] at stoplights . . . put my car in 
gear and pull[] out of the [parking] spot.” ) Second, Appel-
lant told the military judge that from listening to witness 
testimony he understood that he was driving the car “some-
what normal at some points.” Third, he said that when 
“[his] memory kick[ed] back in” it “didn’t feel like waking 
up from sleep” but felt more like a blackout from drinking 
alcohol. (“Like a slide show and there are just some slides 
missing.”) Fourth, Appellant agreed with the military 
judge that based on the complexity of his action s, he did 
not believe he was “ asleep” while driving and that he be-
lieved that his actions were voluntary. Fifth, Appellant ex-
plained that “previously [he] was aware that Ambien was 
pretty potent stuff, and I know it . . . could have effects on 
your driving, operating machinery, whatnot.”
4 Ultimately, 
Appellant agreed with the military judge that “the number 
of things [he] would have had to do and . . . their 
 
4 In response to a follow-up question from the military judge, 
Appellant explained that he learned this information “from [his] 
prescribing [nurse practitioner].” 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
complexity” led him to believe that he was not  truly 
“asleep” at the time that he was driving. 
Later, when asked again by the military judge why he 
believed he was responsible for his actions , Appellant ex-
plained that on the day of the incident his car was running 
low on fuel  and he had been  thinking about getting gas. 
Thus, Appellant said , although he did not remember the 
facts, he believed his motivation to get behind the wheel 
was to go to the gas station. Appellant also told the military 
judge that he believed he was aware of what he had been 
doing while driving, despite not remembering those ac-
tions, because he was aware  of where he was at the stop-
lights, he was aware of other vehicles honking, and he was 
able to drive back home. Appellant stated, “I believe those 
are voluntary actions.” 
Based on Appellant’s statements, the military judge af-
firmed his acceptance of the guilty plea to this offense. 
However, he once again informed Appellant  that he could 
ask to withdraw his plea of guilty at any time before the 
announcement of his sentence. Appellant did not do so.  
At the sentencing phase of the trial , the military judge 
sentenced Appellant to a bad -conduct discharge, confine-
ment for a total of two years and two months, forfeiture of 
all pay and allowances, reduction to the grade of E -1, and 
a reprimand. The convening authority took no action on the 
findings but suspended the first six months of the adjudged 
forfeitures, waived automatic forfeitures for six months, 
and directed that the total pay and allowances be paid to 
Appellant’s spouse for six months. Subsequently, the mili-
tary judge entered judgment. The United States Air Force 
Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the findings and the 
sentence. 
II. The Legal Sufficiency of Appellant’s Conviction 
for Wrongful Use of Ambien 
A. Standard of Review 
We review issues of legal sufficiency de novo. United 
States v. Harman, 68 M.J. 325, 327 (C.A.A.F. 2010). 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
B. Applicable Law 
The elements for Article 112a (wrongful use of a con-
trolled substance) are as follows: 
(a) That the accused used a controlled substance; 
and 
(b) That the use by the accused was wrongful. 
Manual for Courts- Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 
50.b.(2)(a)-(b) (2019 ed.) (MCM). The MCM defines wrong-
ful use as “without legal justification or authorization.” Id. 
para. 50.c.(5). 
A conviction is legally sufficient when “considering the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, a 
reasonable factfinder could have found all the essential el-
ements beyond a reasonable doubt.” United States v. 
Young, 64 M.J. 404, 407 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (citations omitted). Under this stand-
ard, a reviewing court must draw every reasonable infer-
ence from the evidence in favor of the prosecution. United 
States v. Barner, 56 M.J. 131, 134 (C.A.A.F. 2001) (citations 
omitted). The standard for legal sufficiency is “a very low 
threshold to sustain a conviction.” United States v. King, 78 
M.J. 218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (internal quotation marks  
omitted) (citation omitted). However, if there is no rational 
basis for the factfinder to draw an inference from the evi-
dence in favor of the prosecution, and if this results in a 
failure of proof of an essential element, this Court will set 
aside the corresponding conviction.  See United States v. 
Plant, 74 M.J. 297, 299- 300 (C.A.A.F. 2015) (setting aside 
findings of guilt for child endangerment where proof of the 
appellant’s drinking excessive amounts of alcohol while 
caring for his young child did not substantiate a reasonable 
probability that the child, who was placed in his crib during 
ordinary bedtime hours, would experience harm).  
C. Discussion 
As an initial matter, we note that contrary to Appel-
lant’s argument, our legal sufficiency review of his convic-
tion for wrongful use of Ambien is limited to the evidence 
that was presented to the trier of fact  during the  trial. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
United States v. Bethea, 22 C.M.A. 223, 225, 46 C.M.R. 223, 
225 (1973); see also  United States v. Beatty , 64 M.J. 456, 
458 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (“In a succession of early cases, we es-
tablished that the review of findings —of guilt and inno-
cence—was limited to the evidence presented at trial.”  (ci-
tations omitted)). Therefore, although we may consider all 
of the evidence that was admitted during the contested 
phase of this case ( including those  matters of which the 
military judge took judicial notice), in the course of decid-
ing whether Appellant’s conviction for wrongful use of Am-
bien is legally sufficient, we may not reach beyond that ev-
idence and look at the admissions or statements made by 
Appellant during his guilty plea Care inquiry. 
We also acknowledge at the outset that the standard of 
review to be applied for legal sufficiency is a decidedly fa-
vorable one for the government. As noted above, this Court 
is required to view not only the evidence, but also all  the 
reasonable inferences that can be drawn from that evi-
dence, in the light most favorable to the prosecution. 
Young, 64 M.J. at 407; Barner, 56 M.J. at 134.  Therefore, 
although the Government in the instant case can point to 
no direct evidence that Appellant engaged in the wrongf ul 
use of Ambien , it properly urges this Court to consider 
what it characterizes as “four key reasonable inferences” 
and then to affirm Appellant’s conviction for wrongful use 
of Ambien. We will review each of these proffered “reason-
able inferences” directly below. 
First, the Government argues that when we juxtapose 
(a) the trial evidence demonstrating that Appellant knew 
that Ambien should only be taken shortly before going to 
bed when the user can sleep solidly for seven to eight hours, 
with (b) the trial evidence demonstrating that Appellant 
took Ambien before 6:00 p.m. on the day of the incident,  
this Court should infer that Appellant was not using this 
sleep medication for its proper purpose but rather was us-
ing it “wrongfully.” However, we are not convinced of the 
reasonableness of this inference. In essence, the Govern-
ment is asking this Court to conclude that Appellant’s con-
viction for wrongful use of Ambien is legally sufficient 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
because he took his prescribed medication a few hours be-
fore the Government feels he should have taken it. This is 
a thin reed upon which to base a “reasonable” inference.5  
Second, the Government argues that because the “Am-
bien prescription label”6 and a brown paper bag were ob-
served in Appellant’s car two months after the incident , 
Appellant must have used the Ambien while still in his car 
rather than at home where he could be prepared to go to 
sleep. Again, we are not convinced of the reasonableness of 
this inference. We first note that there is no evidence in the 
record that the prescription bottle was found in Appellant’s 
vehicle. And s econd, as his counsel persuasively argues, 
there is no reason to conclude that Appellant was required 
to have the drug literature and brown paper bag with him 
in order for him to lawfully use the prescribed medication.
7 
Third, the Government argues that because Appellant 
was still partially in his duty uniform at the time of the 
police encounter, he must have taken the prescription be-
fore getting home and properly preparing for sleep. How-
ever, there is no evidence in the record that Appellant’s 
blouse—which the Government concedes Appellant was 
not wearing—was anywhere in his vehicle at the time of 
 
5 This is particularly so in light of the fact that Appellant 
could have specifically chosen to take the Ambien early on a 
weekend with the express hope that he would be able to go to 
bed and have uninterrupted sleep for more than  seven-to-eight 
hours. 
6 What the Government describes as the “prescription label” 
actually appears to be the paperwork that routinely accompa-
nies any prescription. 
7 Further, the reasonableness of this inference is mitigated 
by the fact that Appellant could have merely opened and dis-
carded the bag and the drug literature in his car while in the 
process of ensuring that the pharmacy had given him the correct 
prescription, and that he actually took the medication later in 
his apartment. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
the police encounter , thereby undermining the Govern-
ment’s factual predicate.8 
And fourth, the Government argues that because Ap-
pellant did not need to fall asleep in the late afternoon or 
early evening in order to get up in time to work a night 
shift, this shows that he must have been misusing the Am-
bien when he took it during that time frame. However, just 
as with the first “key reasonable inference,” the Govern-
ment’s reliance on this timing is misplaced. A person who 
has been suffering from insomnia may certainly choose to 
properly take Ambien in the late afternoon or early evening 
on a Friday in order to get as much sleep as he or she pos-
sibly can during the weekend, completely unconnected to 
any need to get up to work a night shift. 
In light of the se points, we are compelled to conclude 
that what the Government cites as “four key reasonable in-
ferences” would be better characterized as understanda-
ble—but not compelling —suspicions, speculations, and 
suppositions. And those types of considerations, standing 
alone, are not enough to sustain a conviction even  though 
this Court remains fully committed to the “very low thresh-
old” standard applicable during a legal sufficiency review. 
King, 78 M.J. at 221 (citation omitted).  
This position is consistent with the views expressed by 
some federal circuit courts as laid out below. 
“[W]e do not give the government the benefit of every  
potential inference but rather, only those inferences rea-
sonably and logically flowing from the other evidence ad-
duced at trial.” United States v. Santistevan , 39 F.3d 250, 
258 (10th Cir. 1994). An inference is unreasonable if it re-
quires the jury “to engage in a degree of speculation and 
 
8 Further, the Government’s position is counterbalanced by 
the reasonable inference that a person who is taking Ambien for 
the first time might not immediately and fully disrobe but rather 
would get comfortable and relax for a while in his apartment to 
see how quickly and effectively the medication really works be-
fore going through the whole process—in the late afternoon —of 
putting on some form of sleepwear. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
conjecture that renders its findings a guess or mere possi-
bility.” United States v. Jones, 44 F.3d 860, 865 (10th Cir. 
1995) (internal quotation marks omitted)  (citation omit-
ted). After all, “[i]nferences must stop at some point.” 
United States v. Crain, 33 F.3d 480, 487 (5th Cir. 1994). To 
this end, at “some point along a rational continuum, infer-
ences may become so attenuated from underlying evidence 
as to cast doubt on the trier of fact’s ultimate conclusion.” 
United States v. Summers, 414 F.3d 1287, 129 5 (10th Cir. 
2005); Sunward Corp. v. Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. , 811 F.2d 
511, 521 (10th Cir. 1987). 
In applying these legal principles to the facts in this 
case—with special emphasis on the fact  that Appellant’s 
medical provider prescribed this medication for Appellant 
to take—we conclude that the inferences the Government 
cites in support of a legal sufficiency determination are 
overly speculative and too attenuated from the evidence in 
the record. Therefore, we hold  that Appellant’s conviction 
for wrongful use of Ambien is legally insufficient.   
III. The Providence of Appellant’s Guilty 
Plea to Reckless Driving 
A. Standard of Review 
We review a military judge’s decision to accept a guilty 
plea for abuse of discretion. United States v. Forbes, 78 M.J. 
279, 281 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (citation omitted). In reviewing 
the providence of a plea, a military judge abuses his or her 
discretion only where there is a substantial basis in law or 
fact for questioning the guilty plea. United States v. Inabi-
nette, 66 M.J. 320, 322 (C.A.A.F. 2008). We “giv[e] broad 
discretion to military judges in accepting [guilty] pleas.” 
United States v. Moratalla, 82 M.J. 1, 4 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (al-
terations in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). However, “the military judge’s determi-
nations of questions of law arising during or after the plea 
inquiry are reviewed de novo.” Inabinette, 66 M.J. at 321. 
An appellant “bears the burden of establishing that the 
military judge abused his discretion, i.e., that the record 
shows a substantial basis in law or fact to question the 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
15 
 
plea.” United States v. Phillips, 74 M.J. 20, 21-22 (C.A.A.F. 
2015) (citation omitted). 
B. Applicable Law 
The elements for Article 113 (reckless operation of a ve-
hicle) as relevant to this case are as follows: 
(1) That the accused was operating or in physical 
control of a vehicle . . . ; and 
(2) That while operating or in physical control of a 
vehicle . . . the accused—  
      (a) did so in a wanton or reckless manner. 
MCM pt. IV, para. 51.b. (1)-(2) (2019 ed.). With regard to  
this offense, the MCM defines “reckless” as “a culpable dis-
regard of foreseeable consequences to others from the act 
or omission involved.” Id. para. 51.c.(7). 
A providence inquiry into a guilty plea must establish 
that the accused himself believes he is guilty and “the fac-
tual circumstances as revealed by the accused himself ob-
jectively support th at plea.” United States v. Higgins, 40 
M.J. 67, 68 (C.M.A. 1994) ( internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (citation omitted). In reviewing the providence inquiry 
for a guilty plea, this Court considers an appellant’s collo-
quy with the military judge, as well as any inferences that 
may be reasonably drawn from it. United States v. Carr, 65 
M.J. 39, 41 (C.A.A.F. 2007). An appellant’s inability to re-
call specific facts underlying his or her offense does not ren-
der the guilty plea improvident. United States v. Jones, 69 
M.J. 294, 299 (C.A.A.F. 2011); United States v. Moglia, 3 
M.J. 216, 218 (C.M.A. 1977) . Although “personal aware-
ness is not a prerequisite for a plea of guilty . . . an inquiry 
must be made to ascertain if an accused is convinced of his 
own guilt. Such a conviction . . . may be predicated on an 
accused’s assessment of the [g]overnment’s evidence 
against him.” Moglia, 3 M.J. at 218. 
Article 45(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 845(a) (2018), requires 
a guilty plea to be rejected when inconsistent matters arise 
that cannot be resolved.  “[I]nconsistencies and apparent 
defenses must be resolved by the military judge or the 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
16 
 
guilty plea[] must be rejected.” United States v. Pinero, 60 
M.J. 31, 34 (C.A.A.F. 2004) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (citation omitted).  The “possible defense” standard is 
the threshold for a military judge to inquire into potential 
affirmative defenses during a plea colloquy. United States 
v. Hayes, 70 M.J. 454, 458 (C.A.A.F. 2012). This standard 
“is a lower threshold than a prima facie showing because it 
is intended as a trigger to prompt further inquiry pursuant 
to Article 45, UCMJ,” and Care. Id. Moreover, the “possible 
defense” standard requires that “the acceptance of a guilty 
plea be accompanied by certain safeguards to [e]nsure the 
providence of the plea, including the delineation of the ele-
ments of the offense charged and admission of factual guilt 
on the record” are in line with Article 45. Id. (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) (citation omitted). 
Military law recognizes the affirmative defense of au-
tomatism, which is “[a]ction or conduct occurring without 
will, purpose, or reasoned intention,” “behavior carried out 
in a state of unconsciousness or mental disassociation with-
out full awareness,” and “[t]he physical and mental state of 
a person, who though capable of action, is not conscious of 
his or her actions.” United States v. Torres, 74 M.J.  154, 
156 n.3 (C.A.A.F. 2015) (alterations in original) ( internal 
quotation marks omitted) (c itation omitte d). An accused 
“cannot be held criminally liable in a case where the actus 
reus is absent because the accused did not act voluntarily, 
or where the mens rea is absent because the accused did 
not possess the necessary state of mind when he committed 
the involuntary act.” Id. at 157. 
In Torres, we observed that previously, “[n]either the 
UCMJ nor this Court’s precedent [had] provided definitive 
guidance regarding whether automatism should be viewed 
as negating the mens rea or the actus reus of a charged 
offense.” Id. Although in Torres we recognized that our  
“predecessor [court] indicated in dicta that the mens rea 
approach may be the most appropriate,” Torres conclu-
sively resolved the issue when it held, “[i]n cases where the 
issue of automatism has been reasonably raised by the ev-
idence, a militar y judge should instruct the panel that 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
17 
 
automatism may serve to negate the actus reus of a crimi-
nal offense.” Id. at 157-58.  
And finally, “ [i]n determining the providence of [an] 
appellant’s pleas, it is uncontroverted that an appellate 
court must consider the entire record in a  case.” United 
States v. Johnson, 42 M.J.  443, 445 (C.A.A.F. 1995)  
(citations omitted). 
C. Discussion 
In resolving this issue, we do not discount  Appellant’s 
argument that his reckless driving was the product of au-
tomatism. As discussed above, the FDA officially acknowl-
edges that “sleep-driving” is a potential side effect of Am-
bien. However, in the course of reviewing the providence of 
Appellant’s guilty plea, we place great emphasis on the fact 
that when the military judge reopened the Care inquiry for 
Appellant’s guilty plea to this offense, he squarely ad-
dressed the issue of automatism , and Appellant aff irma-
tively declined to avail himself of this defense.  
Specifically, the military judge informed Appellant that 
military law recognizes the defense of automatism.  Con-
sistent with our holding in Torres, the military judge also 
explained to Appellant that the defense of automatism per-
tains to the actus reus element of the offense (rather than 
to the mens rea element). See 74 M.J. at 157- 58. And sig-
nificantly, the military judge took a break in the proceed-
ings to give Appellant the opportunity to discuss this issue 
with his defense counsel. Then, when the court -martial 
proceedings resumed, the military judge further explored  
the defense of automatism to see if Appellant wished to in-
voke it—and yet Appellant decided not to do so. To be sure, 
Appellant’s responses to questions posed by the military 
judge were not a model of clarity, but they also were not 
conclusory in nature or merely clipped responses to leading 
questions. Rather, Appellant provided moderately well -
reasoned responses to the military judge’s renewed ques-
tions, and these  responses drew from the observations of 
neutral observers, see Moglia, 3 M.J. at 218, his own (albeit 
disjointed and fragmentary) memories of the event, and his 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
18 
 
prior knowledge that Ambien could impair one’s ability to 
safely drive a vehicle. 
And so, when it comes to the actus reus of the charged 
offense, Appellant stated that (a) he was convinced of his 
own guilt, and (b) he had reached this conclusion based —
in large part —on the strength of the Government’s evi-
dence against him. In regard to this second point, this basis 
for pleading guilty is admittedly unusual in the military 
justice system. Further it has a bit of a nolo contendere
9 air 
to it , and m ilitary law does  not permit such pleas. See 
United States v. Forester, 48 M.J. 1, 3 n.2 (C.A.A.F. 1998) 
(“This is contrary to what can be done in the civilian federal 
courts, where a defendant may plead no contest, or nolo 
contendere, to an offense.”). However, our case law demon-
strates that such guilty pleas where an accused primarily 
relies on the strength of the evidence against him rather 
than on his own independent recollections of his actions are 
permissible. In Jones, this Court held: “If an accused is per-
sonally convinced of his guilt based upon an assessment of 
the government’s evidence, his inability to recall the spe-
cific facts underlying his offense without assistance does 
not preclude his guilty plea from being provident.” 69 M.J. 
at 299. 
Turning to the issue of the mens rea of the offense, 
things become less clear. However, the military judge cor-
rectly defined “recklessness” and Appellant said he under-
stood that definition. The military judge then engaged in a 
colloquy with him about why he believed his conduct was 
“reckless.” To be sure, a review of the record demonstrates 
that Appellant’s responses were not neatly tailored to the 
mens rea issue. He talked more about his actions than 
what was going through his mind at the time  of those ac-
tions. However, this Court is required to draw reasonable 
inferences in such instances. See Carr, 65 M.J. at 41. And 
 
9 “Nolo contendere” or “no contest” means “[a] criminal de-
fendant’s plea that, while not admitting guilt, the defendant will 
not dispute the charge .” No Contest , Black’s Law Dictionary, 
(12th ed. 2024).  
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
 
19 
 
a reasonable inference drawn from the facts elicited during 
the Care inquiry was that Appellant knew that taking Am-
bien would impair his ability to safely drive his car, and 
that he recognized, and culpably disregarded, the foresee-
able consequences to others (i.e., putting them at risk of 
being physically harmed) when he drove his car in such a 
dangerous manner after taking the medication. 
In light of the foregoing , we conclude that the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion when he accepted Appel-
lant’s guilty pleas at issue. See Inabinette, 66 M.J. at 322. 
IV. Decision 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is reversed as to Specification 2 of 
Charge II (wrongful use of zolpidem/Ambien) and sentence. 
The finding of guilty with respect to this specification is set 
aside, and Specification 2 of Charge II is dismissed. We af-
firm the lower court with respect to all other findings. The 
record of trial is returned to the Judge Advocate General of 
the Air Force for remand to the Court of Criminal Appeals 
for reassessment of the sentence or for a rehearing on the 
sentence, if necessary. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Judge JOHNSON concurring in part and dissenting in 
part. 
I join Part II of the Court’s opinion in concluding Appel-
lant’s conviction for wrongful use of Ambien was legally in-
sufficient. I part ways with the Court over its resolution of 
the providency of Appellant’s guilty plea to reckless driv-
ing. Because I conclude the record does not support an in-
ference Appellant acted with the requisite mens rea, I re-
spectfully dissent from Part III of the Court’s opinion.  
The crux of my disagreement turns on the Court’s treat-
ment of Appellant’s mens rea. The Court writes:  
And a reasonable inference drawn from the facts 
elicited during the Care inquiry was that 
Appellant knew that taking Ambien would impair 
his ability to safely drive his car, and that he 
recognized, and culpably disregarded, the 
foreseeable consequences to others (i.e., putting 
them at risk of being physically harmed) when he 
drove his car in such a dangerous manner after 
taking the medication. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, __ M.J. __ ( 18-19) 
(C.A.A.F. 2025). As the majority correctly notes, consuming 
a lawfully prescribed medication is not a defense if the user 
culpably disregards the foreseeable consequences to others. 
But in my view, we cannot reasonably infer that Appellant 
culpably disregarded the risk to others by using lawfully 
prescribed medication, at the correct dosage, immediately 
prior to sleeping, as it was intended.  
We review a military judge’s acceptance of a plea for 
abuse of discretion . United States v. Inabinette, 66 M.J. 
320, 322 (C.A.A.F. 2008).  A plea that departs from the 
requirements of Article 45(a), UCMJ, is harmless “if the 
variance does not materially prejudice the substantial 
rights of the accused.” Article 45(c), UCMJ , 10 U.S.C. 
§ 845(c) (2018).  
In assessing whether the military judge abused his dis-
cretion in accepting a plea, “[i]t is not enough to elicit legal 
conclusions. The military judge must elicit facts to support 
the plea of guilty.” United States v. Jordan , 57 M.J. 236, 
238 (C.A.A.F. 2002) . “[A]n accused cannot be held crimi-
nally liable in a case where . . . mens rea is absent because 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Judge JOHNSON, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
 
2 
 
the accused did not possess the necessary state of mind.” 
United States v. Torres, 74 M.J. 154, 157 (C.A.A.F. 2015). 
A conviction under Article 113, UCMJ, requires a mens rea 
of recklessness. Manual for Courts- Martial, United States 
pt. IV, para. 51.b.(2) (a). “Recklessness is not determined 
solely by . . . proof alone of excessive speed or erratic oper-
ation,” but by considering “ all the circumstances. ” Id. at 
para. 51.c.(7). It requires “a culpable disregard of foreseea-
ble consequences to others.” Id. (emphasis added). 
Concerning Appellant’s mens rea, although I agree with 
the Court “things become less clear,” Navarro Aguirre, __ 
M.J. at __ (1 8), in my view, the circumstances do not sug-
gest a culpable disregard of  foreseeable consequences  to 
others. Appellant was prescribed Ambien on September 
30th, the day before the events in question. There is no ev-
idence he had ever taken Ambien before
1 or had any per-
sonal knowledge of how it would affect him. The prescrib-
ing nurse practitioner testified that people’s reactions to 
Ambien use differ, so people “have to govern [their] re-
sponse based on [their] own knowledge after taking [it] at 
least once or a few times to know” how it affects them. She 
never testified to informing Appellant of the possibility of 
sleep driving as a side effect.  Nor is there evidence in the 
record to support that Appellant was aware that “complex 
sleep behaviors, including . . . sleep-driving,” was a known 
side effect, or that he may be susceptible to it.  
The next day, Appellant left work and arrived at his 
apartment around 2:30 p.m. and decided to sleep. After all, 
he “hadn’t slept in almost two days,” so, he took “the pre-
scribed dose of one pill.” Before his memory faded, he re-
called lying in bed with his blouse and shoes  off. “After a 
little while, [he] fell asleep in bed in [his] apartment.” 
Appellant admitted he “was aware that Ambien was 
pretty potent stuff, and [he knew] it [meant] sleeping could 
have effects on your driving, operating machinery and 
whatnot.” However, knowing that a medication could cause 
 
1 That Appellant had not slept in two days supports the 
inference that he did not take any Ambien on the day he picked 
up his prescription.  
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Judge JOHNSON, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
 
3 
 
drowsiness is different from knowing that a known side ef-
fect of the medication  is that it can cause sleep driving .2 
Moreover, according to his admissions, Appellant did not 
take the Ambien until he got home. He did not take it while 
expecting to get behind the wheel. And he did not take it 
thinking he would go for a drive.  In other words, he never 
describes his mental state as:  
[c]haracterized by the creation of a substantial 
and unjustifiable risk of harm to others and by a 
conscious (and sometimes deliberate) disregard 
for or indifference to that risk; heedless; rash. 
Reckless conduct is more than mere negligence: it 
is a gross deviation from what a reasonable person 
would do.  
Reckless, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). In crimi-
nal trials, recklessness contains both an objective and sub-
jective component. See Safeco Ins. Co. of Am. v. Burr, 551 
U.S. 47, 68 n.18 (2007). The creation of a substantial and 
unjustifiable risk is measured against an objective stand-
ard, id. at 68, while the conscious disregard reflects the 
need for “subjective knowledge on the part of the offender.” 
Id. at 68 n.18. While the Court speaks to the objective com-
ponent—the nature of his driving —it does not address 
whether Appellant had the subjective understanding that 
he was culpably disregarding this risk.  
Instead, the record reflects a man using his lawfully  
prescribed medication, at the correct  dosage, immediately 
prior to sleeping, as it was intended. This conclusion is con-
sistent with the C ourt’s conclusion that the Appellant did 
not wrongfully use his prescription. In my opinion, neither 
Appellant’s words nor actions demonstrate a culpable dis-
regard for the foreseeable consequences. 
The United States Court of Appeals for the Third Cir-
cuit came to a similar  conclusion in Government of Virgin 
 
2 I agree with the Court’s decision that Appellant’s actus reus 
was appropriately resolved by the military judge’s questions. 
Although Appellant’s automatism defense addresses the actus 
reus of a crime, Torres, 74 M.J. at 157-58, Appellant still needed 
to show he had the reckless mens rea for his plea to be provident. 
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Judge JOHNSON, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
 
4 
 
Islands v. Smit h, concerning an appellant  who was alleg-
edly unconscious as the result of an epileptic seizure:  
It has been held that  the operator of an automo-
bile who is suddenly stricken by an illness which 
he had no reason to anticipate but which renders 
it impossible for him to control the car is not 
chargeable with negligence. On the other hand it 
has also been held that an operator of a motor ve-
hicle, unconscious from illness at the time of the 
accident, may nonetheless be found guilty of crim-
inal negligence in having undertaken to drive the 
vehicle if he knew at the time that he might black 
out or lose consciousness while doing so. 
278 F.2d 169, 174- 75 (3d Cir. 1960)  (listing cases) (cited 
with approval in Torres, 74 M.J. at 157) . This case resem-
bles the former situation , rather than the latter. Nothing 
in the record suggests Appellant knew or disregarded the 
chance he would be subject to a rare side effect of Ambien. 
 Of course, Appellant did admit his car “was seen reck-
lessly weaving and blocking traffic.” He also agreed that he 
drove his vehicle voluntarily. But as the Court correctly de-
scribes, these solitary statements fail to touch on his men-
tal state.  Considering his driving “under all the circum-
stances” paints the picture of a man wanting to sleep, going 
to bed, and intending to sleep.  MCM pt. IV, para. 51.c.(7). 
These statements should also be viewed in light of the mil-
itary judge’s instructions. Upon reopening the guilty plea, 
the military judge gave Appellant the voluntary intoxica-
tion instruction, saying “tak[ing] a drug voluntarily is not 
a defense.”
3 Appellant, intending to sleep, did take Ambien 
voluntarily; so after being told that this could not be a 
 
3 Appellant did not raise instructional error on appeal, but 
his admissions raise the defense of involuntary intoxication. 
“[I]ntoxication is involuntary when an accused is unaware of the 
effect of a drug or substance on  him.” United States v. 
MacDonald, 73 M.J. 426, 437- 48 (C.A.A.F. 2014). “Among the 
circumstances of intoxication  said to be involuntary is the 
circumstance in which, as a result of a genuine mistake as to the 
nature or character of the liquor or drug, the drunkenness has 
resulted from taking something not known to be capable of 
producing such a result.” United States v. Ward , 14 M.J. 950, 
953 (A.C.M.R. 1982).  
United States v. Navarro Aguirre, No. 24-0146/AF 
Judge JOHNSON, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
 
5 
 
defense to his conduct, Appellant naturally agreed with the 
military judge.  
Appellant’s admissions fail to establish his actions were 
a result of a culpable disregard of any  consequences. In 
light of this, his mental state does  not rise to the reckless 
mens rea. Absent mens rea, I would hold Appellant was 
materially prejudiced by the military judge’s acceptance of 
his guilty plea and his plea should be held improvident.  