This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES  
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Dennis A. GEORGE Jr., Senior Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0206 
Crim. App. No. 40397 
 
Argued December 10, 2024—Decided July 21, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Michael A. Schrama  
 
For Appellant: Major Samantha P. Golseth (argued); 
Megan P. Marinos, Esq. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Tyler L. Washburn  (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
Jenny A. Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined.  
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court -martial composed of officer s and en-
listed members convicted Appellant, contrary to his pleas, 
of one specification of attempted sexual assault without 
consent, in violation of Article 80, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, 10 U.S.C. § 880  (2018). The military judge sen-
tenced Appellant to a dishonorable discharge, five months 
of confinement, reduction to E -1, and a reprimand.  The 
convening authority took no action on the finding s, disap-
proved the reprimand, and upheld the rest of the sentence.  
On appeal, the United States Air Force Court of Criminal 
Appeals (AFCCA) affirmed the findings and sentence. The 
first granted issue requires us to decide whether “Appel-
lant’s conviction for attempted sexual assault was legally 
insufficient because the Government did not prove the al-
leged overt act.”
1 We hold that the reading of the specifica-
tion adopted by the parties at trial is determinative, and, 
as such, Appellant’s conviction was legally sufficient.  We 
therefore affirm the decision of the AFCCA . United States 
v. George, No. ACM 40397, 2024 CCA LEXIS 224,  at *15, 
2024 WL 2874133, at *6 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. June 7, 2024) 
(unpublished). 
 
1 The following additional issues were granted by this Court: 
II. Whether the government can prove that 18 
U.S.C. § 922 is constitutional as applied to 
Appellant when he was convicted of a nonviolent 
offense. 
III. Whether the United States Court of A ppeals 
for the A rmed Forces has jurisdiction to direct 
modification of the 18 U.S.C. § 922 prohibition 
noted on the staff judge advocate’s indorsement to 
the entry of judgment. 
United States v. George , 85 M.J. 133 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review).  In accordance with this Court’s decision in 
United States v. Johnson , __ M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025) , we find 
that because this Court lacks the authority to act on the § 922 
indication in the entry of judgment, Appellant’s constitutional 
challenge to 18 U.S.C. § 922 is moot. 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
I. Background 
Appellant and WMB were coworkers stationed together 
at Joint Base Langley -Eustis, Virginia. On the evening of 
July 3, 2021, WMB, Appellant, and other coworkers —BL, 
LC, and QG—went to a local bar. Later in the evening, Ap-
pellant stood in front of WMB and asked if she was trying 
to give him “head.” WMB testified that she understood the 
term “head” to mean oral sex. WMB tried to defuse this sit-
uation by laughing off Appellant’s  advances and replied 
“no.” At that time, WMB was sitting down in a booth, and 
Appellant was standing in front of her with his crotch at 
her eye level. At trial, WMB testified that, at that time, she 
was not sure if Appellant was joking when he asked her for 
“head.” She stated she did not want to escalate the situa-
tion by being aggressive toward Appellant, which caused 
her to discuss the situation with QG, and WMB suggested 
they leave because Appellant was “getting kind of drunk.”  
In the car , WMB sat in the middle back  seat with Ap-
pellant to her left and QG to her right. Appellant put his 
right arm around WMB and stated he really wanted her to 
give him “head.” He whispered in her ear, “I am being dead 
ass. I really want head.” WMB testified that she took this 
to mean that Appellant was serious. WMB again told Ap-
pellant, “no.” Appellant once again told WMB that she 
should give him “head,” and when she continued to refuse, 
Appellant grabbed the back of WMB’s neck and forced her 
head to wards his crotch. WMB resisted and was able to 
push herself away. Appellant then grabbed her again, and 
more forcefully pushed her toward his crotch. This time her 
cheek touched what WMB believed to be Appellant’s crotch 
because she could feel his zipper. WMB then used her hand 
to alert QG, who was leaning over the front seat, to the sit-
uation. QG heard WMB in a “panicked” state tell Appellant 
to “get the fuck off” her. That was when QG noticed what 
was going on . QG saw Appellant’s hand on the back of 
WMB’s head and that Appellant was trying to force WMB’s 
head down onto his lap, and he intervened. Due to the com-
motion in the back seat, the driver, BL, stopped the car. 
When Appellant exited the vehicle, WMB and LC noticed 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
that Appellant’s pants were unzipped, and his underwear 
was visible.   
Appellant was charged with the following: 
SENIOR AIRMAN DENNIS A. GEORGE, . . . did, 
at or near Newport News, Virginia . . . attempt to 
commit a sexual act upon Senior Airman [WMB] 
by penetrating her mouth with his penis without 
her consent. 
The military judge provided the following instruction 
with regard to the alleged offense: 
Charge I, Attempt, Sexual Assault without Con-
sent. That, at or near Newport News, Virginia, on 
or about 4 July 2021, [Appellant] did a certain 
overt act, that is: attempt to commit a sexual act 
upon [WMB] by penetrating her mouth with his 
penis without her consent; that the act was done 
with specific intent to commit the offense of sexual 
assault without consent; That the act amounted to 
more than mere preparation, that is, it was sub-
stantial, excuse me, it was a substantial step and 
a direct movement toward the commission of the 
intended offense of sexual assault without con-
sent, that is, the act apparently would have re-
sulted in the actual commission of the offense of 
sexual assault without consent except for [WMB’s] 
physical and or verbal protestation, wh ich pre-
vented completion of the offense. 
The military judge instructed on preparation as follows: 
Preparation consists of devising or arranging the 
means or measures necessary for the commission 
of the attempted offense. To find the accused 
guilty of this offense, you must find beyond a rea-
sonable doubt that [Appellant] went beyond pre-
paratory steps, and his act amounted to a sub-
stantial step and a direct movement toward the 
commission of the intended offense. A substantial 
step is one that is strongly corroborative of the ac-
cused’s criminal intent and is indicative of his re-
solve to commit the offense. 
Prior to providing findings instructions to the members, 
the military judge consulted with counsel  from both sides 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
and asked that they “specifically affirm that the instruc-
tions are correct statement[s] of the law to the best of [the 
parties’] understanding.” Counsel for each side responded 
in the affirmative. The military judge specifically asked if 
there were any objections to the instructions, to which trial 
counsel and trial defense counsel answered, “no.” The mil-
itary judge provided the elements of the underlying at-
tempted offense as follows: 
That at or near Newport News, Virginia, on or 
about 4 July 2021, [Appellant] committed a sexual 
act upon [WMB], by penetrating her mouth with 
his penis; and that [Appellant] did so without the 
consent of WMB. 
The definitions of the attempted offense are:  
Sexual act means the penetration, however slight, 
of the penis into the vulva or anus or mouth. 
Consent means a freely given agreement to the 
conduct at issue by a competent person. An ex-
pression of lack of consent through words or con-
duct means there is no consent. 
Trial counsel argued during closing argument on find-
ings that two specific overt acts occurred: (1) the act of hold-
ing WMB’s head down toward his lap;  and (2) the act of 
undoing his pants prior to holding WMB’s head down to-
ward his crotch. Defense counsel failed to  object to trial 
counsel’s assertion that these acts could satisfy the overt 
act requirement.   
 On appeal, Appellant, for the first time, argued that the 
completed offense language in the specification constituted 
the overt act the Government was required to prove. The 
AFCCA summarized Appellant’s argument, and its conclu-
sion, as follows:  
Specifically, Appellant argues that the high-
lighted language denotes the overt act element, 
meaning the Government was required to prove 
that Appellant actually penetrated WMB’s mouth 
with his penis. We disagree and find that the lan-
guage in the specification was designed to, and did 
in fact, place Appellant on notice of the nature of 
the underlying predicate offense—that he 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
attempted to sexually assault WMB without her 
consent. 
George, 2024 CCA LEXIS 224, at * 14, WL 2874133, at * 5 
(footnote omitted). 
II. Discussion 
Appellant has framed this case as an issue of legal suf-
ficiency. However, rather than a claim of insufficiency of 
the evidence, the real issue appears to be a dispute between 
Appellant on appeal and the parties at trial as to how to 
interpret the wording of the specification  as drafted, and 
whether Appellant was provided the requisite notice to de-
fend against the allegation. We review issues of legal suffi-
ciency de novo . United States v. Harrington , 83 M.J. 408, 
414 (C.A.A.F. 2023) . The test for legal sufficiency is 
whether, “viewing the evidence in the light most favorable 
to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have 
found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reason-
able doubt.” United States v. Robinson, 77 M.J. 294, 297-98 
(C.A.A.F. 2018). The legal sufficiency assessment “draw[s] 
every reasonable inference from the evidence of record in 
favor of the prosecution.” Id. at 298 (alteration in original) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States 
v. P lant, 74 M.J. 297, 301 (C.A.A.F. 2015)). Thus, “ [t]he 
standard for legal sufficiency involves a very low threshold 
to sustain a conviction.” United States v. King, 78 M.J. 218, 
221 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (alteration in original) (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (citation omitted). 
A specification is sufficient if it fairly informs an ac-
cused of the offense he must defend against and enables 
the accused to “plead an acquittal or conviction in bar of 
future prosecutions for the same offense.” United States v. 
Norwood, 71 M.J. 204, 206 (C.A.A.F. 2012) (quoting Ham-
ling v. United States, 418 U.S. 87, 117 (1974)). “A specifica-
tion is sufficient if it alleges every element of the charged 
offense expressly or by necessary implication . . . .” Rule for 
Courts-Martial 307(c)(3) (2019 ed.).  
Appellant’s reading of the specification require s us to 
believe that the Government charged an attempted sexual 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
assault and pleaded the complete offense as the overt act. 
It is implausible to think that the Government would have 
charged an attempt in lieu of the completed offense if the 
attempt required them to prove the completed offense.  
“Both [the Fifth and Sixth] amendments ensure the 
right of an accused to receive fair notice of what [they are] 
being charged with.” United States v. Girouard, 70 M.J. 5, 
10 (C.A.A.F. 2011). Because there was no objection at trial, 
the scope of our review is limited to whether there was 
plain error.  See United States v. Warner , 73 M.J. 1, 3 
(C.A.A.F. 2013) (reviewing defects in charges —such as 
claims of lack of fair notice—for plain error “[w]hen not ob-
jected to at trial”). Under plain error review, Appellant has 
the burden of demonstrating that: “(1) there was error; (2) 
the error was plain or obvious; and (3) the error materially 
prejudiced a substantial right of [Appell ant].” United 
States v. Rocha, 84 M.J. 346, 349 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) ( quoting United States v. Wil-
kins, 71 M.J. 410, 412 (C.A.A.F. 2012)). “[A]n error is ‘plain’ 
when it is ‘obvious’ or ‘clear under current law.’ ” Warner, 
73 M.J. at 4 (quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 
734 (1993)). 
First, we must address whether there was any error at 
all. Here, we are presented with a specification that  may 
have multiple interpretations. In such a case, where there 
is no objection to the wording of the specification and no 
claim of a lack of notice at trial, we will adopt the reading 
of the charge and specification that  it appears the parties 
at trial adopted if that interpretation is reasonable.
2 It ap-
pears that both parties at trial reasonably understood that 
the challenged language did not describe an expressly al-
leged overt act but instead served to provide proper notice 
of the predicate offense. 
 
2 While this is a new approach, it is not dissimilar from how 
this Court has addressed ambiguities in the pretrial agreement 
context. See United States v. Acevedo , 50 M.J. 169, 172 -74 
(C.A.A.F. 1999) (holding that the actions of the participants at 
trial can resolve ambiguous terms in pretrial agreements).  
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
At trial, defense counsel did not move for a bill of par-
ticulars, made no objection based on a lack of notice as to 
what to defend against, and did not object to the military 
judge’s instructions to the members regarding the specifi-
cation. Finally, Appellant has made no claim of ineffective 
assistance on the part of his trial defense counsel for not 
doing so.
3 Appellant’s counsel never objected to the mili-
tary judge’s instruction to the members that “by penetrat-
ing” was part of the predicate offense. His trial defense 
counsel spent much of his  closing argument arguing that 
the two overt acts the Government ultimately proved—the 
act of holding WMB’s head down toward his lap and the act 
of undoing his pants prior to holding WMB’s head down to-
ward his crotch—did not occur.  
All of this indicates that the parties at trial understood 
that the challenged language did not describe an expressly 
alleged overt act, but instead served to provide proper no-
tice of the predicate offense.  To be clear, the specification 
could have been drafted more clearly; however, it is not so 
poorly drafted that there is no conceivable interpretation 
that renders the charge valid, nor does it appear any of the 
parties viewed it as invalid at the trial. Here, t here is no 
error, plain or otherwise.  
Having established Appellant had sufficient notice, the 
Court can now answer Appellant’s legal sufficiency claim  
using the reading of the charge that was adopted at trial. 
In this case, the Government argued that the evidence es-
tablished both that Appellant undid his pants  and forced 
WMB’s head down toward his lap. Appellant does not dis-
pute that these were proven at trial. And either of these 
actions provide the overt act necessary to prove a charge of 
attempted sexual assault. Thus, viewing this evidence in a 
 
3 We might speculate whether Appellant, a lay person, could 
have conceivably expressed his confusion to his counsel regard-
ing his reading of the specification. However, in the absence of a 
claim of ineffective assistance, we must presume that if there 
were any such concerns, they were allayed by counsel and that 
Appellant was satisfied with the advice of his counsel. 
United States v. George, No. 24-0206/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
light most favorable to the prosecution, Appellant’s convic-
tion was legally sufficient. 
III. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 