This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Thomas M. SAUL, Staff Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0098 
Crim. App. No. 40341 
 
Argued October 22, 2024—Decided July 21, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Christopher D. James  
 
For Appellant: Captain Michael J. Bruzik  (argued); 
Major Spencer R. Nelson  (on brief);  Megan P . Ma-
rinos, Esq. 
 
For Appellee: Major Vanessa Bairos (argued); Colo-
nel Matthew D. Talcott, Lieutenant Colonel Jenny A. 
Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge HARDY, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge SPARKS filed a sep-
arate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A military judge  sitting as a general court -martial 
found Appellant guilty, consistent with his pleas, of  one 
specification of  willfully disobeying a superior commis-
sioned officer and one specification of willfully and wrong-
fully destroying nonmilitary property in violation of Arti-
cles 90 and 109, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 
10 U.S.C. §§ 890, 909 (2018). The military judge also found 
Appellant guilty, contrary to his plea, of one specification 
of wrongfully using Trenbolone, a controlled substance,  in 
violation of Article 112a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 912a (2018).  
The military judge sentenced Appellant to a reprimand, 
a reduction to the grade of E-2, forfeiture of $1,000  of pay 
per month for nine months, nine months of confinement, 
and a bad-conduct discharge. The convening authority took 
no action on the findings or  the sentence. In addition to 
stating the foregoing information  about the findings and 
the sentence, the Entry of Judgment  form contained th is 
indorsement: “The following criminal indexing is required 
. . . according to the references listed: . . . Firearm Prohibi-
tion Triggered Under 18 U.S.C. § 922: Yes.”  The United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals  (AFCCA) af-
firmed. United States v. Saul , No. ACM 40341, 2023 CCA 
LEXIS 546, at *3, 2023 WL 9018409, at *2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. Dec. 29, 2023) (unpublished). 
We granted review of three issues.
1 Issue I concerns the 
providence of Appellant’s plea of guilty to the specification 
 
1 I. Whether a guilty plea for willful destruction of 
property under Article 109, UCMJ, can be provident 
when Appellant thrice told the military judge that 
he “did not intend to damage the [property]” and 
that he was surprised there was actual damage. 
II. Whether the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Armed Forces has jurisdiction to direct modifi-
cation of the 18 U.S.C. § 922 prohibition noted on 
the staff judge advocate’s indorsement to the entry 
of judgment. 
 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
of willfully and wrongfully destroying private property  in 
violation of Art icle 109, UCMJ. As we explain below, w e 
agree with Appellant  that the military judge should not 
have accepted his guilty plea to this specification,  and we 
grant appropriate relief . Issues II and III concern the in-
dorsement on the Entry of Judgment  form addressing the 
firearm prohibition in 18 U.S.C. § 922 (2018). In accordance 
with our recent decision in United States v. Johnson, __ 
M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025), we hold that this Court lacks the 
authority to modify the indorsement on Appellant’s Entry 
of Judgment form.  
I. Background  
In February 2021, Appellant argued with his wife at 
their residence in Oklahoma. During the argument, Appel-
lant, who had been drinking, forcefully slammed his hand 
down on the windshield of a car that his wife had rented  
from the Avis Car Rental company. This action caused the 
windshield to crack “in a large spider web pattern .” The 
Government subsequently charged Appellant with  one 
specification of “willfully and wrongfully destroy[ing] a ve-
hicle windshield, of a value of under $1000.00, the property 
of Avis Rental Car” in violation of Article 109, UCMJ.  
Appellant entered a plea of  guilty to this specification. 
But during the inquiry into the providence of the plea, Ap-
pellant made several statements raising significant doubt 
about whether he had  willfully destroyed the windshield. 
Appellant told the military judge : “I got frustrated with 
[my wife] and slammed my hand down on the windshield 
with an open palm. I did not intend to damage the vehicle, 
but, especially since I was drunk, I  must have hit it a lot 
 
III. As applied to Appellant, whether the G overn-
ment can prove 18 U.S.C. § 922 is constitutional by 
“demonstrating that it is consistent with the na-
tion’s historical tradition of firearm regulations” 
when he was not convicted of a violent offense (quot-
ing New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, Inc. 
v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 24 (2022)). 
84 M.J. 472 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order granting review). 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
harder than I intended. ” Appellant further stated: “ I did 
not intend to break the windshield, but did intend to hit 
the windshield in the first place. ” In addition, Appellant 
stated that he did not know about the crack until his wife 
pointed it out to him. When the military judge asked Ap-
pellant if he was surprised that “there was actual damage” 
to the windshield, Appellant answered in the affirmative. 
The military judge was initially reluctant to accept Ap-
pellant’s guilty plea because of Appellant’s repeated state-
ments that he did not intend to damage the windshield . 
Addressing Appellant and defense counsel, the military 
judge said: “[W]hat I need to understand is, if  you didn’t 
intend to cause the damage, I understand you intended to  
strike the windshield, but if you did not intend to cause the 
damage, how is the plea provident to this? ” The military 
judge explained more specifically that he was “hung up” on 
the requirement that the destruction of the property must 
be done “willfully.” 
Following a recess, the military judge and counsel dis-
cussed United States v. White, 61 M.J. 521, 524  (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. 2005), a case in which  the court found circum-
stantial evidence legal ly sufficient (although factually in-
sufficient) to establish that an  accused had willfully de-
stroyed property in violation of Art icle 109, UCMJ. The 
court in White cited United States v. Johnson, 24 M.J. 101 
(C.M.A. 1987), for the proposition that a court-martial may 
use a “permissive infere nce” to show that “an intent to 
cause certain results can be established by evidence that 
such results flow ‘naturally and probabl y from the action 
that was taken.’ ” 61 M.J. at 523 (quoting Johnson, 24 M.J. 
at 105). 
Relying on the permissive inference used in White , the 
military judge in this case asked Appellant: “[D]o you agree 
that you smacking the windshield, a natural consequence 
of that action is that the windshield will spider out? ” Ap-
pellant answered: “Yes, Your Honor.” Appellant, however, 
did not retract or modify his earlier statements that he did 
not intend to damage the windshield or that he was sur-
prised that there was any damage. 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
The military judge  then stated: “[H]aving [gone] 
through . . . the last discussion  . . . with Sergeant Saul 
about his intent and  . . . understanding that he 
understands [the damage to the windshield] is a probable 
consequence of him striking the windshield, I do feel like 
his discussion is sufficient for that specification. ” The 
military judge then  asked counsel for both sides whether 
further questioning was necessary, and they answered that 
it was not.  The military  judge accordingly accepted 
Appellant’s plea of guilty. The AFCCA affirmed, finding no 
“substantial conflict ” between the plea and Appellant’s 
statements. Saul, 2023 CCA LEXIS 5 46, at *11, 2023 WL 
9018409, at *4. 
II. Providence of the Guilty Plea 
This Court requested briefing and heard oral argument 
on Issue I  which, as quoted above, ask s whether Appel-
lant’s plea of guilty to the specification of  willfully and 
wrongfully destroying nonmilitary property under Article 
109, UCMJ, was  improvident given his repeated state-
ments that he did not intend to damage the windshield. 
Having considered the parties’ arguments, w e hold that 
Appellant’s plea of guilty was improvident. 
A. Standard of Review and Applicable Legal Principles 
Two standards of review govern appeals in guilty plea 
cases. This Court reviews “ questions of law arising from 
the guilty plea de novo. ” United States v. Inabinette, 66 
M.J. 320, 322 (C.A.A.F. 2008).  This Court, however, re-
views a military judge ’s acceptance of a guilty plea for 
abuse of discretion. Id. Addressing the abuse of discretion 
standard, this Court has explained that “[o]nce the military 
judge has accepted a plea as provident and has entered 
findings based on it, an appellate court will not reverse that 
finding and reject the plea unless it finds a substantial con-
flict between the plea and the accused ’s statements .” 
United States v. Garcia, 44 M.J. 496, 498 (C.A.A.F. 1996). 
Several principles govern a military judge’s acceptance 
of a guilty plea. Under United States v. Care, 18 C.M.A. 
535, 541, 40 C.M.R. 247 , 253  (1969), the military judge 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
must explain each of the elements of an offense to the ac-
cused and question the accused to ensure that the accused’s 
acts or omissions constitute the offense to which the ac-
cused is pleading guilty.  See also Rule for Courts -Martial 
910(e) (2019 ed.) (requiring the military judge to  inquire 
into the factual basis for a plea of guilty). In addition, Arti-
cle 45(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 845 (2018), provides:  
If an accused . . . after a plea of guilty sets up mat-
ter inconsistent with the plea, or if it appears that 
he has entered the plea of guilty improvi-
dently . . . , a plea of not guilty shall be entered in 
the record, and the court shall proceed as though 
he had pleaded not guilty. 
Addressing this article, this Court has stated: “If an ac-
cused ‘sets up matter inconsistent with the plea’ at any 
time during the proceeding, the military judge must either 
resolve the apparent inconsistency or reject the plea.” Gar-
cia, 44 M.J. at 498 (quoting Article 45(a), UCMJ). Military 
judges often can “resolve” apparent inconsistencies by ask-
ing the accused questions and receiving answers that show 
no actual inconsistency exists . See, e.g. , United States v. 
Hines, 73 M.J. 119, 124- 25 (C.A.A.F. 2014) ( holding that 
the military judge’s questioning clarified the amount of 
military allowances wrongfully taken despite an apparent 
inconsistency in the stipulation of fact) ; United States v. 
Goodman, 70 M.J. 396, 399- 400 (C.A.A.F. 2011) (holding 
that the military judge’s questioning clarified that the ac-
cused’s suggestion of a possible defense was not incon-
sistent with his guilty plea because one of the elements of 
the defense could not be established). 
Article 109, UCMJ, establishes offenses concerning the 
destruction of nonmilitary property. It provides in relevant 
part that “[a]ny person subject to this chapter who . . . will-
fully and wrongfully destroys or damages any property 
other than military property of the United States shall be 
punished as a court -martial may direct. ” Id. In United 
States v. Bernacki, 13 C.M.A. 641, 643-44, 33 C.M.R. 173, 
175-76 (1963), this Court held that Article 109, UCMJ, re-
quires that the Government prove the accused had the 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
specific intent of destroying or damaging property, as op-
posed to merely intending to do an act without necessarily 
intending for the act to damage or destroy property. 
A permissive inference —also called a “permissive pre-
sumption”—is a “ presumption that a trier of fact is free to 
accept or reject from a given set of facts. ” Permissive Pre-
sumption, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019). Discus-
sions of permissive inferences most often arise in contested 
cases in which the members may need to consider whether 
circumstantial evidence has proved an element of an of-
fense.
2 Using permissive inferences is less common in un-
contested cases, where the military judge generally must 
determine from the accused’s statements, rather than cir-
cumstantial evidence, whether a guilty plea is provident. 
Although this Court has not stated general rules regarding 
a military judge’s use of permissive inferences in guilty 
plea cases, it has upheld th eir use in at least some in-
stances. For example, i n United States v. Willis , 46 M.J. 
258, 259, 262 (C.A.A.F. 1997), this Court held that a mili-
tary judge could use a transferred intent theory or concur-
rent intent theory to  infer that a nephew , pleading guilty 
to attempted murder of his uncle, intended to shoot his un-
cle when he admitted to shoot ing at his aunt who was in 
the same room.  Similarly, in United States v. Adams, 63 
M.J. 223 , 226  (C.A.A.F. 2006) , this Court held that a 
 
2 For example, model instructions on unpremeditated mur-
der contain the following statement: 
The intent to kill or inflict great bodily harm may 
be proved by circumstantial evidence, that is, by 
facts or circumstances from which you may reason-
ably infer the existence of such an intent. Thus, it 
may be inferred that a person intends the natural 
and probable results of an act (he) (she) purposely 
does. Therefore, if a person does an intentional act 
which is likely to result in death or great bodily 
harm, it may be inferred that (he) (she) intended to 
inflict death or great bodily harm. 
Dep’t of the Army, Pam. 27 -9, Legal Services, Military Judges’ 
Benchbook ch. 3, para. 3-43-2 (2020). 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
military judge could use a deliberate avoidance theory to 
find that an accused knew of his appointed time of place 
and duty when he admitted that he had deliberate ly 
avoided finding out whether his unit had a formation. 
B. Discussion 
The basic positions of the parties are easily summa-
rized. Appellant argues that the military judge abused his 
discretion in accepting his guilty plea because he set up a 
matter substantially inconsistent with his plea and the 
military judge did not resolve  this inconsistency as re-
quired by Article 45(a), UCMJ. Specifically, Appellant as-
serts that it was substantially inconsistent for him to plead 
guilty to willfully and wrongfully destroying a windshield 
in violation of Art icle 109, UCMJ, while at the same time 
repeatedly stating that he did not inten d to cause damage 
to the windshield. The Government responds that the mil-
itary judge properly inferred that a person intends the nat-
ural and probable consequences of his actions. 
The disputed issue  therefore is  whether the military 
judge resolved the asserted inconsistency using the cited  
permissive inference. Appellant makes three arguments 
for concluding that the military judge did not. First, Appel-
lant contends that permissive inferences can only be used 
in contested cases, not in guilty plea cases. Second, Appel-
lant argues that the military judge, in any event, could not 
use a permissive inference to conclude that he willfully de-
stroyed property merely because he knew that its destruc-
tion could be a natural and probable consequence of his ac-
tions. Third, Appellant argues that  the military judge in 
any event never resolved the substantial inconsistency be-
tween any inference that he willfully  and wrongfully de-
stroyed the windshield and his earlier express statements 
that he did not intend to damage the windshield.  
We agree with Appellant’s third argument and thus 
need not address his first two arguments  in this opinion . 
Even if the military judge could lawfully infer that Appel-
lant acted willfully and wrongfully based on his knowledge 
of the natural and probable consequences of his action, that 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
inference substantially conflicts with Appellant’s repeated 
statements that he did not intend to damage the wind-
shield. Nothing in the plea inquiry resolved this substan-
tial inconsistency. Appellant never retracted or modified 
his express statements that he did not intend to damage 
the windshield. He never suggested that he had initially 
misunderstood the meaning of “intent” or otherwise sought 
to clarify his remarks. It is true that the discussion of the 
permissive inference occurred after Appellant made his ex-
press statements that he did not intend to damage the 
windshield. But nothing in the record persuades us  that 
Appellant understood the permissive inference to super-
sede his earlier express statements. And although the mil-
itary judge and counsel for both sides conscientiously en-
deavored to find a way to have Appellant establish that he 
acted with the requisite intent, the military judge could not 
accept the guilty plea with this substantial inconsistency 
unresolved. 
The Government responds that this Court has upheld 
guilty pleas in other  cases with similar facts. It cites Ad-
ams, a case in which an accused pleaded guilty to failing to 
go to his appointed place of duty  in violation of Article 86, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 886 (2000) . 63 M.J. at 223- 24. During 
the plea inquiry, the military judge asked the accused 
whether he knew that he was required to be present at the 
time and place alleged in the specification. Id.  at 224. The 
accused answered that he did not know the time and place 
of his duty because he had deliberately avoided finding out 
this information . Id. This Court ruled that the plea was 
provident, holding that “deliberate avoidance can create 
the same criminal liability as actual knowledge for all Ar-
ticle 86, UCMJ, offenses.” Id. at 226. 
Adams, however,  is distinguishable from the present 
case. The Court in Adams did not fail to reconcile an ex-
press statement that the accused did not know the time 
and place of his duty with an inference that he did  know 
the time and place of his duty. Instead, the Court held that 
deliberate avoidance was sufficient to satisfy the mens rea 
for offenses under Article 86, UCMJ,  even though the 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
accused did not in fact know the time and place of his duty. 
Id. In this case, by contrast, precedent has established that 
an accused mus t destroy property  “willfully and wrong-
fully” to violate Article 109, UCMJ. Bernacki, 13 C.M.A. at 
642-43, 33 C.M.R. at  174-75. Appellant’s express state-
ments that he did not intentionally damage the windshield 
are therefore inconsistent with his plea of guilty to violat-
ing Article 109, UCMJ. 
 The Government also cites Willis , a case in which an 
accused pleaded guilty to the attempted murder of his 
uncle. 46 M.J. at  259. During the providence inquiry, the 
accused told the military judge  that he shot a handgun in 
the direction of the place at which he thought that his aunt 
was located and that he did not intend to shoot his uncle. 
Id. at 260.  This Court held that the plea was provident 
based on a theory of transferred or concurrent intent, 
under which the accused’s  intent to kill his aunt could 
satisfy the mens rea for attempted murder of his uncle. Id. 
at 261-62. The Court explained: “Appellant asserts he did 
not have the intent to ‘kill’ his uncle. However, by shooting 
behind the door, appellant created a killing zone. The 
natural and probable consequence of appellant ’s actions 
was the death or grievous bodily harm of whoever was 
behind the door.” Id. 
The Willis decision is also distinguishable from the pre-
sent case. The Court in Willis  reconciled the accused’s as-
sertion that he did not intend to kill his uncle with the legal 
theory that his intent to kill his aunt was sufficient for the 
offense of attempted murder based on transferred or con-
current intent. Id. at 261. Transferred and concurrent in-
tent do not apply here and therefore cannot reconcile Ap-
pellant’s express statements that he did not intend to 
damage the windshield with an inference that he did in-
tend to damage it or any other property. 
We are similarly unpersuaded by the Government’s ad-
ditional arguments. Because a substantial inconsistency 
between Appellant’s plea and his express statements was 
not resolved, Article 45, UCMJ, required the military judge 
to enter a plea of not guilty. The Government then could 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
have decided whether to proceed to trial, at which a court-
martial might or might not have found circumstantial evi-
dence sufficient to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that  
Appellant acted willfully and wrongfully even if Appellant 
were to testify that he did not intend to destroy the wind-
shield. 
For these reasons, we hold  that the military judge 
abused his discretion in accepting the guilty plea.  Accord-
ingly, we must set aside the finding of guilt to the specifi-
cation of violating Article 109, UCMJ. 
III. Entry of Judgment Indorsement 
This Court also granted two other issues related to  the 
indorsement on the Entry of Judgment form concerning 18 
U.S.C. § 922 . Issue II asks whether this Court has  “juris-
diction” to modify the indorsement. In accordance with our 
decision in Johnson, we hold that while this Court has ju-
risdiction in this appeal, we lack authority to modify the  
indorsement. __ M.J. at __ (11). Issue III asks whether the 
Government can prove that 18 U.S.C. § 922 is c onstitu-
tional as applied to Appellant. T he only relief Appellant 
has requested in connection with I ssue III is modification 
of the indorsement on his Entry of Judgment form. Because 
this Court lacks authority to provide Appellant with th is 
relief, Issue III is moot. 
IV. Conclusion 
We answer the first granted issue in the  negative. We 
answer the second granted issue by holding that while the 
Court has jurisdiction in this appeal, it lacks authority to 
modify the indorsement. We d o not  answer the third 
granted issue because it is moot. The decision of the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals is set aside  as 
to Charge I and its specification but affirmed as to the other 
charges and specifications . The finding tha t Appellant is 
guilty of C harge I and its specification is set aside.  The 
other findings are affirmed. The record is returned to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Air Force for remand to the 
Court of Criminal Appeals. That court either may dismiss 
Charge I and its specification  without prejudice  and 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
reassess the sentence based on the affirmed findings, or it 
may set aside the sentence and order a rehearing  on 
Charge I and its specification and on the sentence. 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting. 
I disagree with the majority opinion’s conclusion that 
the military judge erred in finding Appellant’s guilty plea 
provident. The military judge relied upon the solid legal 
principle that intent can be proven through the permissive 
inference that an accused intends the natural and probable 
consequences of his acts. He properly questioned Appellant 
until he was convinced  that there was a factual basis for 
the plea and that Appellant understood the law. During the 
plea colloquy, Appellant did tell the military judge several 
times that he did not intend to break the windshield or 
damage the vehicle,  and these statements were never ex-
plicitly reversed. However, because of these assertions, the 
military judge further inquired into the willfulness of Ap-
pellant’s actions, focusing on Appellant’s statements that 
he intended to strike the window but did no t intend to 
cause damage. Appellant agreed that destruction of the 
windshield was a “logical consequence” of his hitting it and 
that he was more likely to do damage because he was a 
larger sized man. Appellant then agreed with the military 
judge that damaging the windshield was a natural and 
probable consequence of Appellant’s striking it. 
“During a guilty plea inquiry the military judge is 
charged with determining whether there is an adequate 
basis in law and fact to support the plea before accepting 
it.” United States v. Inabinette, 66 M.J. 320, 321- 22 
(C.A.A.F. 2008) (citing United States v. Prater, 32 M.J. 433, 
436 (C.M.A. 1991)). A military judge abuses his or her dis-
cretion by “fail[ing] to obtain from the accused an adequate 
factual basis to support the plea — an area in which we af-
ford significant deference” or if his or her ruling is based on 
an erroneous view of the law. Id. at 322 (citation omitted). 
“The test for an abuse of discretion in accepting a guilty 
plea is whether the record shows a substantial basis in law 
or fact for questioning the plea.” United States v. Moon, 73 
M.J. 382, 386 (C.A.A.F. 2014) (citing  United States v. Pas-
sut, 73 M.J. 27, 29 (C.A.A.F. 2014)). This Court must find 
a substantial conflict between the plea and the accused’s 
statements or other evidence to set aside a guilty plea. The 
mere possibility of conflic t is not enough. United States v. 
Garcia, 44 M.J. 496, 498 (C.A.A.F. 1996) (citing  Prater, 32 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
2 
 
M.J. at 436). When assessing the viability of a guilty plea, 
the requisite record includes the plea colloquy “as well as 
any inferences reasonably drawn from the record.” United 
State v. Hardeman, 59 M.J. 389, 391 (C.A.A.F. 2004).  
The military judge determined that the windshield 
breaking was a natural and probable consequence of a 
large and muscular man like Appellant hitting a car wind-
shield with extreme force. Appellant agreed with the mili-
tary judge that the outcome was a natural and probable 
consequence of his actions. The military judge then made 
the permissive inference that Appellant intended the nat-
ural and probable consequences of his actions. Our case law 
supports the principle that specific intent can be proved 
through a permissive inference that an accused intends the 
natural and probable consequences of his actions. In 
United States v. Johnson, this Court’s predecessor assessed 
whether the accused possessed the proper willful intent to 
support his conviction for sabotage by throwing a loose 
screw into an aircraft engine. 24 M.J. 101, 103 (C.M.A. 
1987). It determined that: 
 Usually the intent to cause certain results is 
established by evidence that those results fol-
lowed naturally and probably from the action that 
was taken. The permissible inference  . . . is that 
the accused decided to act despite the likely con-
sequences of doing so. However, only an inference 
is involved; and the necessary intent is lacking un-
less the factfinder determines not only that the 
prohibited results were highly foreseeable, but 
also that the accused, in fact, knew they were al-
most certain and nonetheless went ahead.  
Id. at 105- 06; see also United States v. Roa, 12 M.J. 210, 
211 (C.M.A. 1982) (noting the military judge’s proper use 
of “the inference that persons intend the natural and 
probable consequences of their acts”); United States v. 
Christensen, 4 C .M.A. 22, 25, 15 C.M.R. 22, 25 (1954) 
(stating that “a court-martial is certainly free to infer that 
a sane person intends the natural and probable 
consequences of his conduct”).  
     Federal courts have reached a similar conclusion. In the 
context of a jury trial, the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Fifth Circuit has stated that “[g]enerally, the 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
3 
 
natural and probable consequences of an act may satisfac-
torily evidence the state of mind accompanying the act, 
even when a particular mental attitude is a crucial element 
of the offense.” United States v. Stoker, 706 F.3d 643, 646 
(5th Cir. 2013) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Maggitt, 784 F.2d 590, 593 (5th Cir. 1986)); 
see also United States v. Desposito , 704 F.3d 221, 231 (2d 
Cir. 2013) (noting that, to prove intent, the government 
had to show that the appellant’s actions “had the natural 
and probable effect” of obstructing his criminal trial); 
United States v. Moye, 951 F.2d 59, 62 (5th Cir. 1992) (up-
holding an instruction to the jury that “ ‘you may consider 
it reasonable to draw the inference and find that a person 
intends the natural and probable consequences of acts 
knowingly done or knowingly omitted ’ ”); United States v. 
Jackson, 513 F.2d 456, 461 (D.C. Cir. 1975) (stating that 
“the natural probable consequences of an act may satisfac-
torily evidence the state of mind a ccompanying it, even 
when a particular mental attitude is a crucial element of 
the offense”). Though the above cases were all contested, I 
see no reason why the role of natural and probable conse-
quences in determining specific intent would be any differ-
ent under the circumstances of a guilty plea.  
     In addition, as the majority recognizes, this Court has 
previously upheld the use of permissive inference in accept-
ing a guilty plea. Most notably, in United States v. Adams, 
this Court held that a permissive inference of deliberate 
ignorance could suffice to meet the knowledge requirement 
in a guilty plea. 63 M.J. 223, 224 (C.A.A.F. 2006). The ap-
pellant pled guilty to failing to show up at his appointed 
place of duty under A rticle 86, UCMJ , 10 U.S.C. § 886 
(2000). Id. Proof of the offense required act ual knowledge 
of the appointed place of duty and, because he deliberately 
avoided his duties, the appellant told the military judge 
that he never had actual knowledge of his appointed place 
of duty. Id. at 224-25. This Court upheld the plea and de-
termined that “knowledge may be inferred from evidence of 
deliberate avoidance in all Article 86, UCMJ, offenses.” Id. 
at 226 (emphasis added). I believe that our decision in Ad-
ams controls this case and do not agree with the majority 
opinion that the permissive inference this Court found 
United States v. Saul, No. 24-0098/AF 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
4 
 
acceptable in Adams can be distinguished in any signifi-
cant way.  
     I also disagree with the majority’s premise that Appel-
lant had to explicitly retract or modify his initial state-
ments that he did not intend to damage the windshield in 
order to resolve any inconsistency. Even if Appellant ini-
tially asserted that he did not intend, in layman’s terms, to 
inflict damage, he later agreed that such damage was a 
natural and probable consequence of striking the wind-
shield. This is sufficient under our case law to establish le-
gal intent. I cannot see that any substantial conf lict re-
mained once Appellant agreed with the military judge that 
his actions established willful intent. 
     Rejection of a guilty plea requires that “the record of 
trial show a substantial basis in law and fact for question-
ing the plea.” Prater, 32 M.J. at 436 (internal quotation 
marks omitted). The bar is high since we owe the military 
judge deference. He conducted a thorough colloquy and ap-
peared committed to resolving the inconsistency he himself 
noted regarding the required mens rea. Though Appellant 
represented that he did not intend to damage the wind-
shield, he later confirmed that such damage was a natural 
and probable consequence of his actions. This confirmation 
was sufficient to counter his earlier statements that he did 
not intend to damage the windshield, even if he never ex-
pressly revoked those statements. The military judge 
properly drew a permissive inference from Appellant’s 
statements during the plea colloquy and concluded that 
Appellant possessed the requisite willful specific intent. He 
reasonably applied the facts of the case to the law that al-
lows for the use of permissive inference to establish intent. 
Given the above, I cannot conclude that there was a sub-
stantial basis for questioning the plea or that the military 
judge abused his discretion in finding Appellant’s plea 
provident. For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.  