This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Ryan C. THOMAS, Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0147 
Crim. App. No. 20210662 
 
Argued January 28, 2025—Decided July 7, 2025 
 
Military Judges: G. Bret Batdorff (arraignment) 
and Alyssa S. Adams (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Major Robert W. Rodriguez (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten , Lieutenant Colonel Au-
tumn R. Porter , and  Jonathan F. Potter , Esq.  (on 
brief); Captain Kevin T. Todorow.  
 
For Appellee: Major Marc B. Sawyer (argued); Colo-
nel Richard E. Gorini  and Captain Alex J. Berkun  
(on brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined.  
_______________ 
 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Appellant was charged with wrongfully making derog-
atory statements regarding race in violation of Article 134, 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 
(2012),1 among other offenses. The military judge granted 
the Government’s peremptory strike of a prospective panel 
member who said that when he had been on the receiving 
end of racially derogatory comments he had simply ignored 
them. We granted review to determine whether the mili-
tary judge abused her discretion by denying Appellant’s 
Batson challenge to the peremptory  strike. See Batson v. 
Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986). We hold that the military 
judge did not abuse her discretion by denying the Batson  
challenge because the Government offered a plausible, fa-
cially neutral reason for striking  the member and Appel-
lant failed to meet his burden of showing that reason was 
a pretext for racial discrimination.  Accordingly, we affirm 
the decision of the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA). 
I. Background 
Relevant to this appeal, Appellant was charged with 
three specifications of wrongfully making derogatory state-
ments regarding race (hereinafter the “race specifications”) 
in violation of Article 134, UCMJ. Appellant entered pleas 
of not guilty to the race specifications and elected to be 
tried by a panel of members with enlisted representation.  
During group voir dire, the military judge asked 
whether any panel member had ever been the victim of an 
offense “dealing with potentially racially discriminatory 
language, gender bias language, [or] religion motivated 
language.” Major (MAJ) SK answered in the affirmative.2   
 
1 Except as otherwise noted, a ll references herein to the 
UCMJ are to the 2012 edition. 
2 Three other members also answered in the affirmative and 
described personal experiences with derogatory racial com-
ments. One said he had been “on the receiving end of racist com-
ments” as a teenager more than thirty years earlier, when he 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
During individual voir dire, MAJ SK  described two ex-
periences of “racial discrimination.” The first was during 
his youth growing up in Germany. MAJ SK explained that 
the “town next over was the hub for the largest n eo-Nazi 
organization in Germany  . . . [s]o there was frequent en-
counters in regards to racial discrimination in certain 
stores.” The second occurred at Fort Polk, Louisiana, where 
he was “working with civilians as role players[] [a]nd they 
would ask [his ] co -workers how it is to work with the 
n***er.” In response to trial counsel’s query how those ex-
periences made him feel, MAJ SK said, “I see the individu-
als where they’re coming from and unless it has a . . . po-
tential professional long term impact, or it impacts me  
professionally I ignore it and move on.”   
Defense counsel questioned whether MAJ SK believed 
“that just saying that word [n***er], in and of itself, is crim-
inal.” MAJ SK demurred, explaining, “[t]he context in 
which it’s said, and the context  where it comes from abso-
lutely matters.” And to the question whether “a white man 
[can] ever say the word  n***er,” he affirmed that his re-
sponse would be “[w]e can talk about this,” rather than 
“how dare you.” 
After voir dire, t he Government exercised its peremp-
tory challenge against MAJ  SK. The d efense asked the 
Government to state a race-neutral basis for the challenge 
(the Batson challenge). The Government responded: 
So while Major [SK] was being asked questions 
about being a victim of a similar crime, not only 
 
was called an anti-Asian slur. The second, who described himself 
as “multiracial,” had heard racist comments made in his pres-
ence, but never directed at him. The third said he was subjected 
to an equal opportunity complaint after he was falsely accused 
of making racist comments. All three members affirmed that 
they could objectively judge the facts in this case notwithstand-
ing their personal experiences. The first two were not challenged 
by either party . The military judge granted an unopposed de-
fense challenge for cause of the third member, who had articu-
lated a firmly held opinion that a s oldier convicted of a sex of-
fense upon a child should receive a punitive discharge. 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
did he say it would not influence his bias, he 
seemed to go—in the government ’s opinion, too far 
the other way where he sort of minimized the fact. 
And his attitude seemed like if I can get through 
this, than [sic] anyone else can as well.  
The defense objected to the Government’s justification, 
stating: 
I believe that ’s a misstatement. I think my con-
cern, just from an appellate standpoint, is he at 
least is [sic] a partially African-American, mixed 
race. What I ’m gathering, I ’m speculating, but I 
believe he is mixed race, African-American/poten-
tially Caucasian. And he seemed to have an objec-
tive approach to this process. And my position is 
because of that this facially neutral reason that 
the government stated is more of a facade to cover 
up that approach.  
The Government countered the objection, stating:  
Your Honor, first just note that this is a case 
where the accused is white and he’s being accused 
of making negative racial remarks about a black 
person. So, it doesn ’t really make sense that the 
government would have a racial reason to try to 
remove African-American members of the panel. 
And then we just stand by that  . . . it wasn’t be-
cause of his race or because of his attitude when 
he talked about having  encountered similar 
crimes in the past. He seemed to sort of — he 
seemed to minimize them and have an  attitude 
that . . . it was something that was just part of life 
and you just move through rather than consider 
that they might have a lasting emotional effect. 
Just his body language, his attitude when he 
talked about that, just made the government be-
lieve that . . . because of his personal resiliency, he 
would not consider these crimes, things like cru-
elty and maltreatment, as seriously as another 
panel member would.  
The defense reiterated the Batson challenge: 
I don’t want to beat a dead horse, but I do believe 
that Batson does apply because of, while my client 
is a Caucasian male, I still believe that Batson 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
based on the nature of the allegations themselves, 
if we’re striking potential minority members from 
the panel because there is a reverse application of 
Batson that is in its progeny in terms of the appli-
cation thereof.  
The military judge summarily denied the Batson chal-
lenge and granted the Government’s peremptory chal-
lenge, stating, “Okay. Well, I’ve considered both of the po-
sitions and I find that the government has offered a racially 
neutral reason for their peremptory challenge, so I’m going 
to grant that challenge.” 
After the members were impaneled and excused for the 
day, the defense made an oral motion to dismiss the race 
specifications for failure to state  an offense. The military 
judge heard oral argument and ordered briefs on the mo-
tion. A month later, she dismissed the race specifications , 
concluding they “are unconstitutionally vague in light of 
the fact that they fail to allege language of criminality for 
otherwise protected First Amendment speech.”3 
Appellant was convicted, pursuant to his pleas,  of one 
specification of failure to obey a lawful general regulation 
in violation of Article 92, UCMJ, 10 U .S.C. § 892, and one 
specification of adultery in violation of Article 134, UCMJ.  
Contrary to his pleas, a panel of officer and enlisted mem-
bers found Appellant guilty of two specifications of cruelty 
and maltreatment in violation of Article  93, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 893, 4 and two specifications of sexual abuse of a 
child in violation of Article  120b, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920b 
(2018).  The members sentenced Appellant to a dishonora-
ble discharge and confinement for eight years.   
 
3 Appellant was also charged with one specification of wrong-
fully making a derogatory statement regarding gender in viola-
tion of Article 134, UCMJ . This specification was dismissed for 
the same reason as the race specifications.  
4 The Article 93 , UCMJ, specifications alleged cruelty and 
maltreatment for making derogatory statements regarding one 
victim’s family and another victim’s religion.  
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
The ACCA specified the issue whether the military 
judge abused her discretion by denying Appellant’s Batson 
challenge. In a split decision, the ACCA held that while the 
military judge’s one-sentence ruling was “lacking,” she did 
not abuse her discretion in denying the  Baston challenge. 
United States v. Thomas, No. ARMY 20210662, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 154, at *8, 2024 WL 1830206, at *3 (A . Ct. Crim. 
App. Mar. 29, 2024) (unpublished). The majority reasoned 
that trial counsel’s characterization of MAJ SK as not be-
ing able to “appreciate the severity of a number of the spec-
ifications he would be required to adjudicate . . . was both 
plausible and irrespective of [his] race.” Id. at *7, 2024 WL 
1830206, at *3. A dissenting judge  concluded that  trial 
counsel’s proffered explanation “reinforced race” and there-
fore the military judge’s denial of the Batson challenge was 
in error. Id. at *10, 2024 WL 1830206, at *4 (Penland, S.J., 
dissenting).  
We granted review to determine w hether the military 
judge erred by denying Appellant’s  Batson challenge. 
United States v. Thomas, 85 M.J. 141 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (or-
der granting review). For the reasons stated below, we an-
swer the granted issue in the negative and affirm the deci-
sion of the ACCA.  
II. Standard of Review 
Subject to certain qualifications that we describe below, 
we review a military judge’s decision to deny a Batson chal-
lenge for an abuse of discretion. United States v. Williams, 
44 M.J. 482, 485 (C.A.A.F. 1996) . A military judge abuses 
her discretion when her “findings of fact are clearly errone-
ous, the court’s decision is influenced by an erroneous view 
of the law, or the military  judge’s decision on the issue at 
hand is outside the range of choices reasonably arising 
from the applicable facts and the law.” United States v. Mil-
ler, 66 M.J. 306, 307 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (citation omitted). “An 
abuse of discretion does not mean that ‘this Court merely 
would reach a different conclusion’ but rather that the mil-
itary judge’s ruling was ‘arbitrary, fanciful, clearly unrea-
sonable[,] or clearly erroneous.’ ” United States v. Tapp, 85 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
M.J. 19, 27 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (quoting United States v. Uribe, 
80 M.J. 442, 446 (C.A.A.F. 2021)).  
III. Law 
In Batson, the Supreme Court held that the “ privilege 
to strike individual jurors through peremptory challenge [] 
is subject to the commands of the Equal Protection Clause,” 
which “forbids the prosecutor to challenge potential jurors 
solely on account of their race or on the assumption that 
black jurors as a group will be unable impartially to con-
sider the [prosecution’s] case against a black defendant .” 
476 U.S. at 89. Batson established a three-part test to de-
termine whether the g overnment’s exercise of a peremp-
tory challenge violates the prohibition  on racial discrimi-
nation in the jury selection process. Id. at 96-98. First, the 
defendant must make a prima facie showing of purposeful 
discrimination. Id. at 96. Once the defendant has made this 
showing, the burden shifts to the g overnment to come for-
ward with a race-neutral explanation for the challenge. Id. 
at 97. If the g overnment provides a facially neutral expla-
nation, “[t]he trial judge must determine whether the pros-
ecutor’s stated reasons were the actual reasons or instead 
were a pretext for discrimination .” Flowers v. Mississippi, 
588 U.S. 284, 298 (2019) (citing Batson, 476 U.S. at 97-98).  
The Batson “right to equal protection is a part of due 
process under the Fifth Amendment ; and so it applies to 
courts-martial, just as it does  to civilian juries .” United 
States v. Santiago-Davila, 26 M.J. 380, 390 (C.M.A. 1988) 
(citations omitted). However, in light of the structural dif-
ferences between courts -martial and civilian trials, this 
Court has articulated a “modified version of Batson” appli-
cable to courts -martial. United States v.  Tulloch, 47 M.J. 
283, 286 (C.A.A.F. 1997).5  
 
5 As we noted in Tulloch these differences include:  
that (1) “courts-martial are not subject to the jury 
trial” requirements of the Constitution; (2) mili-
tary accused are tried by a panel of their superi-
ors, “not by a jury of their peers”; (3) military pan-
els are selected by the commander who convened 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
This modified standard replaces the first step of the 
Batson analysis with a per se rule:  “upon timely objection 
to a peremptory challenge, a prima facie case of discrimi-
nation is established.” United States v. Hurn, 55 M.J. 446, 
448 (C.A.A.F. 2001).  Once a defendant has made a prima 
facie case of discrimination, the modified standard places a 
heightened burden on the government to satisfy the second 
step of the Batson  analysis by providing not only a race -
neutral explanation, but one that is not “unreasonable, im-
plausible, or that other wise makes no sense.” Tulloch, 47 
M.J. at 287 (distinguishing Supreme Court precedent fo-
cusing on “ ‘the genuineness of the motive’ . . . [t]o the ex-
tent that [it] suggests that unreasonable or implausible ex-
planations may suffice in civilian society”); see also United 
States v. Finch, 64 M.J. 118, 129 (C.A.A.F. 2006) (Gierke, 
C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (noting that 
“this Court, focusing on the differences between a court -
martial and a civilian jury trial, has held that a military 
defendant is entitled to ‘a reasonable, racially neutral ex-
planation’ for a prosecutor’s challenge of a minority mem-
ber of a court -martial, while a civilian defendant is not” 
(emphasis added)  (quoting Tulloch, 47 M.J. at 287) ).6 
 
the court-martial on a best-qualified basis and are 
not “drawn from a random cross -section of 
the community”; (4) military counsel are provided 
with only a single peremptory challenge, in con-
trast to the numerous peremptory challenges per-
mitted by most civilian jurisdictions; and (5) in ci-
vilian jurisdictions, the numerous peremptory 
challenges are used to “select” a jury, but in 
courts-martial, a peremptory challenge is used to 
eliminate those already selected by the convening 
authority.  
47 M.J. at 285-86 (quoting United States v. Moore, 26 M.J. 692, 
699 (A.C.M.R. 1988)  (en banc), set aside on other grounds  and 
remanded for further proceedings, 28 M.J. 366, 368- 69 (C.M.A. 
1989), rev’d on other grounds following remand, 30 M.J. 162, 
162-63 (C.M.A. 1990)). 
6 Because the Government prevails in this case, we do not 
address its argument that Tulloch should be overturned. 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
Finally, if the government offers a facially neutral basis for 
the strike the burden shifts to the accused to prove pur-
poseful discrimination. Batson , 476 U.S. at 98.  Then, the 
military judge must “determine whether ‘the asserted jus-
tification is merely a pretext for intentional race-based dis-
crimination.’ ” United States v. Greene, 36 M.J. 274, 281 
(C.M.A. 1993) (quoting Hernandez v. New York , 500 U.S. 
352, 375 (1991) (O’Connor, J., with whom Scalia, J., joined, 
concurring in the judgment)).  
IV. Discussion  
After Appellant established a prima facie case of racial 
discrimination by demanding a race -neutral explanation  
for the Government’s peremptory strike against MAJ SK, 
the military judge found  that the Government offered a 
race-neutral reason. A lthough she did not explicitly ad-
dress the third step of the analysis by stating whether the 
Government’s stated reason was merely a pretext for racial 
discrimination, she implicitly ruled it was not pretextual 
by stating that she had considered and rejected Appellant’s 
arguments, which included an argument that the reason 
was pretextual. We conclude the Government offered a rea-
sonable, facially neutral explanation for striking MAJ SK, 
and Appellant failed to meet his burden to show the Gov-
ernment’s reason was pretextual. Therefore, we hold the 
military judge did not abuse her discretion by granting the 
peremptory challenge. 
Under the first step of the Batson analysis, Appellant 
must establish a prima facie case of racial discrimination . 
In Moore, this Court’s predecessor adopted a per se rul e 
that an objection by the accused to trial counsel’s 
peremptory strike of a member of a cognizable racial group 
shifts the  burden to the government to provide a 
reasonable race -neutral explanation. 28 M.J. at 368; see 
Tulloch, 47 M.J. at 286. In the case before us, trial counsel 
peremptorily challenged MAJ SK , a prospective panel 
member who had identified himself as having been the 
target of racial epithets. Appellant object ed, noting that 
MAJ SK was “at least  . . . partially African -American, 
mixed race”—a characterization the Government does not 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
dispute. Appellant’s objection to the Government’s 
peremptory strike of MAJ SK, a member of a cognizable 
racial group, satisfied the per se rule.  
Turning to the second step of the Batson analysis, once 
trial defense counsel has raised a Batson challenge the bur-
den shifts to the government to come forward with a race-
neutral explanation that is not “unreasonable, implausible, 
or that otherwise makes no sense.” Tulloch, 47 M.J. at 287. 
A race-neutral reason is “an explanation based on some-
thing other than the race of the juror.” Hernandez, 500 U.S. 
at 360. Whether a race-neutral explanation is reasonable 
is a question of law we review de novo. See United States v. 
Cooper, 58 M.J. 54, 58 (C.A.A.F. 2003) (holding that a mil-
itary judge’s reasonableness determinations are questions 
of law reviewed de novo, as “confirmed by the reality that 
appellate courts frequently review de novo the ‘reasonable-
ness’ determinations of trial judges in a variety of legal set-
tings”); see also United States v. Thompson , 735 F.3d 29 1, 
296 (5th Cir. 2013) (“We review the government’s proffered 
race-neutral explanation as a legal issue de novo.”); Stubbs 
v. Gomez, 189 F.3d 1099, 1105 (9th Cir. 1999)  (reviewing 
de novo the trial court’s holding that the prosecutor’s prof-
fered reason for a peremptory challenge was race-neutral); 
United States v. Uwaezhoke, 995 F.2d 388, 394  (3d Cir. 
1993) (concluding as a matter of law that the government’s 
explanation for a peremptory strike was facially race-neu-
tral); United States v. Johnson, 941 F.2d 1102, 1108 (10th 
Cir. 1991) (reviewing de novo the prosecutor’s “explanation 
for his actions as a legal issue”).  
The Government’s stated reason for striking MAJ SK 
was that both his verbal voir dire responses and his atti-
tude “minimized” his experiences as a victim of racially de-
rogatory language, leading the Government to have con-
cerns that  he would not take the charged offenses 
seriously. The defense conceded that this  rationale for 
striking MAJ SK was  facially neutral . However, the de-
fense disagreed with the Government’s assessment that 
MAJ SK displayed a lack of objectivity and argued that the 
proffered rationale was a “façade.” The defense argued that 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
the Government’s purported rationale was inextricably 
tied to MAJ SK’s race. The military judge found that the 
Government offered a racially neutral basis for the strike . 
She did not make any determination on the record as to the 
reasonableness of the Government’s proffered reason, nor 
did she rule on the defense’s claim that it was pretextual. 
After reviewing MAJ SK’s voir dire responses and the 
Government’s rationale for striking him from the panel, we 
conclude that the military judge did not err in finding the 
Government offered a race- neutral basis for the strike: 
MAJ SK “ seemed to minimize” the seriousness of the 
charged offenses as “something that was just part of life 
and you just move through rather than consider that they 
might have a lasting emotional effect .” We acknowledge 
that the offenses at issue involved the use of racially derog-
atory language and the prospective member happened to 
belong to the maligned racial group. However, the Govern-
ment’s explanation focused on MAJ SK’s responses to ques-
tions about his experiences, and not on his race.7 The same 
rationale could have applied equally (and unobjectionably) 
to any prospective panelist who had experience with mis-
conduct similar to any charged offense.  See, e.g. , United 
States v. Paz, No. ARMY 20010910, 2004 CCA LEXIS 369, 
at *4-5, *10, 2004 WL 5862657, at * 2-3 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 
Nov. 2, 2004)  (unpublished) (holding that the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion in granting a peremptory 
strike of a member where “trial counsel’s explanation [that 
‘[i]t seemed like it wasn’t a significant deal to him to be 
involved in drugs’] . . . specifically related to [the member’s] 
attitude toward drugs, the subject of the charges against 
appellant”). 
 
7 We recognize that the underlying basis for MAJ SK’s  re-
sponses was his own life experience as a Black man, but in light 
of his statements during individual voir dire that he would fol-
low the military judge’s instructions, that he does not find dis-
cussions of race difficult, and that he would apply an “objective 
approach” we conclude that MAJ SK’s responses do not contra-
dict the Government’s race-neutral explanation. 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
Moreover, we conclude as a matter of law that this 
stated rationale was not unreasonable, implausible, or oth-
erwise nonsensical, where trial counsel articulated a con-
nection between MAJ SK’s perspective on his experiences 
and how that perspective would impact his ability to faith-
fully execute his duties to the  court-martial, referencing 
both his “body language” and his “attitude.” Specifically, 
the Government voiced a concern that MAJ SK’s personal 
resilience in the face of conduct  similar to the charged of-
fenses could cause him to minimize the seriousness of the 
offenses. Cf. Tulloch, 47 M.J. at 288- 89 (explaining that 
trial counsel’s vague reference to the challenge member’s 
demeanor, being he “ blink[ed]” and “seemed uncomforta-
ble” without further explanation, did not provide a suffi-
ciently articulated reason to sustain the challenge). 
The Government could have described MAJ SK’s body 
language and demeanor in greater detail . Although trial 
defense counsel objected to the challenge as a “misstate-
ment” he did not present an alternative  characterization. 
If there is a factual dispute about a court member’s de-
meanor “the military judge normally  can and should re-
solve [this] dispute about the factual basis for [the] peremp-
tory challenge.” Id. at 288. In the absence of any factual 
dispute as to the court member’s body language or de-
meanor, as in this case, “we accept the trial counsel’s inter-
pretation of [the challenged member’s] demeanor as credi-
ble.” Paz, 2004 CCA LEXIS 369, at * 8, 2004 WL 5862657, 
at *3. Reviewing de novo the reasonableness of the Govern-
ment’s proffered rationale, we conclude the Government 
met its burden of providing a reasonable , plausible, race-
neutral basis for striking MAJ SK.  
Finally, we turn to the third step of the Batson analysis: 
when trial counsel articulates a reasonable race-neutral 
explanation for a peremptory challenge, the burden shifts 
to Appellant to prove purposeful discrimination. Greene, 36 
M.J. at 278 n.2.  
Here, although trial defense counsel replied to the Gov-
ernment’s assertion that MAJ SK’s attitude “minimized” 
his experiences as a victim of racially derogatory language, 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
this reply did not demonstrate how the facially neutral re-
sponse was a pretext or demonstrate purposeful discrimi-
nation. Instead, trial defense counsel merely reiterated 
that Batson applied. Nevertheless, Appellant argues that 
the military judge erred either by failing to analyze the 
third Batson step or by failing to make an express finding 
about trial counsel’s true motive on the record.   
Appellant is correct that the military judge must deter-
mine whether trial counsel’s proffered explanation is cred-
ible or merely a pretext for intentional  racial discrimina-
tion. Id. at 281. “[T]he trial court’s decision on the ultimate 
question of discriminatory intent represents a finding of 
fact of the sort accorded great deference on appeal.”  Her-
nandez, 500 U.S. at  364. Accordingly, we afford the mili-
tary judge’s decision “great deference” absent “clear error.” 
Williams, 44 M.J. at 485.  
We agree with the CCA that the military judge’s analy-
sis in this case was “lacking,” and as a result we afford her 
decision less deference. Thomas, 2024 CCA LEXIS  154, at 
*8, 2024 WL 1830206, at *3 (noting that the military 
judge’s one-sentence ruling was “lacking”). Whereas “an ex-
press ruling on this question is preferred,” even absent an 
express finding and analysis , we conclude the military 
judge implicitly found the Government’s stated purpose to 
be genuine and not a pretext for purposeful discrimination. 
United States v. Gray, 51 M.J. 1, 34 (C.A.A.F. 1999).  
“[M]ilitary judges are presumed to know the law and to 
follow it, absent clear evidence to the contrary.” United 
States v. Mason, 45 M.J. 483, 484 (C.A.A.F. 1997). Thus, a 
military judge ruling on a Batson challenge is presumed to 
know that she must make a finding as to whether a facially 
neutral peremptory strike masks a discriminatory purpose. 
United States v. Huff , No. ACM 37431, 2009 CCA LEXIS 
342, at *7, 2009 WL 2997016, at *3 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. 
Sept. 14, 2009) (unpublished); United States v. Walker, 50 
M.J. 749, 751 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. 1999).  Applying that 
presumption, a finding of no purposeful  discrimination 
may be implied by a military judge’s ruling granting a per-
emptory strike even where the military judge failed to state 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
her findings on the record. United States v. Chaney, 51 M.J. 
536, 540 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. 1999) (holding that the mili-
tary judge’s decision to grant a peremptory challenge was 
not clearly erroneous where the military judge did not 
make findings as to whether the challenge was a pretext 
for discrimination but “it is clear from his comments that 
he determined that the p roffered reason was genuine and 
not unreasonable, implausible, or without sense”), aff’d, 53 
M.J. 383 (C.A.A.F. 2000); Walker, 50 M.J. at 751 (holding 
that the military judge’s ruling on each Batson prong was 
“implicit” in his ruling granting a peremptory strike). 
In this case, “[v] iewing this conduct of the [military] 
judge in its entirety, we conclude that it constitutes an im-
plied ruling on [her]  part that trial  counsel’s explanation 
was genuine and that [A]ppellant’s Batson claim was with-
out merit.” Gray, 51 M.J. at 35; see Messiah v. Duncan, 435 
F.3d 186, 198 (2d Cir. 2006) (stating a trial judge “need not 
engage in ‘a talismanic recitation of specific words in order 
to satisfy Batson ’ ” (citation omitted) ). Appellant chal-
lenged the Government’s peremptory strike as a facially 
neutral “façade to cover up” a racially discriminatory pur-
pose for striking MAJ SK. The Government responded that 
it was motivated by concerns abo ut MAJ SK’s attitude to-
ward the charged offenses, not by his race. Ruling from the 
bench, the military judge stated, “ I’ve considered both of 
the positions and I find that the government has offered a 
racially neutral reason  for their peremptory challenge, so 
I’m going to grant that challenge.”  
In light of the presumption that the military judge knew 
the law and followed it and given Appellant’s failure to 
expand the argument beyond merely calling the 
Government’s explanation a “façade,” we conclude that the 
military judge’s ruling impliedly found trial counsel’s race-
neutral explanation to be genuine, and not pretextual . 
Gray, 51 M.J. at 35 . Finding nothing in the record to 
undermine the military judge’s explicit or implicit findings 
and no basis for concluding her ruling is  “arbitrary, 
fanciful, clearly unreasonable[,] or clearly erroneous ,” 
United States v. Thomas, No. 24-0147/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
Tapp, 85 M.J. at 27, 8 we hold that the military judge’s 
decision to grant the peremptory challenge was not an 
abuse of discretion.  
V. Judgment  
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 
 
8 Despite our holding that the military judge’s ruling was not 
an abuse of discretion, we encourage military judges and counsel 
to be thorough in articulating  their analysis of Batson  
challenges. 