This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
James L. TAYLOR Jr., Staff Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0234 
Crim. App. No. 40371 
 
Argued March 19, 2025—Decided June 10, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Colin P. Eichenberger (arraignment 
and motions) and Elijah F. Brown (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Major Frederick J. Johnson (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Heather R. Bezold  (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
Jenny A. Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) and the 
Rules for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) impose various limita-
tions on trying reservists by court-martial. One limitation, 
found in R.C.M. 204(b)(1) (2019 ed.), states: “A member of 
a reserve component must be on active duty prior to ar-
raignment at a general or special court-martial.” Appellant 
argues that his court-martial violated R.C.M. 204(b)(1) be-
cause he is a reservist who was  not on active duty at the 
time of his arraignment  and trial . The Government re-
sponds that the Air Force had properly ordered Appellant 
to active duty under Article 2(d)(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 802(d)(1) (2018), which provides in relevant  part that a 
“member of a reserve component . . . may be ordered to ac-
tive duty involuntarily for the purpose of . . . trial by court-
martial.”1 We hold, however, that Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ, 
 
1 The complete text of Article 2(d)(1)-(2), UCMJ, which is the 
major subject of this appeal, is as follows: 
 (d)(1) A member of a reserve component who is 
not on active duty and who is made the subject of 
proceedings under section 815 (article 15) or sec-
tion 830 (article 30) with respect to an offense 
against this chapter may be ordered to active duty 
involuntarily for the purpose of—  
 (A) a preliminary hearing under section 
832 of this title (article 32); 
 (B) trial by court-martial; or 
 (C) nonjudicial punishment under section 
815 of this title (article 15). 
 (2) A member of a reserve component may not 
be ordered to active duty under paragraph (1) ex-
cept with respect to an offense committed while 
the member was—  
  (A) on active duty; or 
 (B) on inactive -duty training, but in the 
case of members of the Army National Guard 
of the United States or the Air National Guard 
 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
did not authorize ordering Appellant to active duty for trial 
by court -martial because Appellant was not “on active 
duty” or “inactive-duty training” at the time of the charged 
offenses, as the provision requires . Accordingly, we set 
aside the decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals  (AFCCA), which affirmed the findings 
and sentence in this case. United States v. Taylor, No. ACM 
40371, 2024 CCA LEXIS 316, at *2, 2024 WL 3597025, at 
*1 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jul y 31, 2024) (unpublished). We 
further set aside the findings and the sentence. 
I. Background 
Appellant’s reserve unit conducted a unit training as-
sembly (UTA or “drill weekend”) on Saturday and Sunday, 
December 7 and 8, 2019. During the day on Saturday, Ap-
pellant completed two four -hour periods of inactive -duty 
training.2 On Saturday evening, A ppellant attended a 
party at the home of someone in his unit.  A.G., another 
member of Appellant’s unit, was also at the party. After 
drinking at the party, A.G.  went to sleep in a  spare bed-
room of the home.  
A.G. testified that she awoke around 4:00 a.m. on Sun-
day morning to find Appellant touching and kissing her.  
She testified that she felt Appellant’s lips upon her but-
tocks and his fingers in her vulva. She further testified that 
she had never indicated to Appellant that he could perform 
these acts. Appellant was scheduled to complete two addi-
tional periods of inactive -duty training on Sunday and is 
recorded as having completed them. 
 
of the United States only when in Federal 
service. 
2 The precise meaning of the term “inactive-duty training” is 
a disputed issue in this appeal.  In general, however, the term 
refers to a “duty prescribed for Reserves by the Secretary con-
cerned under section 206 of title 37 or any other provision of 
law.” 10 U.S.C. § 101(d)(7)(A) (2018). Under 37 U.S.C. § 206(a)(1) 
(2018), the Secretary concerned may prescribe regulations es-
tablishing periods of at least two hours for instruction and duties 
for which reservists receive compensation. 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
A charge and three specifications of sexual assault were 
preferred against Appellant o n August 1, 2020, at a time 
when he was performing  inactive-duty training. Th is 
charge was dismissed for reasons not relevant to this ap-
peal. The same charge and specifications were re-preferred 
over a year later on October 20, 2021. The first specification 
alleged that on December 8, 2019, Appellant committed 
sexual assault in violation of Article 120, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 920 (2018), by penetrating A.G.’s vulva with his fingers . 
The second and third specifications alleged Appellant com-
mitted abusive sexual contact in violation of Article 120, 
UCMJ, by touching A.G.’s vulva and buttocks, respectively, 
with his mouth . On November 19, 2021, a court -martial 
convening authority referred the charge and the three 
specifications to a general court-martial. 
Major General Michael G. Koscheski  subsequently is-
sued an order involuntarily ordering  Appellant to active 
duty for two days, March 21 and 22, 2022, “for the purpose 
of arraignment and motions for an alleged UCMJ viola-
tion.” The order cited “Title 10, 802(d)” as authority for the 
involuntary order to active duty. The cited provision is Ar-
ticle 2(d), UCMJ, which , as noted above, authorizes a re-
servist to “be ordered to active duty involuntarily for the 
purpose of . . . trial by court-martial.” 
At his arraignment on March 2 2, 2022, the military 
judge asked trial defense counsel: “[I]s there any objection 
regarding jurisdiction over the accused at this point  [in] 
time for the purposes of arraignment and motions 
practice?” Trial defense counsel answered: “Yes, Your 
Honor. We have not seen any orders with regards to 
actually administratively affecting or enacting—executing 
is the best word, his —Major General Koscheski ’s recall 
order.” Trial defense counsel asserted that the Air Force  
needed to use a document such as “Air Force Form 938” to 
put Appellant i n an active duty status. Trial defense 
counsel elaborated by sayin g: “This is how the process is 
supposed to go, there ’s supposed to be something that 
actually puts him on status, otherwise it ’s a recall for—
certainly it’s the authority to do so, but it hasn’ t actually 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
been enacted by the Air Force yet. ” The military judge 
rejected Appellant’s argument and held that the Air Force 
had “properly recalled [Appellant] to active duty for the 
purposes of [the] arraignment.” 
The court-martial subsequently found Appellant guilty, 
contrary to his pleas, of the specification of sexual assault 
and the specification of abusive sexual contact alleging that 
Appellant touched A.G.’s buttocks with his mouth. The 
court-martial found Appellant not guilty of the other spec-
ification of abusive sexual contact . The court-martial sen-
tenced Appellant to confinement for nineteen months, a 
reprimand, a reduction to the grade of E-1, and a dishonor-
able discharge. The convening authority disapproved the 
reprimand but took no other action. 
On appeal to the AFCCA, Appellant again argued that 
the court-martial lacked jurisdiction over him because he 
was not properly ordered to active duty. Taylor, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 316 , at *3 1-33, 2024 WL 3597025 , at * 11-12. In 
making this argument, however, Appellant asserted for the 
first time that his order to active duty violated Article 
2(d)(2), UCMJ, which provides that “a member of a reserve 
component . . . may not be ordered to active duty under [Ar-
ticle 2(d)(1), UCMJ] . . . except with respect to an offen se 
committed while the member was . . . on active duty; or . . . 
on inactive -duty training.” Id. at *34 & n.20, 2024 WL 
3597025, at *12 & n.20. Appellant asserted that the of-
fenses with which he was charged did not occur while he 
was “on active duty  . . . or inactive-duty training” but in-
stead occurred during the interval between his inac-
tive-duty training on Saturday and Sunday.  Id. at *34, 
2024 WL 3597025, at *13. 
The AFCCA rejected Appellant’s argument. Id. at *39, 
2024 WL 3597025, at *14. The AFCCA reasoned that Arti-
cle 2(d)(2), UCMJ, had to be read in the context of  Article 
2(a)(3), UCMJ. Id. at *36-39, 2024 WL 3597025, at *13-14. 
Under Article 2(a)(3), UCMJ, which Congress had recently 
amended, reservists are subject to the UCMJ for offenses 
committed during “[i]ntervals between inactive-duty train-
ing on consecutive days, pursuant to orders or 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
regulations.”3 The AFCCA stated that it would be “absurd, 
and not what Congress intended ” to hold that a reservist 
like Appellant was subject to the UCMJ during periods be-
tween inactive-duty training but that he could not be or-
dered to active duty to stand trial for offenses that he com-
mitted during such a period.  Id. at *3 8-39, 2024 WL 
3597025, at *14. 
We granted review of the question: 
Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 802(d)(2), sets 
forth the authority to involuntarily order 
 
3 Article 2(a)(3), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 802(a)(3) (2018), provides 
in relevant part: 
(a) The following persons are subject to this 
chapter: 
 . . . . 
 (3)(A) While on inactive -duty training and 
during any of the periods specified in subpara-
graph (B)—  
 (i) members of a reserve component; and 
 (ii) members of the Army National Guard 
of the United States or the Air National Guard 
of the United States, but only when in Federal 
service. 
 (B) The periods referred to in subparagraph 
(A) are the following: 
 (i) Travel to and from the inactive -duty 
training site of the member, pursuant to or-
ders or regulations. 
 (ii) Intervals between consecutive periods 
of inactive-duty training on the same day, pur-
suant to orders or regulations. 
 (iii) Intervals between inactive-duty train-
ing on consecutive days, pursuant to orders or 
regulations. 
Congress added the three periods listed in Article 
2(a)(3)(B)(i)-(iii) in the National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2017, Pub. L. No. 114- 328, §§ 5102, 5542(a), 130 
Stat. 2000, 2894-95, 2967 (2016). 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
members of reserve components to active duty for 
trial by court-martial. Did the Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals err by using the absurdity doc-
trine to interpret this provision in a manner that 
conflicts with the plain and unambiguous mean-
ing of the statutory language? 
United States v. Taylor, 85 M.J. 246 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
II. Scope of This Court’s Review 
Before addressing the merits of the granted question, 
we must consider three arguments that the Government 
makes concerning the scope of our review . First, the Gov-
ernment argues, in essence, that any dispute about the 
meaning of Article 2(d), UCMJ, is moot. The Government 
asserts that the court-martial gained personal jurisdiction 
over Appellant when charges were first preferred while he 
was on inactive-duty training and that this jurisdiction 
was never lost regardless of whether Appellant was 
properly ordered to active duty under Article 2(d), UCMJ. 
We reject this argument  because, as noted above, R.C.M. 
204(b)(1), requires a “member of a reserve component [to]  
be on active duty prior to arraignment at a general or spe-
cial court-martial.” Thus, even if court-martial jurisdiction 
over the offense attach ed upon the  initial preferral of the 
charge and specifications, Appellant still had to be on ac-
tive duty at the time of  his arraignment. Accordingly, the 
issue of whether Appellant was ordered to active duty in 
violation of Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ, is not moot.4 
Second, the Government argues that A ppellant ex-
pressly waived any objection to his order to active duty 
when trial defense counsel  explained an objection at ar-
raignment, quoted above, by saying “there’s supposed to be 
something that actually puts him on status, otherwise it’s 
a recall for—certainly it’s the authority to do so , but it 
hasn’t actually been enacted by the Air Force yet.” (Empha-
sis added.) The Government interprets this statement as a 
 
4 The Government has not argued that Appellant was on ac-
tive duty based on any other theory. 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
concession that the convening authority could order him to 
active duty and an intentional abandonment of any argu-
ment based on Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ.  We disagree. Trial 
defense counsel’s brief interjection about authority, made 
in the middle of another sentence, is simply too ambiguous 
to constitute a waiver. 
Third, t he Government argues that Appellant at the 
very least forfeited his argument  based on R.C.M. 905(e), 
which generally provides that nonjurisdictional issues are 
forfeited if they are not raised a t trial. The Government 
therefore argues that this Court can at most review the 
granted question for plain error. Appellant argues both 
that this case involves a jurisdictional issue that cannot be 
forfeited and, in the alternative, that even if the issue were 
forfeited, he would prevail under a plain error standard of 
review. 
For simplicity, w e will assume , without deciding, that 
an accused may forfeit objection s to compliance with 
R.C.M. 204(b)(1) and Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ , and that Ap-
pellant forfeited them in this case. Based on these assump-
tions, we will review the granted issue only for plain error. 
These assumptions will not prejudice Appellant because we 
ultimately hold, for reasons explained below, that Appel-
lant has demonstrated plain error and that the findings 
and sentence must be set aside. 
III. Plain Error Review of the Granted Issue 
When conducting a plain error review of a nonconstitu-
tional issue, this Court may grant relief only if the appel-
lant proves that there was an error, that the error was clear 
and obvious, and that the error caused material prejudice. 
United States v. Clifton , 71 M.J. 489, 491 (C.A.A.F. 2013) 
(citing United States v. Powell , 49 M.J. 460, 464- 65 
(C.A.A.F. 1998)). 
A. Whether There Was an Error 
The answer to the granted question depends on the 
meaning of  Articles 2(a)(3) and 2(d), UCMJ , and R.C.M. 
204(b)(1). “The interpretation of UCMJ and R.C.M. 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
provisions and the military judge ’s compliance with them 
are questions of law, which we review  de novo. ” United 
States v. St. Blanc, 70 M.J. 424, 427 (C.A.A.F. 2012)  (cita-
tions omitted). 
R.C.M. 204(b)(1), as noted, provides: “A member of a re-
serve component must be on active duty prior to arraign-
ment at a general or special court -martial.” The meaning 
of this provision is not in dispute.  The parties’ disagree-
ment is instead solely about whether the Air Force  had 
properly ordered Appellant to active duty at the time of his 
arraignment. The Government argues that the Air Force 
properly ordered Appellant to active duty pursuant to Ar-
ticle 2(d)(1), UCMJ, which provides that a “member of a 
reserve component . . . may be ordered to active duty invol-
untarily for the purpose of . . .  trial by court-martial.” But 
Appellant argues that Article 2(d)(1), UCMJ, is limited by 
Article 2(d)(2), which provides, “a member of a reserve com-
ponent . . . may not be ordered to active duty under [Article 
2(d)(1), UCMJ] . . . except with respect to an offense com-
mitted while the member was . . .  on active duty; or . . . on 
inactive-duty training.” Appellant asserts that this limita-
tion applies to him because his alleged offenses did not oc-
cur when he w as on active duty  or on inactive-duty train-
ing. Instead, they occurred during the interval between his 
inactive-duty training on Saturday and his inactive -duty 
training on Sunday. 
We conclude that Appellant is correct , based on the 
plain language of Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ . Article 2(d)(2), 
UCMJ, precludes the involuntary ordering of a reservist to 
active duty for the purpose of trial by court -martial for of-
fenses that did not occur when the reservist was on active 
duty or performing inactive -duty training. Congress could 
amend Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ, to cover intervals between 
two periods of inactive -duty training, but the current lan-
guage of the statute does not include such periods. 
The Government makes two responses  that we reject. 
First, the Government argues that the term “inactive-duty 
training” should be interpreted to include the interval  be-
tween two periods of inactive-duty training. Its argument 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
rests on Article 2(a)(3)(A) and (B) , UCMJ. Subparagraph 
(A) says that members of a reserve component are subject 
to the UCMJ “[w]hile on inactive-duty training and during 
any of the periods specified in subparagraph (B) .” Article 
2(a)(3)(A), UCMJ (emphasis added). One of the periods 
listed in subparagraph (B) includes “[i]ntervals between in-
active-duty training on consecutive days, pursuant to or-
ders or regulations.” Article 2(a)(3)(B)(iii), UCMJ. The Gov-
ernment argues that the word “and” in subparagraph (A) 
is ambiguous and that this Court should interpret “and” to 
mean “which includes .” Under this proposed interpreta-
tion, the phrase “inactiv e-duty training” would become a 
term of art “which  includes” both inactive duty and the 
time between two sessions of inactive duty on consecutive 
days. If so interpreted, Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ,  would not 
have prevented the Air Force from calling Appellant to ac-
tive duty for offenses that occurred between periods of in-
active-duty training because the term “inactive-duty train-
ing” would include such periods. 
We are unpersuaded because we fail to see any ambigu-
ity in the word “and” in Article 2(a)(3)(A), UCMJ. In addi-
tion, Article 2(a)(3)(B), UCMJ, draws a clear distinction be-
tween “inactive-duty training”  and “intervals between 
inactive-duty training ” because it uses the terms sepa-
rately in both subparagraph (B)(ii) and subparagraph 
(B)(iii). The Government, furthermore, offers no explana-
tion for how to reconcile the defin ition of  “inactive-duty 
training” in 10 U.S.C. § 101( d)(7), which applies to all of 
title 10 of the United States Code, with its theory that Con-
gress used Article 2(a)(3), UCMJ, to expand the meaning of 
inactive-duty training. 
Second, the Government argues that following the plain 
language of Article 2(d), UCMJ,  would lead to the absurd 
result of Congress expanding court-martial jurisdiction un-
der Article 2(a)(3), UCMJ, to include intervals between pe-
riods of inactive-duty training but then providing the Gov-
ernment only very limited means for effectuating that new 
jurisdiction due to the limitation in Article 2(d)(2), UCMJ. 
The absurdity doctrine allows a court to depart from the 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
plain language o f a statute only in very limited circum-
stances. I n United States v. McPherson , this Court ex-
plained that “ ‘a departure from the letter of the law’ may 
be justified to avoid an absurd result if ‘the absurdity . . . is 
so gross as to shock the general moral or common sense.’ ” 
81 M.J. 372, 380  (C.A.A.F. 2021) (alteration in original) 
(quoting Crooks v. Harrelson, 282 U.S. 55, 60 (1930)). 
We hold that the plain reading of Article 2(d), UCMJ, 
does not lead to a result that is so shocking to the general 
moral or common sense that it qualifies as  absurd. Con-
gress clearly recognized that reservists at times commit of-
fenses on the Saturday night during the interval between 
their Saturday and Sunday inactive -duty training . Con-
gress made progress in addressing this situation by amend-
ing Article 2(a)(3), UCMJ, so that reservists are subject  to 
the UCMJ during this period. Congress , however, has not 
yet completely solved the problem of authorizing the call-
ing of such reservists to active duty to stand trial . This is 
not an absurd result. It is just a case of legislation not yet 
implementing what some consider optimal policy.  As we 
have previously reasoned, “an ‘unintentional drafting gap’ 
is insufficient to warrant judicial correction; correction is 
the province of Congress in cases where an admittedly 
‘anomalous’ result ‘may seem odd, but . . . is not absurd.’ ” 
McPherson, 81 M.J. at 378 (alteration in original) (quoting 
Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Allapattah Servs., Inc., 545 U.S. 546, 
565-66 (2005)).5 
B. Whether the Error Was Clear and Obvious 
We have concluded that an error occurred.  Appellant 
was not properly ordered to active duty under Article 2(d), 
UCMJ, and his trial therefore violated R.C.M. 204(b)(1).  
The next question is whether this error was clear and 
 
5 The Government suggested at oral argument that there 
were other mechanisms for court -martialing Appellant. If the 
Government’s position is correct, then the Air Force would not 
be entirely precluded from prosecuting Appellant for conduct 
that he committed during the interval between his inactive-duty 
training periods. 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
obvious. In addressing this question, we begin by noting 
that it was clear to both the Government and the military 
judge that Appellant had to be on active duty to be ar-
raigned. Major General Koscheski purported to order Ap-
pellant to active duty for the purpose of his arraignment 
and motions. The military judge then specifically asked 
trial defense counsel about Appellant’s status. It was also 
clear and obvious that whether the Air Force  properly or-
dered Appellant to active duty depended on the meaning of 
Article 2(d), UCMJ, because General Koscheski’s order spe-
cifically cited this provision. 
The only question, then, is whether it was clear and ob-
vious that Article 2(d), UCMJ, did not provide the Air Force 
with authority to order Appellant to active duty. This ques-
tion only concerns the meaning of Article s 2(a)(3) and 
2(d)(2), UCMJ. We have held that these provision s have a 
plain meaning—that the Government cannot involuntarily 
call a reservist to active duty to stand trial by court-martial 
for offenses that did not occur while the reservist was on 
active duty or in inactive -duty training. Once this plain 
meaning is recognized, the application of Article 2(d)(2), 
UCMJ, to the facts of this case is clear and obvious. Accord-
ingly, we hold that the error of concluding Appellant  had 
been properly ordered to active duty at the time of arraign-
ment and arraigning him was clear and obvious. 
C. Whether There Was Material Prejudice 
Appellant asserts that he was materially prejudiced by 
the error. He argues that th e error allowed the trial to go 
forward and the court-martial to subject him to findings of 
guilt and a sentence, which would not have occurred if the 
requirements of R.C.M. 204(b)(1) had been followed. The 
Government does not contest the issue of prejudice in its 
brief. We therefore conclude that th e prejudice  require-
ment of the plain error analysis has been met and that Ap-
pellant is entitled to relief. 
Because Appellant should not have been tried when the 
requirements of R.C.M. 204(b)(1) were not established, we 
must set aside the findings and sentence. We do not 
United States v. Taylor, No. 24-0234/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
dismiss the charges because the parties do not contest that 
Appellant was subject to the UCMJ at the time the alleged 
offenses occurred. A rehearing is authorized, provided that 
the requirements of R.C.M. 204(b)(1), and any other appli-
cable requirements, are satisfied. 
IV. Conclusion 
The granted question is answered in the affirmative.  
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of Crim-
inal Appeals is set aside. The findings and sentence are set 
aside. A rehearing is authorized. 