This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Nathan G. LEESE, Private First Class 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 25-0024 
Crim. App. No. 20230250 
 
Argued April 8, 2025—Decided June 4, 2025 
 
Military Judge: J. Harper Cook 
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Colonel Ryan S. Coward  
(argued); Colonel Philip Staten , Lieutenant Colonel 
Autumn Porter, and Major Robert Luyties (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Captain Nicholas A. Schaffer (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini , Major Lisa Limb , and 
Captain Anthony J. Scarpati (on brief); Major Justin 
L. Talley.  
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
I. HOLDING 
We hold as follows: Confinement credit mandated by 
United States v.  Pierce1 applies only to a segmented sen-
tence that corresponds to an offense that previously served 
as the basis for nonjudicial punishment; Pierce credit does 
not apply to an aggregate term of confinement. 
II. OVERVIEW 
Since its inception in the 1950s, Article 15  of the Uni-
form Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) , has included some 
form of the following provision:  
The imposition and enforcement of disciplinary 
punishment under this article for any act or omis-
sion is not a bar to trial by court -martial for a se-
rious crime or offense growing out of the same act 
or omission, and not properly punishable under 
this article; but the fact that a disciplinary pun-
ishment has been enforced may be shown by the 
accused upon trial, and when so shown shall be 
considered in determining the measure of punish-
ment to be adjudged in the event of a finding of 
guilty. 
10 U.S.C. § 815(f) (2018). 
In United States v. Pierce, our predecessor court 
reached two key conclusions upon interpreting th is pas-
sage. First, the Pierce court noted that “[i]t is clear from the 
language of this provision that Congress did not intend for 
imposition of nonjudicial punishment to preclude the sub-
sequent court-martial of a servicemember accused of a se-
rious offense.” 27 M.J. at 368. And second, the Pierce court 
opined that “[i]t does not follow that a servicemember can 
be twice punished for the same offense.” Id. at 369. In re-
gard to the latter point, Judge Cox invoked the memorable 
phrase that “in these rare cases, an accused must be given 
 
1 27 M.J. 367 (C.M.A. 1989). 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
complete credit for any and all nonjudicial punishment suf-
fered: day-for-day, dollar-for-dollar, stripe-for-stripe.” Id. 
Although the calculation of what has become known as 
“Pierce credit” has always been somewhat intricate, 2 the 
application of that credit used to be quite simple. “When 
Congress first enacted the UCMJ, courts-martial adjudged 
only one sentence even if they found the accused guilty of 
multiple offenses.” United States v. Flores, 84 M.J. 277, 280 
(C.A.A.F. 2024). Under this “unitary sentencing” approach, 
a military judge would simply “subtract” the amount of 
Pierce credit from the total adjudged sentence. But no 
more. “In the Military Justice Act of 2016, . . . Congress in-
troduced segmented sentencing in which a separate term 
of confinement and fine is adjudged for each specification 
[for] which there was a finding of guilty when sentencing is 
conducted by the military judge.” United States v. Smith , 
2024 CAAF LEXIS 759 , at *20 n.5, 2024 WL 4941954, at 
*7 n.5 (C.A.A.F. Nov. 26, 2024). So, instead of “unitary sen-
tencing” in the military justice system we now have “seg-
mented sentencing.”3  
III. FACTS 
All of this leads us to the facts in this case. Here, the 
military judge sitting as a general court -martial convicted 
Appellant, in accordance with his pleas, of two specifica-
tions of willfully disobeying a superior commissioned of-
ficer and one specificati on of assault consummated by a 
battery in violation of Articles 90 and 128, UCMJ, 10 
 
2 A Table of Equivalent Nonjudicial Punishments has now 
been created to facilitate that calculation. Dep’t of the Army, 
Pam. 27 -9, Legal Services, Military Judges’ Benchbook ch. 2, 
§ V, para. 2-7-21, tbl.2-10 (2020). 
3 Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1002(b)(3) expands on this 
point: “All punishments other than confinement or a fine avail-
able under R.C.M. 1003, if any, shall be determined as a single, 
unitary component of the sentence, covering all of the guilty 
findings in their entirety. The military judge shall not segment 
those punishments among the guilty findings.” (At the time of 
Appellant’s court -martial, t his provision was at R.C.M. 
1002(d)(2)(C) (2019 ed.).) 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
U.S.C. §§ 890, 928 (2018). The military judge then sen-
tenced Appellant as follows: to be reduced to the grade of 
E-2; to be discharged from the service with a bad- conduct 
discharge; to be confined for fourteen days for the first Ar-
ticle 90 specification; to be confined for thirty days for the 
second Article 90 specification; and to be confined for three 
months for the Article 128 specification. The military judge 
then ruled that the periods of confinement would run con-
currently.4 However, because Appellant already had re-
ceived nonjudicial punishment for the two Article 90 spec-
ifications, the military judge also ruled that Appellant was 
entitled to receive Pierce credit. 
The parties agreed that consistent with the holding in 
Pierce, Appellant should receive confinement credit.  How-
ever, they disagreed about how that credit should be ap-
plied. The Government argued that the confinement credit 
should apply only to the separate sentences imposed for 
each Article 90 violation. In other words, the Government 
took the position that fourteen days of credit should be ap-
plied to the sentence of confinement for one Article 90 of-
fense, and the other fourteen days of credit should be ap-
plied to the other Article 90 violation. The defense, on the 
other hand, argued that the Pierce credit should apply to 
the sentence as a whole. In other words, trial defense coun-
sel took the position that because the segmented sentences 
were to run concurrently, the twenty -eight days of Pierce  
credit should be applied to the three months of total con-
finement Appellant was scheduled to serve.  
In response, the military judge explained his views of 
the issue. 
 Rarely have I found myself in a position where 
I have no guidance whatsoever. On whether to 
blindly follow Pierce with a disregard to seg-
mented sentencing and, frankly, with a disregard 
 
4 R.C.M. 1002(d)(2)(B) (2019 ed.) states that “[i]f a sentence 
includes more than one term of confinement, the military judge 
shall determine whether the terms of confinement will run con-
currently or consecutively.”  
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
to the nature of the Article 15s themselves. If I 
were to do that, the argument would be the ac-
cused is getting credit where credit is not due. Af-
ter all, if he received Article 15s for disobedience, 
he should get credit for the disobedience offenses. 
That’s the one hand. 
 On the other hand, if I’m going to follow the 
government’s proposed solution, I’m in uncharted 
waters having to apply what used to be black-and-
white sentencing credit principles  . . . . But the 
appeal of the government’s argument is that 
there’s no danger of either over crediting the ac-
cused or under []crediting  . . . the accused with 
what he’s entitled to. 
The military judge then ruled in favor of the Govern-
ment and applied the Pierce credit only to the two Article 
90 offenses “[b]ecause these Article 15s are so specific and 
are basically lifted from the Article 15s themselves to this 
charge sheet.” Accordingly, he credited Appellant with one 
pay grade credit against the sentence to reduction, fourteen 
days of credit against the segmented sentence of confine-
ment imposed for the first Article 90 specification, fourteen 
days of credit against the segmented sentence of confine-
ment imposed for the second Article 90 specification , and 
$1,142 against any automatic forfeitures. 5 The military 
judge noted in the judgment of the court that even “[a]fter 
applying those credits and then running the segmented 
confinement sentences concurrently, the total adjudged 
sentence to confinement remains 3 months.”  
The CCA subsequently affirmed the military judge’s 
ruling. Leese, 84 M.J. at 753. We then granted Appellant’s 
petition for grant of review on the following issue: 
“Whether the military judge and the Army Court correctly 
applied United States v. Pierce, 27 M.J. 367 (C.M.A. 1989) 
 
5 The United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) 
later concluded that the credited amount for any automatic for-
feitures should have been $1,042. United States v. Leese, 84 M.J. 
748, 751 n.4 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2024). Trial defense counsel used 
the correct amount in her R.C.M. 1106 submission to the con-
vening authority. 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
in awarding credit for Appellant’s two prior instances of 
nonjudicial punishment to a segmented sentence.” United 
States v. Leese, __ M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order granting 
review).  
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW 
“Pierce credit has long been considered a form of con-
finement credit.” United States v. Haynes, 79 M.J. 17, 19 
(C.A.A.F. 2019). The proper application of a confinement  
credit is a question of law reviewed de novo. See United 
States v. Spaustat , 57 M.J. 256, 260 (C.A.A.F. 2002) (re-
viewing de novo the “applications of credit for illegal pre-
trial punishment and lawful pretrial confinement”); see 
also United States v. Harris, 78 M.J. 434, 436 (C.A.A.F. 
2019) (“This Court reviews the question whether an appel-
lant is entitled to pretrial confinement credit de novo.” (ci-
tation omitted)). Therefore, determining the proper appli-
cation of Pierce credit is a question of law which we review 
de novo.  
V. DISCUSSION 
In its brief, the Government argues that Pierce credit 
should only be applied “to the segmented sentence for the 
offense previously punished” via nonjudicial punishment 
(NJP). Otherwise, “an accused would receive both the ben-
efit of a concurrent sentence and Pierce credit, with the 
Pierce credit applying to punishments for offenses that 
were wholly separate and of a different degree of criminal-
ity than the NJP offenses.” Indeed, the Government asserts 
that taking a different approach could result in a convicted 
servicemember receiving a sentencing “windfall.” 
In contrast, Appellant offers a number of arguments in 
support of his position that “Pierce credit must be applied 
against the total adjudged sentence.” In sum, Appellant ar-
gues that this approach “is consistent with past practice, 
[comports with] the awarding of other forms of sentence 
credit, ensures all portions of the sentence receive mean-
ingful relief, and recognizes that the government controls 
the charge sheet.” We will address each of Appellant’s ar-
guments in turn. 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
First, Appellant notes that the military judge’s applica-
tion of Pierce credit in the instant case “had zero impact on 
the length of the sentence that [A]ppellant [actually] 
served. . . . [Although] [A]ppellant’s sentence was short-
ened on paper, it was not reduced in reality.” He then avers 
that any Pierce credit afforded by a military judge must be 
“meaningful,” i.e., it must have a tangible effect on the pun-
ishment the servicemember actually experiences. 
We disagree. We begin by noting that in support of his 
position, Appellant cites cases such as Spaustat, 57 M.J. at 
256, United States v. Larner, 1 M.J. 371 (C.M.A. 1976), and 
United States v. Suzuki , 14 M.J. 491 (C.M.A. 1983).  
However, as he acknowledges, those cases involved illegal 
pretrial confinement credit —not Pierce credit—and we 
conclude that both the reasoning and the holdings in those 
two areas of the law are not interchangeable. We reach that 
conclusion because deterring the government from 
improperly placing a servicemember in pretrial 
confinement is patently distinct from ensuring that a 
convicted servicemember receives sentencing credit at a 
court-martial if he already had received nonjudicial 
punishment for the same offense via a lawful Article 15. 6 
 
6 Appellant seeks to tie together these two lines of cases as 
follows: “Though Larner and Suzuki dealt with illegal pretrial 
confinement and its processes, this Court in Gammons explained 
that Pierce credit should be adjudicated ‘in a manner similar to 
[the] adjudication of credit for illegal pretrial confinement.’ ” (Al-
teration in original.) (Quoting United States v. Gammon s, 51 
M.J. 169, 184 (C.A.A.F. 1999).) However, we do not ascribe to 
this passage from Gammons the same meaning that Appellant 
apparently does. The full sentence from the Gammons opinion 
states as follows:  
If the accused chooses to raise the issue of credit 
for prior punishment during an Article 39(a) ses-
sion rather than on the merits during sentencing, 
the military judge will adjudicate the specific 
credit to be applied by the convening authority 
against the adjudged sentence in a manner simi-
lar to [the] adjudication of credit for illegal pre-
trial confinement. 
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
And further, we reject Appellant’s contention that Pierce 
credit must result in a tangible benefit because: applicable 
statutes are silent on this point ; our case law imposes no 
such requirement; and as reflected below, we find no basis 
to impose such a mandate. 
Second, Appellant urges this Court to “adopt a simple -
to-apply principle that requires Pierce credit [to] be applied 
against the total adjudged sentence  . . . . This proposal is 
easy to apply, easy to understand, and ensures consistency 
of application across the services and potential sentences.” 
However, we do not find this point compelling. Simply 
stated, all of the benefits cited in favor of applying Pierce  
credit to the total adjudged sentence pertain equally to a 
determination that Pierce credit applie s only to the seg-
mented sentence that corresponds to the  offense that pre-
viously served as the basis for nonjudicial punishment.  
Third, Appellant argues as follows:  
 The government has a choice: punish an ac-
cused via nonjudicial punishment; via court-mar-
tial; or do both. When it does both, an accused 
must be afforded credit to prevent double punish-
ment . . . . The government should not be permit-
ted to charge prior non-judicial punishment and 
then hide behind the shield of concurrent sen-
tences to punish the appellant twice for the same 
misconduct . . . . 
However, we simply do not agree with Appellant’s conten-
tion that a convicted servicemember will receive “double 
punishment” if Pierce credit is applied to the segmented 
sentence that corresponds to the  offense that previously 
served as the basis for nonjudicial punishment rather than 
to the term of confinement as a whole. To the contrary, we 
conclude that even when a convicted servicemember does 
not receive tangible relief in terms of a reduction in his 
 
Gammons, 51 M.J. at 184. This broader context makes it clear 
to us that the Gammons court was not opining that because 
credit for illegal pretrial confinement must result in tangible re-
lief then Pierce credit must also result in tangible relief. Rather, 
the Gammons court was merely mentioning a procedural point.  
United States v. Leese, No. 25-0024/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
period of confinement because of a concurrent sentence, the 
imperative of the Pierce decision still will be obeyed —
namely, the convicted servicemember will not  be “twice 
punished for the same offense.” 27 M.J. at 369. 
The CCA explained this point with concision and 
clarity: 
[Pierce confinement credit should] be applied only 
to the segmented sentence for the offense previ-
ously punished under Article 15, UCMJ, and not 
to the total sentence to confinement when the ac-
cused is convicted of other offenses. This ensures 
an accused is not punished twice for the same of-
fense while also ensuring the accused does not re-
ceive credit when no credit is due. Whether the 
military judge determines the sentences to con-
finement shall run concurrently or consecutively, 
the result is the same. The accused receives relief 
that is effective and meaningful towards the of-
fense for which he has already been punished and 
not towards an offense for which he has not.  
Leese, 84 M.J. at 752. For these reasons, we answer the 
granted issue in the affirmative.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed.  