This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee/Cross-Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Jeremy W. HARBORTH, Chief Master-at-Arms 
United States Navy, Appellant/Cross-Appellee 
 
Nos. 24-0124 & 24-0125 
Crim. App. No. 202200157 
 
Argued November 5, 2024—Decided June 3, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Melanie J. Mann (arraignment and 
motions) and Chad C. Temple (motions and trial) 
 
For Appellant/Cross-Appellee: Lieutenant Raymond 
E. Bilter, JAGC, USN  (argued); Lieutenant Colonel 
Matthew E. Neely, USMC (on brief).  
 
For Appell ee/Cross-Appellant: Major Mary Clair e 
Finnen, USMC (argued); Lieutenant Commander 
Paul S . LaPlante, JAGC, USN,  Lieutenant 
Commander James P. Wu Zhu, JAGC, USN, Colonel 
Joseph M. Jennings, USMC, Colonel Iain D. Pedden, 
USMC, and Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON and Judge SPARKS 
joined and Judge MAGGS and Judge HARDY joined 
with respect to Parts I, II .A, II. B, and I II. Judge 
MAGGS filed a separate opinion  concurring in part 
and in the judgment, in which Judge HARDY joined. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
This case raises issues regarding the applicability of the 
Fourth Amendment to a seizure by a private actor and the 
implications for the Government when it accepts the same. 
A panel with enlisted representation convicted 
Appellant/Cross-Appellee (Appellant) of three 
specifications of indecent visual recording and one 
specification of production of child pornography in violation 
of Articles 120c and 134, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§  920c, 934 ( 2018). The panel of 
members sentenced hi m to confinement for eighteen 
months and a bad-conduct discharge. 
The United States Navy -Marine Corps Court of 
Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) affirmed one specification , 
dismissed one specification with prejudice, and set aside 
the last specification  of indecent visual recording . United 
States v. Harborth, 84 M.J. 509, 516 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. 
2023). The NMCCA set aside the remaining charge and 
specification of production of child pornography after 
concluding the Government’s retention of Appellant ’s 
electronic devices for three months without authorization  
was an unreasonable seizure . Id. at 531, 536. The Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy  certified five issues for 
review,1 and this Court granted review of a sixth issue 
raised by Appellant:2  
I. Did the military judge err by (1) finding the 
warrantless seizure of [Appellant’s] electronic 
devices was justified by probable cause, and 
(2) not ruling on law enforcement’s reliance on 
actual and apparent authority? 
II. Did the lower court err in ruling that law 
enforcement could not rely on actual or 
apparent authority and by holding the delay in 
securing a search authorization was 
 
1 United States v. Harborth , 84 M.J. 344, 344- 45 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (notice of certificate for review). 
2 United States v. Harborth, 85 M.J. 95 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
unreasonable, thereby setting aside 
[Appellant’s] convictions? 
III. Did the lower court err in failing to find that 
[Appellant] waived objection to the duration of 
the seizure, when [ Appellant] never objected 
at trial to the duration of the seizure, and Mil. 
R. Evid. 311 states that objections not made at 
trial are waived? 
IV. Did the lower court err in failing to first 
determine whether Ms. Hotel was a 
government actor, and if so, did Ms. Hotel’s 
actions constitute government action, thus 
implicating Fourth Amendment protection, 
when she seized [ Appellant’s] other devices 
and provided them to HPD and NCIS? 
V. Having found a reasonable probability that a 
motion to suppress the results of the seizure 
and search of [ Appellant’s] iPhone XS would 
have been meritorious, did the NMCCA err in 
not finding prejudice from the defense counsel 
not moving to suppress this evidence? 
VI. Was the trial defense counsel ineffective by not 
seeking suppression of all evidence derived 
from the unlawful seizure of [Appellant’s] 
property?   
Addressing Issue III, we hold Appellant waived 
objection to the duration of the seizure by failing to raise 
the objection at trial. Turning next to Issue IV, we hold Ms. 
Hotel was a private actor, and therefore, the Fourth 
Amendment was not implicated  when she seized  
Appellant’s devices. We decline to answer Issues I and II, 
which have been rendered moot by our resolution of Issues 
III and IV. Lastly, answering Issue VI, we hold trial 
defense counsel’s failure to object to the duration of the 
seizure of his  devices was not ineffective. We decline to 
answer Issue V, which has been rendered moot by our 
resolution of Issue VI. Accordingly, we reverse the decision 
of the NMCCA. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
I. Background 
Appellant turns his iPhone XS over to his wife 
On Saturday, May 11, 2019, Appellant was driving with 
his wife, Ms. Hotel, and his fifteen-year-old stepdaughter, 
Ms. November, when a n argument erupted over 
Appellant’s alleged infidelity. Ms. Hotel  asked to see his 
phone. Appellant resisted, telling her “there were things on 
his phone he didn’t want [her] to see.” Ms. November  
grabbed the iPhone XS out of his hand and turned  it over 
to her mother. Ms. Hotel demanded his password, which he 
eventually surrendered.  
After arriving home, Ms. Hotel and Ms. November went 
into the house first , locked all the doors , and looked 
through the photos . Ms. Hotel did not find any 
inappropriate photos  until Ms. November suggested she 
look through the deleted  photos folder. There, Ms. Hotel 
found six photos of her daughter . Two were of Ms. 
November sunbathing. The others were taken by a security 
camera located in Ms. November’s bedroom 3 and showed 
her changing clothes in her bedroom. In one of the photos, 
her breasts were exposed.  After seeing these photos, Ms. 
Hotel called the police.  
Meanwhile, Appellant made his way into the garage 
where he was confronted by Ms. Hotel . Concerning the 
photos, she asked him, “What were you going to do? Were 
you going to pleasure yourself to them?” Appellant  
responded, “No, no , but I thought about it.” Ms. Hotel 
punched him. 
Ms. Hotel turns over Appellant’s iPhone XS to HPD 
Officer Tango of the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) 
arrived to find Appellant  in front of his home. Appellant  
admitted getting into an argument with his wife over 
inappropriate photos of his  minor stepdaughter. Officer 
Tango assured Appellant  no one was in trouble  yet, to 
which Appellant responded, “[I]t’s bad, I need help. You 
 
3 Appellant’s home was outfitted with a Vivint security 
system with cameras in every room. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
should just arrest me now.” Officer Tango then spoke with 
Ms. Hotel, who showed him the four photos she had seen of 
Ms. November on the iPhone XS. Another HPD officer on 
scene, Officer Bravo, took photos of the images as Ms. Hotel 
flipped through them. Ms. Hotel then turned the iPhone XS 
over to HPD . That same day s he attempted to give HPD 
more devices, but Officer Tango refused  to accept them 
because “there was no probable cause that the devices had 
content relevant to this particular case.”  
After HPD left, Ms. Hotel accessed Appellant ’s iPad 4.  
After connecting to iCloud, she saw emails sharing links to 
video clips associated with the Vivint account. Ms. Hotel 
testified those emails were sent to Appellant  and she 
personally viewed approximately twenty of them. In the 
videos, Ms. Hotel saw her naked daughter masturbating. 
Two days later , on May 13, 2019, she turned that  iPad 4, 
an additional iPad , and another iPhone , all belonging to 
Appellant, over to HPD. 
NCIS’s investigation begins the same day Ms. Hotel 
turns over Appellant’s iPhone XS to HPD 
On May 11, 2019, t he same day Ms. Hotel turned over 
Appellant’s iPhone XS to HPD, HPD informed Naval 
Criminal Investigative Service ( NCIS) about its case 
against Appellant. NCIS opened its own investigation and 
requested primary jurisdiction from  HPD. NCIS assigned 
the case to Special Agent (SA) Kilo. 
On May 15, 2019, four days after the investigation was 
opened, Ms. Hotel consented to a  permissive search 
authorization “of her residence for electronic evidence.” By 
the time agents arrived to conduct the search , Ms. Hotel 
had collected a box of Appellant’s electronic devices she had 
found amongst his personal belongings . She gave the 
agents the box of devices , saying, “here’s some stuff that 
might be helpful to you.” She also showed agents the Vivint 
wall security panel with surveillance footage from around 
the house, including surveillance videos of Ms. November  
nude or partially nude . NCIS agents photographed the 
location and angle of the Vivint security cameras, including 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
the one in Ms. November’s room, and then seized the Vivint 
security panel with Ms. Hotel’s permission.4  
Ms. Hotel turned over eleven electronic devices to NCIS 
on May 15, 2019, including  the Vivint security panel, an 
iPhone 6s, and numerous electronic devices capable of 
storage.5 A little more than a week later, NCIS received the 
devices Ms. Hotel previously turned over to HPD.  
NCIS secures search authorization 
On May 29, 2019, Appellant was brought to NCIS for 
questioning. After being advised of his Article 31(b) , 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 831(b) (2018), rights, Appellant elected 
to remain silent and refused consent to  search his 
electronic devices. 
After these initial steps, the investigation slowed. SA 
Kilo transferred, and the case was reassigned to SA Mike.  
On June 24, 2019, forty-four days after NCIS started its 
investigation, SA Mike met  with Ms. Hotel to discuss  the 
electronic devices she had turned over before SA Mike was 
assigned to the case, and to ask why she turned over each 
device. In a hearing on the motion to suppress, SA Mike 
testified that Ms. Hotel had gathered the electronic devices 
on her own initiative; “[s]he was not tasked to do anything.” 
Forty-three days after the interview, on August 6, 2019, 
SA Mike sent a draft command authorization for search 
and seizure (CASS) to the staff judge advocate for review.  
One week later, on August 13, 2019, ninety-four days after 
Ms. Hotel gave Appellant ’s iPhone XS to HPD, the CASS 
was approved. 
 
 
 
4 Evidence seized from the Vivint security panel is not at 
issue in this appeal. 
5 More than twenty devices  were eventually logged in 
evidence, including the items turned  over by Ms. Hotel in the 
early days of the investigation. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
The forensic examination of Appellant’s devices yields 
more nude videos and images  
NCIS’s forensic examination of Appellant ’s devices 
revealed the presence of the Vivint security mobile 
application on three devices: the iPhone XS, the iPhone 6s, 
and the iPad 4. In total, NCIS found 126 videos from the 
Vivint security camera saved on these three devices. 
Appellant’s iPhone XS also contained several images of Ms. 
November changing clothes in addition to the deleted 
photos viewed by Ms. Hotel. 
Trial defense counsel moves to suppress evidence 
retrieved from Appellant’s devices  
In a written pretrial motion, trial defense counsel 
moved to suppress evidence from the “search of the 
accused’s iPhone XS and the unconstitutional seizure s of 
the accused’s other iPhones and iPads.” He  reiterated 
during oral argument on the motion that Appellant sought 
to suppress the “unlawful search of the iPhone X [S]” and 
offered “a separate argument” concerning “the seizure of 
the other three Apple devices .” Neither party mention ed 
the duration of the seizure , the time it took for the 
Government to get  a CASS, the diligence of the 
investigative agents, or the reasonableness of the 
investigation’s speed. 
Ruling on the motion, the military judge found that “law 
enforcement officers did not search the devices, ask for 
them, or collect them while searching the home. Rather , 
[Ms. Hotel ], of her own volition, collected and provided” 
Appellant’s electronic devices. Yet, the military judge did 
not rule on whether the seizure was justified because Ms. 
Hotel was a private actor. Instead, the military judge 
denied the motion on the grounds that the seizure was 
justified by probable cause and  inevitable discovery 
applied. 
II. Discussion 
Starting with Issue III, we hold Appellant waived any 
challenge to the duration of the seizure of all of his devices. 
Turning next to Issue IV, we hold Ms. Hotel was a private 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
actor, and therefore her actions were not constrained by 
the Fourth Amendment. Finally, answering Issue VI, we 
hold trial defense counsel was not ineffective because a 
motion to suppress would not have been successful. Our 
resolution of these issues renders Issues I, II, and V moot. 
A. Appellant waived objection to the duration 
of the seizure (Issue III) 
The third certified issue requires us to determine  
whether the lower court erred by failing to find that 
Appellant waived objection to the duration of the seizure.  
Suppression arguments not raised at trial are waived. 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 311(d)(2)(A) (2019 ed.). 
When an issue is waived, “it is extinguished and may not 
be raised on appeal.” United States v. Gladue, 67 M.J. 311, 
313 (C.A.A.F. 2009). Preserving an argument requires a 
“particularized objection.” United States v. Perkins, 78 M.J. 
381, 390 (C.A.A.F. 2019). When constitutional rights are at 
issue, this Court has applied a presumption against finding 
waiver. United States v. Blackburn , 80 M.J. 205, 209 
(C.A.A.F. 2020). “This Court reviews de novo whether an 
accused has waived an issue.” Id. 
In this case, notwithstanding  the presumption against 
waiver of constitutional issues, Appellant  waived 
challenging the duration of the seizure  by failing to make 
a particularized objection to the duration at trial. Instead, 
the defense moved to suppress evidence from: (1) the 
search of the iPhone XS; and (2) the seizure of Appellant’s 
other devices for lack of probable cause. We agree with the 
NMCCA that Appellant could not challenge the duration of 
the seizure of the iPhone XS on appeal where, at trial, he 
objected only to its search and he waived objection to its 
seizure. However, for the reasons set forth below, w e 
disagree with the NMCCA’s conclusion that he preserved 
objection to the duration of the seizure of the other devices.  
In written and oral arguments in support of the motion 
to suppress, trial defense counsel specifically challenged 
the seizure of Appellant’s other devices for lack of probable 
cause. Trial defense counsel never discusse d the length of 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
the seizure as an independent ground for challenging the 
constitutionality of the seizure, let alone as a component of 
his probable cause attack. To the extent the parties 
discussed the timeline of the seizure, it was  solely in the 
context of evaluating evidence of probable cause “at the 
moment of the seizure.” We conclude the presumption 
against waiver of  constitutional issues  was overcome 
because the lack of a challenge to the duration of the 
seizure fails to meet the “particularized objection” 
requirement of M.R.E. 311(d)(2)(A).  Perkins, 78 M.J. 
at 390.  
The NMCCA cited United States v. Griffith , 867 F.3d 
1265, 1277 (D.C. Cir. 2017) , in support of the conclusion  
that Appellant’s challenge on appeal to the duration of the 
seizure of Appellant’s other devices was  not waived 
because it was “ ‘simply an extension of his probable cause 
challenge, which he has pressed all along. ’ ” Harborth, 84 
M.J. at 524 (quoting Griffith, 867 F.3d at 1277). In Griffith, 
the appellant raised a probable cause challenge at the trial 
level and failed. 867 F.3d at 1270. On appeal, the appellant 
added an overbreadth argument, claiming  there was no 
probable cause to seize devices of non -suspect residents of 
the same house as  the appellant. Id. at 1277. Both 
arguments challenged the probable cause of the initial 
seizure, and the record was fully developed because the 
overbreadth challenge relied on the same facts as the 
probable cause argument at trial. Id. at 1277-78.  
This case is distinguishable from Griffith because here, 
the legal theory  was never raised at trial and the record 
was not fully developed. Instead, Appellant raised an 
entirely new ground for challenging a Fourth Amendment 
seizure for the first time on appeal—after any opportunity 
for the Government to explain or justify the delay  had 
passed. Allowing Appellant to assert this argument for the 
first time on appeal frustrates the purpose of the 
“particularized objection” requirement as it prevents the 
Government from “present[ing] relevant evidence on the 
objection” at trial. United States v. Bavender, 80 M.J. 433, 
436 (C.A.A.F. 2021)  (citation omitted) . Nor was this a 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
“subtle” theory woven throughout the defense’s argument, 
which specifically and repeatedly asserted a lack of 
probable cause as the basis for the suppression motion . 
Blackburn, 80 M.J. at 210. The lower court erred in not 
recognizing this issue was waived.  
B. The seizure of Appellant’s devices by Ms. Hotel, a 
private actor, did not implicate Appellant’s Fourth 
Amendment right against unreasonable seizure 
(Issue IV) 
Having concluded Appellant waived objection to the 
duration of the seizure of all of his devices, we turn next to 
the question of whether the initial seizure of his devices by 
Ms. Hotel was barred by the Fourth Amendment. Although 
the Government did not present the issue to the lower 
court, the Government certified to this Court the issue of 
whether the NMCCA erred by failing to determine that she 
was not a government actor subject to the Fourth 
Amendment.  
“When reviewing a lower court’s decision on a military 
judge’s ruling, we ‘typically have pierced through that 
intermediate level and examined the military judge’s 
ruling, then decided whether the Court of Criminal 
Appeals was right or wrong in its examina tion of the 
military judge’s ruling.’ ” Id. at 211 (quoting United States 
v. Shelton, 64 M.J. 32, 37 (C.A.A.F. 2006)) . We review the 
military judge’s ruling on a motion to suppress for abuse of 
discretion, considering the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the prevailing party. United States v. Shields, 
83 M.J. 226, 230- 31 (C.A.A.F. 2023). There is an abuse of 
discretion when the “military judge’s findings of fact are 
clearly erroneous, the court’s decision is influenced by an 
erroneous view of the law, or the military judge’s decision 
on the issue at hand is outside the range of choices 
reasonably arising from the applicable facts  and the law.” 
Id. at 230 (internal quotation marks omitted).  
The Fourth Amendment protects the “right of the 
people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effects, against unreasonable searches and  seizures.” U.S. 
Const. amend. IV. The Supreme Court has held that the 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Fourth Amendment restrains g overnment action, not 
private conduct. United States v. Jacobsen , 466 U.S. 109, 
113-14 (1984). As such, its protections do not extend to “a 
search or seizure, even an unreasonable one, effected by a 
private individual not acting as an agent of the 
Government or with the participation or knowledge of any 
government official.” Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted). Determining whether a person 
is a private actor or “an agent of the [Government]” 
requires consideration of “all the facts and circumstances.” 
United States v. Buford, 74 M.J. 98, 101 (C.A.A.F. 2015)  
(alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). 
In this case, the analysis is straightforward because the 
parties agree: “Ms. [Hotel] was not acting as a government 
actor when she handed over [ Appellant’s] exclusive 
electronic devices to law enforcement.”  The parties’ 
understanding is consistent with the military judge’s 
findings of fact set forth in his ruling on the motion to 
dismiss: that “Ms. [Hotel] collected, of her own accord, 
multiple electronic devices and provided them to NCIS” ; 
“Ms. [Hotel] provided Officer [Tango]  with two iPads and 
an additional iPhone and requested that they be submitted 
into evidence”; and “[Ms. Hotel] provided a damaged Apple 
iPhone, model A1634, to Special Agent [Kilo]  along with 
other electronic storage devices.” Because Ms. Hotel was a 
private actor her  seizure of Appellant’s devices did not 
implicate the Fourth Amendment.  Thus, we hold her  
seizure of Appellant’s devices did not violate the Fourth 
Amendment prohibition against unreasonable seizures.6 
 
6 The NMCCA concluded that “the military judge’s finding of 
fact that HPD officers did not ask for Appellant ’s devices, and 
that Ms. Hotel provided them of her own volition, is clearly  
erroneous.” Harborth, 84 M.J. at 528 n.186 . However, the 
NMCCA cited her testimony that she searched the residence for 
firearms at the direction of HPD. In light of the parties’ 
agreement that Ms. Hotel acted on her own initiative in seizing 
Appellant’s electronic devices and in the absence of any evidence 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
We also conclude there was nothing unlaw ful in the 
Government’s receipt of the devices. The Supreme Court 
has long recognized “there [is] nothing wrongful about the 
Government’s acquisition” of evidence that was seized, 
searched and turned over to the g overnment by a private 
actor. Walter v. United States, 447 U.S. 649, 656 (1980) 
(plurality opinion) ( first citing Burdeau v. McDowell , 256 
U.S. 465 (1921) ; and then citing  Coolidge v. New 
Hampshire, 403 U.S. 443 (1971)). 7 The Supreme Court 
reaffirmed this principle  more recently,  acknowledging 
that an individual “acting on his own initiative may be able 
to deliver evidence to the police” before police are required 
to obtain a warrant. Georgia v. Randolph , 547 U.S. 103, 
116 (2006) (citing Coolidge, 403 U.S. at 487-89).  
Appellant points to no affirmative obligation on the part 
of law enforcement to reject evidence voluntarily handed 
over by a private actor, and we know of no such obligation 
existing in any federal jurisdiction. To the contrary, we 
conclude that “where a private party produced evidence for 
government inspection, ‘it was not incumbent on the police 
to stop her or avert their eyes.’  ” Walter, 447 U.S. at 661 
(White, J., with whom Brennan, J., joined , concurring in 
part and in the judgment) (quoting Coolidge , 403 U.S. at 
489). To hold otherwise would unreasonabl y require law 
 
to the contrary, we reject the NMCCA’s conclusion and conclude 
the military judge’s findings of fact are not clearly erroneous.  
7 Both the concurrence and dissent agreed with the plurality 
that there was “nothing wrongful” about the government’s 
acquisition of such evidence. Walter, 447 U.S. at 661 (White, J., 
with whom B rennan, J., joined , concurring in part and in the 
judgment) (“I agree with Mr. Justice Stevens  that there was 
‘nothing wrongful’ about the Government ’s examination of the 
contents of the packages that had been opened by private 
parties.”); id. at 663 (Blackmun, J., with whom Burger, C.J., 
Powell, J., and Rehnquist, J., joined , dissenting) (“The opinion 
acknowledges that ‘there was nothing wrongful about the 
Government’s acquisition of the packages or its examination of 
their contents to the extent that they had already been examined 
by third parties.’ ”). 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
enforcement to reject potential evidence of  a known crime 
by a known suspect offered by a private actor.8   
The initial seizure of Appellant’s devices by Ms. Hotel, 
a private actor, was not constrained by the Fourth 
Amendment and law enforcement did “nothing wrong” in 
accepting the devices from her. But as Appellant argued at 
trial, once the Government took possession of the devices 
“for their own purposes,” it became a seizure subject to the 
Fourth Amendment. Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 120 n.18. As a 
result, the Government must still obtain a warrant or meet 
an exception to the warrant requirement to seize  such 
evidence. See id. at 121. Mindful, however, that “  ‘the 
ultimate touchstone of the Fourth Amendment is 
reasonableness’ . . . [t]he ‘warrant requirement is subject to 
certain exceptions.’ ” Lange v. California, 594 U.S. 295, 301 
(2021) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398, 403 (2006)). One such 
exception allows for the temporary seizure of effects based 
upon probable cause or a “reasonable, articulable 
suspicion, premised on objective facts,” of criminal activity. 
United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 702 (1983); Jacobsen, 
466 U.S. at 121.  
The United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh 
Circuit held that a warrantless seizure was reasonable 
under circumstances similar to this case in United States 
v. Castaneda, 997 F.3d 1318 (11th Cir . 2021). In 
Castaneda, two of the appellant’s friends who were living 
in his condominium came across child pornography on his 
laptop while downloading a television show. Id. at 1326. 
They notified the FBI and turned over the laptop, along 
 
8 The Government was still obligated to secure search 
authorization, and did in fact obtain search authorization, before 
searching the devices.  See Walter , 447 U.S. at 654 (plurality 
opinion) (“The fact that FBI agents were lawfully in possession 
of the boxes [of evidence] did not give them authority to search 
their contents.”); see also Jacobsen , 466 U.S. at 120 n.17 (“A 
container which can support a reasonable expectation of privacy 
may not be searched, even on probable cause, without a 
warrant.”).  
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
with four other laptops belonging to the appellant. Id. After 
obtaining a warrant to search the devices,  investigators 
discovered child pornography on two of the laptops. Id. The 
Eleventh Circuit rejected the appellant’s argument that 
the evidence should be suppressed. Id.  at 1327. First, the 
friends were not subject to the Fourth Amendment, and the 
FBI was not barred from accepting the devices. Id. at 1328. 
And second, even if the FBI’s acceptance of the devices was 
a seizure, the court noted that law enforcement can 
lawfully seize property when a “private party has 
voluntarily relinquished” it to them and probable cause 
exists to believe the property contains contraband. Id.  
(citing Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 120-22). 
In this case, as in Castaneda, to the extent law 
enforcement’s acceptance of Appellant’s devices from a 
private actor was a seizure, it was reasonable. When HPD 
arrived at Appellant’s residence, Appellant declared that 
the officers should arrest him. Ms. Hotel showed the 
officers nude images of her minor daughter that were saved 
on Appellant’s iPhone XS. Two days later, she gave HPD 
three more devices, including an iPad on which she had 
seen child pornography recorded by the Vivint security 
system. Ms. Hotel subsequently gathered Appellant’s other 
electronic devices on her own initiative and voluntarily 
relinquished them to NCIS , stating at one point, “here’s 
some stuff that might be helpful to you.” Even if the 
circumstances did not rise to probable cause, the seizure of 
the other devices was justified on a reasonable, articulable 
suspicion of criminal activity. See Place, 462 U.S. at 702.  
C. Ineffective assistance of counsel (Issue VI) 
On appeal to the NMCCA, Appellant argued that to the 
extent he waived objection to the duration of the seizure of 
all his devices, trial defense counsel’s failure to preserve 
the issue was ineffective. The NMCCA concluded that trial 
defense counsel waived objection  to the seizure of the 
iPhone XS, Harborth, 84 M.J. at 523, but declined to reach 
the ineffective assistance claim. Id. at 533 n.244. The court 
was “convinced . . . that there is a reasonable probability 
that a motion to suppress the results of the seizure and 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
search of [Appellant’s] iPhone X [S] would have been 
meritorious.” Id. Nevertheless, the court found “the 
overwhelming evidence of guilt presents [an] 
insurmountable obstacle to Appellant claiming prejudice 
from his alleged ineffective assistance of counsel claim.” Id. 
Therefore, the court concluded, there was “not a reasonable 
probability of a different verdict” even if the iPhone XS 
evidence had been suppressed. Id.9 
The Judge Advocate General  of the Navy  certified to 
this Court Issue V, questioning whether the NMCCA erred 
in finding no prejudice after deciding there was a 
reasonable probability of success if the defense had 
challenged the duration of the iPhone XS seizure. We 
granted review of Issue VI  raised by Appellant, whether 
trial defense counsel was deficient in failing to preserve the 
objection to the duration of the seizure of all of his devices. 
Addressing Issue VI, we hold there was no reasonable 
probability of success on a motion to suppress based on the 
duration of  the seizure of Appellant’s devices. Therefore, 
trial defense counsel was not deficient in failing to preserve 
the issue . We need not answer Certified Issue V, as our 
resolution of Issue VI renders moot the certified question  
on prejudice.  
“The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to effective 
assistance of counsel.” United States v. Gilley, 56 M.J. 113, 
124 (C.A.A.F. 2001). An ineffective assistance of counsel 
claim requires the appellant to demonstrate  (1) counsel’s 
performance was deficient, and (2) this deficiency caused 
prejudice. United States v. Palik , 84 M.J. 284, 288 
(C.A.A.F. 2024). Under prong (1), to overcome the 
presumption of competence and show that counsel’s 
performance was deficient where the “ ‘claim of ineffective 
assistance of counsel is premised on counsel’s failure to 
make a motion . . . , an appellant must show that there is a 
 
9 The NMCCA concluded that trial defense counsel preserved 
the issue with respect to the other devices , 84 M.J.  at 524; 
therefore, it did not address whether  waiver of this challenge 
would have been ineffective assistance of counsel. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
reasonable probability that such a motion would have been 
meritorious.’ ” Id. at 289 (alteration in original) (quoting 
United States v. McConnell , 55 M.J. 479, 482 (C.A.A.F. 
2001)). To establish prejudice u nder prong (2),  the 
appellant must show “ a reasonable probability that the 
verdict would have been different absent the excludable 
evidence.” Kimmelman v. Morrison , 477 U.S. 365, 375 
(1986). This Court reviews ineffective assistance of counsel 
claims de novo. United States v. Green , 68 M.J. 360, 362 
(C.A.A.F. 2010). 
Appellant contends trial defense counsel was deficient 
in failing to preserve the argument that a  three-month 
delay between the seizure of his devices and obtaining a 
CASS was unreasonable. Although there is no per se rule 
determining when an initially lawful seizure becomes 
unreasonable, United States v. Gurczynski , 76 M.J. 381, 
387 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (noting that “neither the Fourth 
Amendment nor the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 
impose deadlines for the digital examination of seized 
devices”), we reco gnize that a “seizure [can become] 
unreasonable because its length unduly intruded upon 
constitutionally protected interests.” Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 
124 n.25; see also United States v. Cote, 72 M.J. 41, 44 n.6 
(C.A.A.F. 2013) (noting that even if a warrant does not 
contain a time limitation, “the Government nevertheless 
remains bound by the Fourth Amendment to the extent 
that all seizures must be reasonable in duration”). Here , 
we need not decide whether the three-month delay between 
the Government’s receip t of Appellant’s devices and 
obtaining a CASS was unreasonable because we conclude 
the military judge would not have applied the exclusionary 
rule even if he found the delay unreasonable.  
The “exclusionary rule serves to deter deliberate, 
reckless, or grossly negligent conduct, or in some 
circumstances recurring or systemic negligence.” Herring 
v. United States , 555 U.S. 135, 144 (2009). “ [F]or the 
exclusionary rule to apply ‘the deterrent effect of 
suppression must be substantial and outweigh any harm 
to the justice system.’ ” United States v. Lattin, 83 M.J. 192, 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
197 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (quoting Herring, 555 U.S. at 147).  
Suppression of evidence is a “last resort.” Hudson v. 
Michigan, 547 U.S. 586, 591 (2006). 
Military Rule of Evidence 311(a)  implements the 
Supreme Court’s holding in Herring. Lattin, 83 M.J. at 197. 
Where the defense moves to suppress evidence under 
M.R.E. 311, the  prosecution may defeat the motion by  
proving by a preponderance of the evidence “ that the 
deterrence of future unlawful searches or seizures is not 
appreciable or such deterrence does not outweigh the costs 
to the justice system of excluding the evidence.” M.R.E. 
311(d)(5)(A).  
The military judge never ruled on whether the 
exclusionary rule should apply because trial defense 
counsel never moved to suppress evidence on the basis of 
duration (hence the ineffective assistance of counsel claim). 
Nevertheless, the NMCCA held that exclusion of the 
evidence from the devices other than the iPhone XS 
required dismissal of one specification and a rehearing on 
two others. Harborth, 84 M.J. at 536. While acknowledging 
that this result would impose costs on the justice system, 
the NMCCA conclu ded the benefits of deterrence 
outweighed the costs. Id. at 532. The court arrived at this 
result for three key reasons: it believed law enforcement 
“directed Appellant’s wife” to gather his electronic devices, 
id. at 531; it viewed the seizure as a “dragnet seizure” of 
the sort this Court has condemned, id.  at 531- 32 (citing 
United States v. Nieto , 76 M.J. 101, 108 n.5 (C.A.A.F. 
2017)); and it found no reasonable officer could have 
concluded that Ms. Hotel had actual or apparent authority 
to consent to the seizure of Appellant’s devices, id.  at 
528-29 (citing United States v. Taylor, No. 201900242, 2020 
CCA LEXIS 137, at *43, 2020 WL 2086600, at *16 (N -M. 
Ct. Crim. App. Apr. 30, 2020) (unpublished)).  
We are unpersuaded by the NMCCA’s reasoning , 
primarily because these three reasons turn on the origin of 
the seizure and the NMCCA’s characterization of Ms. Hotel 
as a government agent rather than the  seizure’s duration. 
This Court has previously concluded, by virtue of her being 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
a private actor, Ms. Hotel’s collection of Appellant’s devices 
did not implicate the Fourth Amendment . Law 
enforcement acted reasonably in accepting those  devices 
from her , and they were not required to first ascertain 
whether Ms. Hotel had actual or apparent authority to turn 
over devices she had seized as a private actor. 
Addressing the crux of Appellant’s claim, there can be 
no doubt that Appellant’s possessory interests were 
implicated to some degree by the Government’s  retention 
of his devices prior to the CASS. See United States v. Hahn, 
44 M.J. 360, 362 (C.A.A.F. 1996) (“ ‘A “seizure” of property 
occurs when there is some meaningful interference with an 
individual’s possessory interests in that property.’ ” 
(quoting Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 113)).  
However, even if the military judge agreed with 
Appellant on the merits of the duration challenge, from the 
military judge’s perspective the exclusionary rule would 
not have been appropriate because: (1) law enforcement’s 
actions could not be described as deliberate, reckless, 
grossly negligent, or symptomatic of a recurring systemic 
issue, Herring, 555 U.S. at 144 ; and (2) the cost to the 
justice system is high.  
Under the first factor, law enforcement did not 
deliberately, recklessly, or with gross negligence  violate 
Appellant’s possessory interests in his property. The 
military judge ruled as a matter of law that the seizure of 
the iPhone XS was justified by probable cause, and we have 
concluded that Ms. Hotel was  a private actor when she 
turned over the other devices to law enforcement . 
Moreover, regarding the duration of the seizure, Appellant 
never requested the return of his devices,  even when he 
was allowed t o return home to collect his belongings. “[A] 
request for return may weigh in the analysis as to whether 
the government has acted in a reasonable or unreasonable 
manner by retaining an item.” Cote, 72 M.J. at 47 (Baker, 
C.J., concurring in part  and dissenting in part). This is 
because “a request gives police notice that the continued 
retention of the property is harming  the owner.” Id. at 49 
n.3. Appellant’s failure to request the return of his devices 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
19 
 
either before or after the CASS was obtained suggests he 
was not harmed by the continued retention, weighing 
against application of the exclusionary rule. In addition, 
after Appellant refused consent to search, SA Mike 
scheduled an interview with Ms. Hotel to review all of the 
evidence she turned over and determine whether there was 
probable cause for a CASS. This does not demonstrate 
deliberate, reckless, or gross negligence.  
The lack of gross indifference or deliberate neglect on 
the part of law enforcement in this case contrasts sharply 
with the facts in Taylor , relied upon by the NMCCA . 
Taylor, 2020 CCA LEXIS 137, at *47, 2020 WL 2086600, at 
*17-18.10 In Taylor, the NMCCA held  the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion in finding NCIS acted 
unreasonably when it waited six months to ask the ex-wife 
of the appellee for consent to search the appellee’s devices. 
Id. at *47, 2020 WL 2086600, at * 17. NCIS never sought 
search authorization. Id. , 2020 WL 2086600, at * 17. It 
relied solely on the consent of appellee’s  ex-wife despite 
“substantial information showing [the ex-wife’s] animosity 
toward” appellee. Id. at *42, 2020 WL 2086600, at *16. We 
find Taylor distinguishable as the issue there was not  
receiving evidence from a private actor but instead 
whether NCIS agents claimed apparent consent for a 
warrantless search  to circumvent the need for a search 
authorization. Id., 2020 WL 2086600, at *16. Therefore, we 
reject the NMCCA’s characterization of law enforcement’s 
actions here as “recurring or systemic negligence” thereby 
justifying the exclusionary rule.  Harborth, 84 M.J. at 532 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting Herring, 555 
U.S. at 144).  
Turning now to the second factor, the cost to the justice 
system of applying the exclusionary rule would be high as 
it would result in dismissal of one specification and 
rehearing on two others.  
 
10 Although not binding on this Court, Taylor  was cited by 
trial defense counsel, so we consider it to the extent it could have 
factored into the military judge’s ruling.  
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
20 
 
This cost is not outweighed by the low deterrent effect 
in this case. The record does not indicate NCIS deliberately 
or recklessly violated Appellant’s rights; rather it suggests 
law enforcement was sensitive to Appellant’s rights.11 For 
that reason, we cannot conclude the military judge would 
have applied the exclusionary rule. 
To succeed in a claim of ineffective assistance of counsel 
on the basis of failing to file a motion, the appellant must 
show a reasonable probability of success. Because the 
military judge would not have applied the exclusionary 
rule, the motion to suppress did not have a reasonable  
probability of success. Therefore, we conclude trial defense 
counsel was not deficient in failing to challenge the 
duration of the seizure.  
III. Judgment 
We answer C ertified Issues III and IV in the 
affirmative. In light of our disposition of Certified Issues 
III and IV, we decline to answer Certified Issues I and II 
as moot. We answer Issue VI in the negative. In light of our 
disposition of Issue VI, we decline to answer Certified Issue 
V as moot. Therefore, we set aside  the decision of the 
United States Navy -Marine Corps  Court of Criminal 
Appeals. The case is returned to the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy for remand to the Court of Criminal 
Appeals for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
 
11 See supra pp. 18-19. 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
 
Judge MAGGS, with whom Judge H ARDY joins, con-
curring in part and in the judgment. 
I concur in the Court’s judgment to set aside the deci-
sion of the United States Navy -Marine Corps  Court of 
Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) and to return the case to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Navy for remand to the 
NMCCA for further proceedings.  I also join Parts I, II.A , 
II.B, and III of the Court’s opinion. I differ just with respect 
to Part II.C. 
Certified Issue VI asks whether Appellant had ineffec-
tive assistance of counsel  at trial. Appellant asserts that 
his trial defense counsel’s representation was deficient be-
cause his counsel did not ask the military judge to suppress 
evidence from his devices on the ground that the Govern-
ment’s three-month delay in obtaining a search authoriza-
tion constituted an unreasonable seizure. The Court rejects 
this argument, reasoning that even if the military judge 
had determined that an unreasonable seizure had oc-
curred, the military judge would not have excluded the ev-
idence after applying the balancing test in Military Rule of 
Evidence 311(d)(5)(A). 
I agree with the Court that the Sixth Amendment does 
not require counsel to make a motion to suppress evidence 
that is unlikely to succeed. United States v. Jameson , 65 
M.J. 160, 164 (C.A.A.F. 2007)  (citing United States v. Del 
Rosario-Puente, 41 F. App’x 483, 484 (1st Cir. 2002)). I also 
agree with the Court that the military judge was unlikely 
to grant a motion to suppress the evidence found on Appel-
lant’s devices. But my reasoning is different . While the 
Court decides that the military judge would not ha ve ap-
plied the exclusionary rule, I believe that the military judge 
was unlikely to have found that the police’s continued re-
tention of the devices in this case constituted an unreason-
able seizure. In my view, this is a simpler and less specu-
lative reason for rejecting Appellant’s ineffective 
assistance of counsel claim.1 
 
1 I express no opinion on the correctness of the Court’s con-
clusion that the military judge would not have applied the 
United States v. Harborth, No. 24-0124/NA & No. 24-0125/NA 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and in the judgment 
2 
 
Even assuming that the police’s retention of property 
voluntarily given to the police by a third party constitutes 
a “seizure,” the Fourth Amendment prohibits only unrea-
sonable seizures. United States v. Jacobsen , 466 U.S. 109, 
120-21 (1984) (holding that federal agents’ “assertion of do-
minion and control” over property was a warrantless sei-
zure, but not an unreasonable one). A key fact in assessing 
the reasonableness of the police’s actions in this case is that 
Appellant never asked the police to return hi s devices be-
fore they were searched.2 Appellant has cited no precedent 
that clearly establishes that the government unreasonably 
interferes with an accused’s possessory interests in prop-
erty when the police’s initial receipt of the property was not 
a seizure and the accused never requested the return of the 
property. Accordingly, a trial defense counsel could reason-
ably decide that seeking suppression would be futile be-
cause the military judge would not hold that an unreason-
able seizure had occurred. Trial defense counsel’s 
performance in this case therefore was not deficient. 
 
exclusionary rule even if the military judge had found retention 
of the devices to be an unreasonable seizure. 
2 The Supreme Court recognized the Fourth Amendment sig-
nificance of a lack of a request for the return of property in police 
custody in United States v. Johns, 469 U.S. 478 (1985) . In that 
case, the police properly seized the defendants’ trucks and had 
authority to search the contents of packages within the trucks. 
Id. at 483 -86. The d efendants, however,  argued that federal 
agents had violated the Fourth Amendment by retaining posses-
sion of the packages found in the trucks for several days before 
searching them. Id. at 482-83. The Supreme Court rejected their 
argument, concluding that the search following the short delay 
“was reasonable” in part because the defendants “never sought 
return of the property.” Id. at 487. 