This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Adalberto BRINKMAN-CORONEL, First Lieutenant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0159 
Crim. App. No. 20220225 
 
Argued January 15, 2025—Decided May 28, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Michael E. Korte  
 
For Appellant:  William E. Cassara , Esq. (argued);  
Captain Robert W. Duffie  and Julie Caruso Haines, 
Esq. (on brief); Major Justin L. Watkins. 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Anthony J. Scarpati (argued); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini and Major Lisa Limb (on 
brief); Major Chase C. Cleveland. 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A military judge sitting as a general court-martial con-
victed Appellant, contrary to his pleas, of attempted sexual 
assault of a child who has attained the age of twelve years, 
attempted sexual abuse of a child, absence from place of 
duty, communication of  indecent language, two specifica-
tions of wrongful possession of child pornography, and 
three specifications of wrongful distribution of child por-
nography, in violation of Articles 80, 86, and 134, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 880, 886, 934 
(2018). The military judge sentenced Appellant to be dis-
missed from the service and to be confined for nine years 
and ten days. The convening authority took no action on 
the findings and affirmed the sentence. On appeal, the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA), in 
a divided opinion, affirmed Appellant’s conviction. 
The first granted issue requires us to decide whether 
the “lower court erred in finding that the military judge did 
not abuse his discretion when he failed to recuse himself 
from Appellant’s court-martial for the appearance of bias.” 
We agree with the lower court that the military judge did 
not abuse his discretion  when he denied the motion to 
recuse himself. The second granted issue requires us to de-
cide whether the “military judge abused his discretion 
when he denied the motion to suppress evidence discovered 
from the search of Appellant’s ‘vacuum phone’ and all de-
rivative evidence.” While there may be questions about the 
theory of authority the military judge applied, we conclude 
that the evidence was admissible under a separate theory, 
and, as such, the military judge did not abuse his discre-
tion. We therefore affirm the decision of the  ACCA, which 
affirmed the findings and sentence in this case. United 
States v. Brinkman -Coronel, No. ARMY 20220225, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 131 , at * 26, 2024 WL 1460894, at *9 (A. Ct. 
Crim. App. Mar. 22, 2024) (unpublished). 
I. Background 
Appellant was stationed in Hawai‘i and pending poten-
tial administrative separation from the Army for alleged 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
cocaine use. In preparation for said separation, Appellant’s 
husband, DBC, had relocated to Michigan to prepare for 
their life after the Army. During this time apart, Appellant 
contacted an undercover law enforcement agent , who was 
posing as a fourteen-year-old boy named “Skyler,” on a da-
ting application. When “Skyler” informed Appellant he was 
fourteen, he asked if Appellant was upset. Appellant re-
plied, “I’m not and I’d like to kiss you.” Appellant then 
blocked “Skyler” on the application. However, he lat er de-
cided to reestablish contact. 
After unblocking “Skyler,” Appellant initially told “Sky-
ler” that “Skyler” was not supposed to be on the applica-
tion; however, the conversation turned sexual, and Appel-
lant arranged to meet “Skyler” the next day . After 
Appellant arrived at the agreed upon location, Army Crim-
inal Investigative Division (CID) agents apprehended him 
and seized his phone. A military magistrate denied CID’s 
verbal request to search the phone for evidence of child por-
nography. The commander of Joint Base Pearl Harbor -
Hickam later authorized a search of the seized phone. 
Investigators then released Appellant into the custody 
of his company commander, Captain (CPT) RZ, who placed 
conditions on his liberty. These conditions required, in 
part, that Appellant check in with CPT RZ on a regular 
schedule. During this time period, Appellant sent four mes-
sages to DBC telling him to immediately come to Hawai ‘i, 
find Appellant’s phone located in side a vacuum  cleaner 
(vacuum phone), and look for videos in a specific folder  on 
the phone. Hours later, and before DBC saw the first mes-
sages, Appellant sent DBC a message saying “please disre-
gard the previous messages. I had a crisis. I’m better now.” 
After reading these messages, DBC called Appellant, and 
after the call DBC said that Appellant had allayed his con-
cerns and did not make the trip to Hawai ‘i or notify any 
authorities.  
The following morning, Appellant failed to appear at ei-
ther staff duty or morning formation. CPT RZ went to Ap-
pellant’s on-base home, but Appellant did not answer the 
door. After speaking with DBC, CPT RZ  was fearful for  
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
Appellant’s well-being. While on the phone, DBC gave CPT 
RZ permission to enter the home he shared with Appellant. 
DBC also gave CID broad authority to “do what they had 
to do to find [his] husband .” An initial search of the home 
failed to uncover any information regarding Appellant’s 
whereabouts. Later that same day,  after CID agents 
searched the residence for nearly an hour, DBC informed 
CID agents about the “vacuum phone.” With his assistance, 
the agents were able to access the phone  which was found 
inside the vacuum. A quick manual search of the device un-
covered “goodbye” messages Appellant left for his loved 
ones. CID had not informed DBC that it had already seized 
Appellant’s primary phone , thus DBC was under the im-
pression that the phone in question was Appellant’s every-
day phone. The agent at the scene said he did not search 
beyond the farewell messages because he did not want to 
“alter too much data” so that the phone could be reviewed 
in the most “forensically sound” manner. 
That day, while examining the phone, a CID digital fo-
rensic examiner found images and videos of suspected child 
pornography. After a military magistrate’s search authori-
zation, additional searches of this phone revealed that Ap-
pellant distributed videos containing child pornography 
and chatted with others about his interest in young boys.  
At trial, defense counsel moved to suppress the evidence 
found on the vacuum phone and all derivative evidence. Af-
ter extensive testimony, the military judge concluded that 
DBC gave “broad consent . . . to CID concerning the house 
and many items in it,” and that DBC had “common author-
ity” over the vacuum phone such that he could give consent 
to access the entire phone. The military judge held that Ap-
pellant’s “disregard” message did not revoke consent and 
that DBC “was never told he could not come to the ho use 
or unlock and view the phone.”  The military judge con-
cluded that CID had not exceeded DBC’s consent because 
DBC, possessing actual authority to consent, gave a broad 
search authorization and Appellant’s behavior had created 
a sense of emergency. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
At Appellant’s arraignment, prior to inviting either side 
to inquire whether there were grounds to challenge his 
qualifications to sit as military judge, the military judge 
sua sponte disclosed that he served as the “special victim 
prosecutor for Hawai‘i from 2018 until approximately May 
of 2021.” In that capacity, he worked with both the detailed 
trial and defense counsel and assisted them with investi-
gations involving sexual assault, child abuse, and domestic 
violence. The military judge also worked professionally 
with the assistant trial counsel who was a special victim’s 
counsel from 2020 until 2021. However, he had not super-
vised any of the three counsel and classified his relation-
ship with them as “professional.” The military judge clari-
fied that he “[knew] nothing of [the] case except what’s 
been provided to [him] by counsel through the course of this 
court-martial referral process. And . . . just to be sure, [he] 
checked files.” During voir dire, the military judge repeat-
edly affirmed that he knew nothing of the case. The mili-
tary judge volunteered that, from the context of Charge I, 
he assumed the charge was related to Operation Keiki 
Shield.1 Although Appellant’s misconduct occurred toward 
the end of the military judge’s tenure as special victim pros-
ecutor (SVP), he was not present in any meetings regarding 
Appellant’s case. The military judge was confident that this 
was so because he kept files on cases that he reviewed and 
because he was “sectioned off” during this time, presuma-
bly to avoid conflicts of interes t. The military judge con-
firmed that neither trial counsel nor any other member of 
the government sought his advice on Appellant’s case when 
he was the SVP. 
Trial defense counsel sought to disqualify the military 
judge under Rule for Courts -Martial ( R.C.M.) 902 (2019 
ed.), first arguing that the military judge’s “impartiality 
might reasonably be questioned just based off of [his] back-
ground as an SVP . . . during a timeframe in which some of 
this misconduct did arise.” Second, Appellant argued the 
 
1 Operation Keiki Shield is a multiagency undercover opera-
tion targeting child sexual predators in Hawaiʻi. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
military judge should be disqualified based upon his rela-
tionships and work with both trial counsel. The military 
judge, without explaining his rationale, denied Appellant’s 
challenge. Shortly thereafter, Appellant elected to be tried 
by the military judge alone.  
On appeal, the ACCA gave the military judge’s recusal 
determination little deference because he failed to provide 
his rationale. The lower court, nonetheless, found that the 
military judge did not abuse his discretion by not disquali-
fying himself from adjudicating Appellant’s case.  Brink-
man-Coronel, 2024 CCA LEXIS 131, at * 14-17, 2024 WL 
1460894, at *6. The ACCA based its decision primarily on 
the military judge’s forthcoming responses during voir dire, 
demonstrating that he had no prior knowledge of or in-
volvement with Appellant’s case. Id., 2024 WL 1460894, at 
*6. 
Furthermore, the lower court concluded that the mili-
tary judge had not erred when he denied the suppression 
of evidence discovered from a search of Appellant’s phone. 
The lower court reasoned that Appellant gave DBC com-
mon authority over the vacuum phone by providing its lo-
cation, the password, and directing him to the goodbye 
messages. Id. at *18-20, 2024 WL 1460894, at *7. 
II. Discussion 
Beginning with Issue I, we hold that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion. Turning to Issue II, we hold 
that DBC had apparent authority over the vacuum phone, 
and, as such, the search was reasonable. Thus, the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion in admitting the 
evidence. 
A. The military judge did not abuse his discretion by 
not recusing himself from this court-martial 
“An accused has a constitutional right to an impartial 
judge.” United States v. Butcher , 56 M.J. 87, 90 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) (internal quotation marks omitted)  (quoting United 
States v. Wright, 52 M.J. 136, 140 (C.A.A.F. 1999)). R.C.M. 
902 implements this rule and “provides  two bases for 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
disqualification of a military judge.” United States v. Mar-
tinez, 70 M.J. 154, 157 (C.A.A.F. 2011). The first basis is a 
military judge’s duty to “disqualify himself or herself in any 
proceeding in which that military judge ’s impartiality 
might reasonably be questioned.”  R.C.M. 902(a). The sec-
ond basis involves the specific enumerated circumstances 
requiring disqualification under R.C.M. 902(b). “There is a 
strong presumption that a military judge is impartial in 
the conduct of judicial proceedings.” United States v. Fos-
ter, 64 M.J. 331, 333 (C.A.A.F. 2007). 
This Court reviews a “mili tary judge’s disqualification 
decision . . . for an abuse of discretion.” United States v. 
Uribe, 80 M.J. 442, 446 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (citation omitted)  
(internal quotation marks omitted). “A military judge’s rul-
ing constitutes an abuse of discretion if it is arbitrary, fan-
ciful, clearly unreasonable or clearly erroneous.” Id. (cita-
tion omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). This 
Court cannot find an abuse of discretion if it “merely would 
reach a different conclusion.” Id. (citation omitted) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted).  
Appellant made no claim of actual bias  before this 
Court, and there is nothing in the record that would compel 
the military judge to recuse himself from Appellant’s court-
martial under R.C.M. 902(b) .2 The question before us  is 
whether the military judge should have recused himself 
under R.C.M. 902(a). The appearance of bias is judged ob-
jectively, and this Court considers “[a]ny conduct that 
would lead a reasonable [person] knowing all the circum-
stances to the conclusion that the judge’s impartiality 
might reasonably be questioned.” Hasan v. Gross, 71 M.J. 
416, 418 (C.A.A.F. 2012) (first alteration in original) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. 
Kincheloe, 14 M.J. 40, 50 (C.M.A. 1982) ). “[W]hen a mili-
tary judge’s impartiality is challenged on appeal, the test 
 
2 At the ACCA, Appellant argued that the military judge 
should have recused himself for both actual and apparent bias. 
The ACCA incorrectly stated that Appellant alleged only the ap-
pearance of bias before the lower court. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
is whether, taken as a whole in the context of this trial, a 
court-martial’s legality, fairness, and impartiality were put 
into doubt by the military judge’s actions.” United States v. 
Tapp, 85 M.J. 19, 27 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (alteration in original) 
(internal quotation marks omitted)  (quoting Martinez, 70 
M.J. at 157-58). 
Appellant argues that the military judge should have 
recused himself because Appellant’s charged offenses oc-
curred during the military judge’s tenure as the SVP and 
in the same jurisdiction where he served as the “subject 
matter expert for all of Hawai‘i.” This provided the military 
judge, or so Appellant argues, with a unique perspective 
regarding “tactics and techniques” used by law enforce-
ment.  
We disagree with Appellant that the timing of his of-
fenses give rise to concern about the appearance of bias. 
Appellant’s conduct did not come to light until he tried to 
meet a fictitious fourteen-year-old for sex in April 2021. 
This is also when law enforcement first discovered that Ap-
pellant potentially possessed images and videos of child 
pornography dating back to May 2019. By this time, the 
military judge, still in his role as SVP, had already started 
the process of transitioning to the bench. As a par t of this 
process, he sectioned himself off from investigations. Dur-
ing voir dire, the military judge stated that he had not 
worked on Appellant’s case in any capacity. 
Further, Appellant makes the argument that the mili-
tary judge’s recusal was warranted based on his supervi-
sory prosecutorial position before joining the bench. In es-
sence then, Appellant invites this Court to apply the 
vertical imputation standard examined in United States v. 
Jones, 55 M.J. 317, 319 (C.A.A.F. 2001), under which the 
knowledge and actions of subordinates are attributed to 
their superiors. In Jones, this Court declined to apply the 
vertical imputation standard where an appellate military 
judge serving on the United States Navy -Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals had previously served as the di-
rector of the Government Appellate Division when the ap-
pellant’s appeal was docketed with the lower court. 55 M.J. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
at 318. In that case, we reasoned that the appellate mili-
tary judge’s recusal was not warranted where his unrebut-
ted affidavit demonstrated that “he had no actual involve-
ment with [that] case during his tenure at the Appellate 
Government Division.” Id. at 320. As in Jones, Appellant in 
this case has not provided any indication that the military 
judge played any role in Appellant’s case before his ascen-
sion to the bench, and Appellant has identified no other ba-
sis that warranted the military judge’s recusal. If we were 
to say that the military judge in this case was implicitly 
biased, it is hard to picture an instance in which any mili-
tary judge who played a role in the military justice system 
in a judicial circuit could hear a case in that circuit that 
originated in their time before the judiciary. Essentially, 
Appellant is asking us to adopt a per se implied bias stand-
ard. However, that would stretch R.C.M. 902(a) beyond its 
purpose, and, for that reason, we reject it.  
Thus, we agree with the ACCA that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion when he did not recuse himself 
from Appellant’s court-martial for the appearance of bias. 
B. The military judge did not  abuse his discretion 
when he denied the motion to suppress evidence 
“Property or evidence may be seized with consent con-
sistent with the requirements applicable to consensual 
searches.” Military Rule of Evidence  316(c)(3). Voluntary 
consent from an individual possessing authority over the 
property in question provides an exception to the Fourth 
Amendment protections against warrantless search. See 
United States v. Weston, 67 M.J. 390, 392 (C.A.A.F. 2009). 
A third party can consent when they share “ common au-
thority over the property.” Id. (citing United States v. Mat-
lock, 415 U.S. 164, 171 (1974)). “The authority which justi-
fies the third -party consent does not rest upon the law of 
property, . . . rather on mutual use of the property by per-
sons generally having joint access or control for most pur-
poses.” Matlock, 415 U.S. at 171 n.7. 
Even if a third party does not possess the actual author-
ity to consent , the search may still be lawful if law 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
enforcement officials reasonably believed the third party 
could consent —that they had apparent authority to con-
sent. See Illinois v. Rodriguez, 497 U.S. 177, 185-87 (1990). 
However, apparent authority only justifies a search if “no 
facts . . . tended to show that the [law enforcement] agents 
should have reasonably known that the [property] was the 
exclusive property” of someone other than the consenting 
third party. United States v. Gallagher , 66 M.J. 250, 252 
(C.A.A.F. 2008). The standard, as always is the case under 
the Fourth Amendment, is “reasonableness.” See United 
States v. Shields, 83 M.J. 226, 232 (C.A.A.F. 2023). 
“This Court reviews a military judge’s ruling on a mo-
tion to suppress evidence for an abuse of discretion.” Id. at 
230 (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted) . 
When reviewing a “military judge’s denial of a motion to 
suppress for an abuse of discretion, [this Court views] the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the prevailing 
party.” United States v. Eugene, 78 M.J. 132, 134 (C.A.A.F. 
2018) (citation omitted)  (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). “When reviewing a lower court’s decision on a military 
judge’s ruling, we ‘typically have pierced through that in-
termediate level and examined the military judge’s ruling, 
then decided whether the Court of Criminal Appeals was 
right or wrong in its examination of the military judge’s 
ruling.’ ” Shields, 83 M.J. at 230 (quoting United States v. 
Blackburn, 80 M.J. 205, 211 (C.A.A.F. 2020)).  
The Supreme Court has recognized that cell phones oc-
cupy a unique place in contemporary society. See Riley v. 
California, 573 U.S. 373, 403 (2014) (“Modern cell phones 
are not just another technological convenience. With all 
they contain and all they may reveal, they hold  for many 
Americans ‘the privacies of life .’ ” (quoting Boyd v. United 
States, 116 U.S. 616, 630 (1886)) ). Just as people have the 
right to be “secured in their persons, houses, papers and 
effects,” pursuant to the Fourth Amendment, people also 
have a reasonable expectation of privacy in their cell 
phones. United States v. Wicks, 73 M.J. 93, 98-99 (C.A.A.F. 
2014). Cell phones “may not be searched without probable 
cause and a warrant unless the search . . . falls within one 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
of the recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement. ” 
Id. at 99. 
The military judge in this case found that DBC’s com-
mon authority over the dwelling extended to the vacuum 
phone. There exists some uncertainty about whether DBC  
had actual authority to consent to a search of the vacuum 
phone in part because of Appellant’s contention that he re-
voked DBC’s access to the phone.  However, there is no 
doubt that DBC’s common authority over his and Appel-
lant’s home gave him the apparent authority to consent to 
the search.3  
A search satisfies the Fourth Amendment —even 
though the person lacks the actual authority  to consent—
if “ ‘the facts available to the officer at the moment [would] 
warrant a [person] of reasonable caution [to believe] that 
the consenting party had authority over the premises’ or 
effects.” Gallagher, 66 M.J. at 253 (quoting Rodriguez, 497 
U.S. at 188) (first and third alterations in original) . The 
scope of apparent authority depends on whether it was ob-
jectively unreasonable under the circumstances for law en-
forcement to believe that the consent extended to a partic-
ular container on the premises, and the container could 
reasonably hold the object of the search. See Florida v. 
Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248, 251 (1991). While the scope of con-
sent to search may be limited by the consenter, if consent 
“would reasonably be understood to extend to a particular 
container, the Fourth Amendment provides no grounds for 
 
3 Unlike actual authority, apparent authority exists when 
“the facts available to the officer at the moment” would lead a 
reasonable officer to believe that a party had actual authority. 
Rodriguez, 497 U.S. at 188. Because Appellant’s purported rev-
ocation of DBC’s access to the vacuum phone was not immedi-
ately and clearly conveyed to the CID agents conducting the 
search, “it cannot reasonably have influenced [their] beliefs re-
garding whether [DBC] possessed apparent authority.” United 
States v. Groves , 470 F.3d 311, 319 (7th Cir. 2006). Moreover, 
because the purported recission of authority was equivocal, Ap-
pellant’s argument fails on this ground as well. See Eugene, 78 
M.J. at 134. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
requiring a more explicit authorization.” Id. at 252. These 
cases stand for the proposition that absent evidence show-
ing that an officer should have known the third party did 
not have the authority to consent, the search is reasonable. 
Although the vacuum phone was Appellant’s exclusive 
property, the CID agents had reason to believe that Appel-
lant had given DBC permission to authorize a search of the 
vacuum phone. In Gallagher, the issue was whether the 
appellant’s spouse’s common authority to consent to  a 
search of their joint residence extended to an unmarked, 
unlocked, briefcase kept in a common area of the home. 66 
M.J. at 25 1-52. Quoting the military judge’s conclusion, 
this Court noted that the officer “possessed no facts that 
reasonably should have caused him to believe the briefcase 
was the exclusive domain of the appellant. In fact, it would 
have been just as reasonable to conclude the briefcase was 
primarily used by Mrs. Gallagher.” Id. at 254 (internal quo-
tation marks omitted). This Court determined that the ap-
pellant’s wife had common authority over the home, which 
extended to apparent authority over the briefcase. Id. 
Here, Appellant and DBC did not share a cell  phone 
plan, t he cell  phone was hidden  away in a vacuum , and 
DBC was not aware that the vacuum phone was different 
from Appellant’s primary phone.  However, the searching 
officer was aware of only some of this information . All the 
officer knew at that moment was that  DBC identified the 
location of the vacuum phone and had the passcodes neces-
sary to access it. Thus, as in Gallagher, DBC had the ap-
parent authority to consent to a search of the vacuum 
phone.  
The question still remains as to whether the Govern-
ment exceeded the scope of its authority  in conducting its 
search of the phone. As established above, DBC had appar-
ent authority to consent to the search and provided CID 
with “broad consent regarding the time, place, and manner 
of the CID search.” Brinkman-Coronel, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
131, at *22, 2024 WL 1460894, at *8 . The only limiting 
term was that the search must be related to actions in-
tended to locate Appellant. 
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
“The standard for measuring the scope of a suspect ’s 
consent under the Fourth Amendment is that of ‘objective’ 
reasonableness.” Jimeno, 500 U.S. at 251. While the scope 
of consent can be limited by the consenter, if said consent 
“would reasonably be understood to extend to a particular 
container, the Fourth Amendment provides no grounds for 
requiring a more explicit authorization.” Id at 252. Appel-
lant’s husband instructed CID to take any action necessary 
to find Appellant. Thus, CID had broad apparent authority 
to search the vacuum phone as it could have contained 
clues as to Appellant’s travel or communications, w hich 
could be used to help locate Appellant.  
In Shields, the appellant surrendered his cell phone to 
military law enforcement pursuant to a search authoriza-
tion. 83 M.J. at 228. The search authorization provided ac-
cess to “all location data stored on [ appellant’s] phone or 
within any application within the phone for 23 Dec [20]18.” 
Id. (second alteration in original). The analyst organized 
the images in a “thumbnail” format and a “table view” for-
mat.4 Id. at 229. His intent was to sort the images and filter 
by the date range described in the warrant. Id. “However, 
before he could apply a date filter to isolate images from 
December 23, [2018], he immediately noticed a thumbnail 
image of what he believed to be a depiction of child pornog-
raphy.” Id. Th is Court held that “when it comes to cell 
phones and computers, although one search method may 
be objectively ‘better’ than another, a search method is not 
unreasonable simply because it is not optimal.” Id. at 232. 
The analyst “was not rummaging through [a]ppellant’s 
phone, even though the defense expert poi nted to a differ-
ent—and perhaps even better—way to conduct the search.” 
Id. 
Like Shields, the forensic analyst’s search of the vac-
uum phone was broadly limited to anything that could help 
in locating Appellant. He located the apparent child por-
nography “in the same pane” or “next to . . . the suicide 
 
4 Of note, in both Shields and the present case, the forensic 
analysts were using the software program Cellebrite.  
United States v. Brinkman-Coronel, No. 24-0159/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
videos” that he was authorized to view. While it may have 
been wiser for the forensic analyst to further limit the scope 
of his search in some manner, this Court’s precedent does 
not find this disqualifying.  
Thus, while we diverge slightly from the  military 
judge’s reasoning, we agree with the ACCA that the mili-
tary judge did not abuse his discretion.  
III. Conclusion 
The granted issues are answered in the negative. The 
decision of the United States Army Court of Criminal Ap -
peals is affirmed.  