This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Salvador JACINTO,  
Aviation Structural Mechanic First Class 
United States Navy, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0144 
Crim. App. No. 201800325 
 
Argued January 29, 2025—Decided May 19, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Roger E. Mattioli (trial) and 
Ryan J. Sears (DuBay hearing)   
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Jesse B. Neumann, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Major Colin W. Hotard, USMC. 
 
For Appellee : Lieutenant Lan T.  Nguyen, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Major Candace G. White, USMC, and 
Brian K. Keller, Esq.  (on brief); Colonel Joseph M. 
Jennings, USMC. 
 
Amicus Curiae for Appellee: Peter Coote, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
_______________ 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
PER CURIAM. 
We granted review of two issues in Appellant’s case. As 
we will explain, additional  factfinding is necessary to  re-
solve important questions relevant to this appeal . There-
fore, we remand the record to the United States Navy-Ma-
rine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA). 
I. Introduction 
A general court-martial panel with enlisted representa-
tion convicted Appellant, in relevant part, of one specifica-
tion of rape of a child  (his stepdaughter, E.B.) and three 
specifications of sexual abuse of a child (also E.B.), in vio-
lation of Article 120 b, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10  U.S.C. §  920b (2012) . In 2021, we initially  
granted review to determine whether  the military judge  
abused his discretion when he denied defense requests for 
a continuance1 and for in camera review of E.B.’s  mental 
health records. Jacinto, 81 M.J. at 351. However, upon re-
view, we determined that the record was “unclear and in-
complete,” and that we could not make “an informed deci-
sion about whether the military judge’s crucial fact 
findings [were] clearly erroneous.” Id. at 354. We therefore 
“vacate[d] the decision of the lower court in part and re-
mand[ed the case] for further factual development of the 
record.” Id. In doing so, we directed the lower court to “ob-
tain the missing record evidence and any other evidence 
(such as affidavits from m edical providers) relevant to 
whether E.B. was diagnosed with psychotic agitation in 
 
1 The basis for the defense request for a continuance was the 
Government’s “bombshell” disclosure “on the eve of trial” that 
E.B. had been prescribed Thorazine for psychotic agitation while 
also being diagnosed with “PTSD and major depressive disorder 
without psychotic features.” United States v. Jacinto , 81 M.J. 
350, 352, 354 (C.A.A.F. 2021)  (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). Trial defense counsel explained that the question of 
whether E.B. was experiencing psychotic agitation at the time of 
her accusation against Appellant “goes to the heart of [E.B.’s] 
credibility, memory, and ability to accurately perceive events.”  
Id. at 352 n.6 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
May 2017,” and to make “any other findings of fact neces-
sary to resolve the granted appellate issues.” Id. at 355. 
On remand, the CCA ordered a DuBay  hearing.2 The 
CCA ordered the DuBay military judge to answer a series 
of questions in order to resolve what information was omit-
ted from the record and to make additional findings related 
to this Court’s granted issues.  Although t he lower court 
acknowledged the conflicting evidence regarding the psy-
chotic agitation issue, it did not directly instruct the DuBay 
military judge to resolve whether E.B. was diagnosed with 
psychotic agitation in May 2017. 
In addition to  answering the CCA’s questions , the 
DuBay military judge ordered the production of E.B.’s en-
tire 212-page hospital record for in camera review.  After 
reviewing the results of the DuBay proceedings, the lower 
court determined that the trial military judge did not prej-
udicially err in denying the defense continuance motion 
and it affirmed the findings and sentence. United States v. 
Jacinto, No. 201800325, 2024 CCA LEXIS 14, at *17, 2024 
WL 234699, at *7 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 18, 2024) (un-
published). We then granted review to consider, in relevant 
part, whether the trial military judge prejudicially erred in 
denying the defense motion for a continuance. United 
States v. Jacinto, 85 M.J. 97 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order grant-
ing review).  
After hearing oral argument in this case, we ordered the 
Government to submit an affidavit from Dr. Harwant Gill, 
E.B.’s treating psychiatrist. This affidavit was supposed to 
address “why E.B. was prescribed Thorazine and whether 
E.B. exhibited psychotic agitation in May 2017.” United 
States v. Jacinto , __ M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025) (order). The 
Government submitted Dr. Gill’s affidavit under seal, and 
we then took “ Dr. Gill’s affidavit under further advise-
ment.” United States v. Jacinto, __ M.J. __ (C.A.A.F. 2025) 
(order). 
 
2 United States v. DuBay , 17 C.M.A. 147, 37 C.M.R. 411 
(1967). 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
II. Discussion 
Even after all of this litigation, this Court still does not 
know the answer to two crucial questions : Why was E.B. 
prescribed Thorazine , and was E.B. diagnosed with  psy-
chotic agitation in May 2017? Dr. Gill’s affidavit was unre-
sponsive on these points. He stated that he no longer works 
at the hospital where E.B. was treated, he does not remem-
ber E.B.’s case, and “[r]etrieving the hospital records would 
be the only way to answer the Court’s questions.”   
This Court cannot engage in factfinding  on its own to 
resolve the questions cited above. See Article 67(c), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 867(c) (2012) (authorizing this Court to “ take 
action only with respect to matters of law ”). However, we 
do have the authority to  order additional factfinding  by a 
lower court. (“If an issue concerning an unresolved mate-
rial fact may affect the Court’s resolution of the case, the 
Court may remand the case or the record to the Court of 
Criminal Appeals.” C.A.A.F. R. 30A(c); see United States v. 
Graner, 69 M.J. 104, 105 n.1 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (stating that 
under C.A.A.F. 30A(c), “ we may remand for further fact-
finding if an issue concerning an unresolved fact affects the 
Court’s resolution of the case ”); see also United States v. 
Barry, 76 M.J. 407, 407 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (summary disposi-
tion); 52 M.J. 306, 307 (C.A.A.F. 1999) (rule change order) 
(Rules Advisory Committee Comment on C.A.A.F. R. 30A 
stating that “ Rule 30A codifies the Court ’s practice con-
cerning additional fact finding.”).) 
In light of these circumstances, we deem it both appro-
priate and necessary to remand this case once again. We 
direct the CCA on remand to determine whether two ques-
tions can be answered and, if they can be answered, what 
the answers are. These two questions are: 
1. Why was E.B. prescribed Thorazine  in May 
2017? 
2. Did E.B. exhibit signs of psychotic agitation in 
May 2017? 
Should the CCA determine that a limited DuBay hear-
ing is necessary to answer the se questions, th at court is 
United States v. Jacinto, No. 24-0144/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
authorized to order such a hearing. We emphasize that all 
applicable rules of evidence and all applicable privileges 
continue to apply in this case . “[T]he appropriate author-
ity—i.e., either the lower court or a DuBay military judge—
shall conduct an in camera review, issue appropriate pro-
tective orders, and place portions of the record under seal 
as required. ” Jacinto, 81  M.J. at 355 (citing R ules for 
Courts-Martial 701(g) and 1113).3 
III. Conclusion 
The record of trial is returned to the Judge Advocate 
General of the Navy for remand to the United States Navy-
Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals  for additional 
factfinding. Upon completion of the factfinding  by the 
Court of Criminal Appeals, the record will be returned di-
rectly to this Court for further review of the granted issues 
under Article 67, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 867 (2012). This fact-
finding shall be completed and the record returned to this 
Court within ninety days of this opinion. 
 
 
3 One obvious step that should be considered is providing Dr. 
Gill with relevant portions of E.B. ’s medical records so that he 
can attempt to answer the key questions noted above. If this ap-
proach is unproductive for whatever reason, at a minimum Dr. 
Gill should be asked about the circumstances that would cause 
him, as the Medical Director at the Department of Psychiatry at 
a public hospital, to prescribe Thorazine to a minor who had 
been hospitalized for inpatient mental health treatment. 