This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Andrew J. SHAFRAN, Boatswain’s Mate Third Class  
United States Coast Guard, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0134 
Crim. App. No. 1480 
 
Argued January 15, 2025—Decided May 12, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Paul R. Casey 
 
For Appellant:  Lieutenant Benjamin M. Cook , 
JAGC, USN (argued); Lieutenant Commander 
Kristen R. Bradley, USCG, and Philip D. Cave, Esq. 
(on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Elizabeth Ulan, USCG (ar-
gued); Lieutenant Christopher J. Hamersky, USCG. 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge HARDY filed a sep-
arate opinion, concurring in the judgment. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
We granted review to decide whether a specification , 
alleging that Appellant “provid[ed] several alcoholic 
beverages to a person under the age of 21,” fails to state an 
offense under Article 134, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §  934 (2018), because “it fails to allege 
words of criminality .” United States v. Shafran , 85 M.J. 
144, 145 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order granting review). Because 
Appellant did not raise his objection to the specification at 
trial, our precedent requires us to assess its sufficiency  
with “maximum liberality.” United States v. Turner, 79 
M.J. 401 , 403  (C.A.A.F. 2020) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting United States v. Bryant , 30 M.J. 72, 73 
(C.M.A. 1990) ). Applying this lenient standard, we hold 
that the specification at issue sufficiently states an offense. 
We therefore affirm the decision of the United States Coast 
Guard Court of Criminal Appeals  (CGCCA), which 
affirmed the findings and sentence in t his case . United 
States v. Shafran , 84 M.J. 548, 568 (C.G. Ct. Crim. App. 
2024) (en banc). 
I. Background 
After meeting Ms. E.F. at a retail store, Appellant in-
vited her to visit him at his house. She accepted the invita-
tion. At the time, Ms. E.F. was not yet twenty -one years 
old. The record establish es that Appellant had accessed 
Ms. E.F.’s profile on a dating app and that this profile cor-
rectly indicated that she was twenty years old; Ms. E.F. 
also testified that she told Appellant her age and that her 
age was one reason why she would not drink alcohol. Dur-
ing Ms. E.F.’s visit, Appellant provided her with liquor, and 
she “felt pressure[d]” to drink. Ms. E.F. became intoxicated. 
Nonconsensual sexual activity between Appellant and Ms. 
E.F. then occurred. 
Appellant was charged with one specification of sexual 
assault and one specification  of abusive sexual con tact in 
violation of Article 120 (d), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  920(d) 
(2018), and one specification  of an unenumerated offense 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
under Article 134, UCMJ . The specification under Article 
134, UCMJ, as amended, alleged that Appellant: 
provide[d] several alcoholic beverages to Ms. E.F., 
a person under the age of 21, in the presence of 
other junior enlisted members of the U.S. Coast 
Guard and U.S. Air Force, and that said conduct 
was to the prejudice of good order and discipline 
in the armed forces and was of a nature to bring 
discredit to the armed forces. 
Two aspects of the unenumerated Article 134, UCMJ, 
specification are noteworthy. First, t he specification does 
not expressly allege that Appellant acted with  any partic-
ular mens rea.1 The military judge, however, ruled that the 
Government was required to prove th at Appellant acted 
with recklessness based on this Court’s decision in United 
States v. Tucker, 78 M.J. 183, 184, 186 (C.A.A.F. 2018). Sec-
ond, the specification does not expressly allege that Appel-
lant acted “wrongfully” or “unlawfully” in providing Ms. 
E.F. with alcohol or that his actions violated a particular 
law or regulation . Appellant, however,  did not challenge 
the sufficiency of the specification at trial on these grounds. 
A general court -martial found Appellant guilty of the 
unenumerated offense under Article 134, UCMJ, and 
guilty of abusive sexual con tact, but found him not guilty 
of sexual assault. The court-martial sentenced Appellant to 
a bad-conduct discharge, confinement for 180 days, and a 
reduction to the lowest enlisted grade. 
On appeal to the CGCCA, Appellant argued inter alia  
that the specification under Article 134, UCMJ, for provid-
ing alcohol to a person under the age of twenty -one, was 
fatally defective. Shafran, 84 M.J. at 55 3. He asserted for 
the first time that the specification failed to state an of-
fense because it d id not expressly allege that his conduct 
was either “wrongful” or “unlawful.” Id.  at 558. The 
 
1 When the specification was first referred, it expressly 
stated that Ms. E.F. was a person “ whom [Appellant] knew to 
be” under the age of twenty-one. The military judge, however, 
allowed the Government to strike these words. 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
CGCCA, in a detailed opinion, rejected this contention. 
Summarizing its reasoning, the CGCCA stated that requir-
ing the specification to include one of these two words ex-
pressly would “raise[] form over substance and [would be]  
inconsistent with the nature of Article 134, the concept of 
notice pleading, the statutory text, the [Manual for Courts-
Martial], military case law, and constitutional due process 
requirements.” Id. After also rejecting Appellant’s argu-
ments with respect to other issues, t he CGCCA aff irmed 
the findings and sentence. Id.  at 568. Three judges dis-
sented from the conclusion that the specification under Ar-
ticle 134, UCMJ, stated an offense. Id. at 569 (Brubaker, 
J., with whom McClelland, C.J., and Herman, J., joined, 
concurring in part and dissenting in part). 
II. Standard of Review and Applicable Law 
The parties disagree about the applicable standard of 
review when an appellant challenges the sufficiency of a 
specification for the first time on appeal. Appellant asserts 
that we must review his objection to the specification de 
novo, while the Government asserts that we may review 
the issue only for plain error. Appellant argues that under 
the version of Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 905 in the 
Manual for Courts- Martial, United States (2019 ed.) 
(MCM), an accused’s failure to object to a specification for 
failing to state an offense neither forfeits nor waives the 
objection. The CGCCA reached this same conclusion. 
Shafran, 84 M.J. at 556. The Government, however, relies 
on this Court’s precedent in United States v. Day, 83 M.J. 
53, 57-59 (C.A.A.F. 2022), which applied plain error review 
in a similar situation  but did not address R.C.M. 905.  We 
decline to resolve this disagreement because doing so is un-
necessary in this case. 2 Both parties agree that precedent  
requires us to assess the validity of the specification with 
 
2 In addition, we note that any interpretation of R.C.M. 905  
(2019 ed.) would have limited precedential value because Con-
gress recently amended the rule . See R.C.M. 905 (2024 ed.), 
amended by Exec. Order No. 14,103, Annex 2 § 2 (www), 88 Fed. 
Reg. 50,535, 50,679 (Aug. 2, 2023). 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
“maximum liberality” because Appellant did not challenge 
its validity at trial.  Turner, 79 M.J. at 403  (citation omit-
ted) (internal quotation marks omitted) . For reasons that 
we provide below, when we read the specification at issue 
with “maximum liberality,” we conclude that it states an 
offense under Article 134, UCMJ. 
III. Discussion 
The Government maintains that the specification at is-
sue states an offense under both the first  and second 
clauses of Article 134, UCMJ. These two clauses state: 
Though not specifically mentioned in this chapter, 
all disorders and neglects to the prejudice of good 
order and discipline in the armed forces, [and] all 
conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the 
armed forces . . . shall be taken cognizance of by a 
general, special, or summary court- martial, ac-
cording to the nature and degree of the offense, 
and shall be punished at the discretion of that 
court. 
Article 134, UCMJ. The President has indicated that an of-
fense under either of these two clauses  has only two ele-
ments, namely, (a) that “the accused did or failed to do cer-
tain acts ,” and (b) t hat, under the circumstances, the 
accused’s conduct was either “to the prejudice of good order 
and discipline in the armed forces” or was “of a nature to 
bring discredit upon the armed forces.” MCM pt. IV, para. 
91.b.(1), (2). 
Appellant contends that the “act” constituting the first 
element of an unenumerated offense under Art icle 134, 
UCMJ, cannot be any type of act  but instead must be an 
act that is unlawful or wrongful. Appellant further asserts 
that when a particular act may  or may not be unlawful or 
wrongful, depending on  the circumstances, the specifica-
tion must identify the act and must contain “  ‘words of 
criminality’ ” that “capture the essence of a crime .” (Cita-
tion and internal quotation marks omitted.) He draws sup-
port for this proposition from this Court’s statement in 
United States v. Vaughan , 58 M.J. 29, 35  (C.A.A.F. 2003) 
(citation omitted), that “[a]n Article 134 offense that is not 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
specifically listed in the MCM must have words of crimi-
nality and provide an accused with notice as to the ele-
ments against which he or she must defend.” Based on this 
restriction, Appellant argues that the specification at issue 
in this case fails to state an offense. He explains that 
providing alcohol to a person under twenty -one is not al-
ways unlawful because there are numerous exceptions to 
state laws and federal regulations that  restrict underage 
drinking. Appellant therefore asserts that to be proper, the 
specification needed to allege that he acted “wrongfully, ” 
“unlawfully,” or “without authority” or that it needed to use 
other words to the same effect. 
We agree with Appellant’s general point that, as we 
stated in Vaughan, an unenumerated Article 134 , UCMJ, 
specification must allege unlawful or wrongful conduct. As 
this Court has explained, “due process requires that a per-
son have fair notice that an act is criminal before being 
prosecuted for it.” United States v. Saunders , 59 M.J. 1, 6 
(C.A.A.F. 2003) (citing Vaughan, 58 M.J. at 31). As one ex-
ample, a specification may satisfy this requirement by ex-
pressly using a word such as “wrongfully” or “unlawfully” 
to distinguish criminal conduct from conduct  that other-
wise might be innocent . United States v. Sadinsky , 14 
C.M.A. 563, 565, 34 C.M.R. 343, 345 (1964) (holding that a 
specification, which alleged an accused “wrongfully and un-
lawfully” jumped from an aircraft carrier,  properly stated 
an unenumerated offense under Article 134, UCMJ, in part 
because the words “wrongfully and unlawfully” eliminated 
innocuous reasons for the accused’s action). As another ex-
ample, a specification may describe facts that would satisfy 
each of the elements generally required for the same of-
fense under state and federal criminal laws. Saunders, 59 
M.J. at 9 (upholding a specification under Article 134, 
UCMJ, for an unenumerated offense of harassment).  
In this case, although the specification did not expressly 
state that Appellant acted unlawfully or wrongfully , the 
Government argues that the unlawfulness or wrongfulness 
of Appellant’s conduct was implied and did not need to be 
expressly stated . In making this argument, the 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Government relies on U nited States v. Davis, 26 M.J. 445 
(C.M.A. 1988). In Davis, this Court explained Article 134, 
UCMJ, “encompass[es] two general classes of conduct.” Id. 
at 448. The first class  is conduct that “is or generally has 
been recognized as illegal under the common law or under 
most statutory criminal codes.” Id. The second class is con-
duct that , “however eccentric or unusual [,] would not be 
viewed as criminal outside the military context.” Id. Ad-
dressing the first category of conduct, the  Court stated: 
“With respect to conduct that, wherever it occurs, is gener-
ally viewed as illegal, it can be argued that a specific alle-
gation of ‘wrongfulness’ or ‘unlawfulness’ is surplusage.” 
Id. Based on this statement, the Government argues that 
it was unnecessary for the specification to allege Appellant 
acted wrongfully or unlawfully because providing alcohol 
to persons under twenty -one years of age is “generally 
viewed as illegal.” Appellant asserts that the statement in 
Davis was dicta and that, in any event, providing alcohol 
to a person who is twenty years old is not generally unlaw-
ful because of various exceptions in state and federal laws. 
Because Appellant raised his objection for the first time 
on appeal, the parties agree that our precedent requires us 
to assess the specification at issue with “maximum liberal-
ity.” Turner, 79 M.J. at 403 (citation omitted) (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) . When reading a specification with 
maximum liberality, we may find terms to be implied.  Id. 
at 407. In Turner, for instance, a specification alleged that 
the accused had “attempt[ed] to kill” another soldier with 
premeditation “by shooting her with a loaded firearm, 
causing grievous bodily harm .” Id. at 403. The specifica-
tion, however, did not expressly state that the accused had 
acted unlawfully or wrongfully. This Court recognized that 
in some instances, an attempt to kill someone might not be 
unlawful or wrongful (e.g., attempting to kill an enemy 
combatant on a battlefield). Id. at 406-07. The Court, how-
ever, upheld the specification under the “maximum liber-
ality” standard. Id. The Court explained: 
[W]hen viewed with “maximum liberality,” it is a 
“reasonable construction” of the phrase “did  . . . 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
attempt to kill with premeditation [the victim] by 
means of shooting her with a loaded firearm, caus-
ing grievous bodily harm,” that Appellant was be-
ing charged with the offense of attempted premed-
itated murder (i.e., an unlawful killing). 
Id. at 406. The Court also saw nothing in the specification 
that would indicate  that the attempted killing had oc-
curred in a context that would make it lawful. Id. at 407. 
When we read the specification at issue in this case with 
“maximum liberality,” similar considerations require us to 
conclude that it properly states an offense . Although the 
specification does not expressly include the words “wrong-
ful” or “unlawful,” one reasonable construction of the spec-
ification is that such words are implied. We find support 
for this conclu sion in Davis where this Court stated that 
the words wrongful or unlawful sometimes are surplusage. 
26 M.J. at 448. We find further support from the general 
illegality of providing alcohol to persons under twenty-one 
years old notwithstanding the fact that exceptions do ex-
ist.3 We also observe that, as in Turner, t he specification 
alleges no facts suggesting  a context in which a possible 
exception would apply.4 
Two final points bear mentioning. In the future, the 
Government could avoid appellate disputes of this kind by 
expressly including words of criminality such as “wrong-
fully” or “unlawfully” in a specification.5 And similarly, 
 
3 The CGCCA conducted a thorough review of state laws and 
federal regulations restricting alcohol, which we find persuasive. 
Shafran, 84 M.J. at 557-58, 557 nn.9-11. 
4 Because we find the “wrongfulness” of providing alcohol to 
a person under twenty -one years of age to be implied when re-
viewing the specification at issue with “maximum liberality,” we 
need not address  the Government’s distinct argument that a 
specification can imply wrongfulness simply by alleging that the 
charged conduct is contrary to good order and discipline or ser-
vice discrediting. 
5 The discussion accompanying R.C.M. 307(c)(3) also recom-
mends including words of criminality in specifications alleging 
unenumerated Article 134, UCMJ,  offenses. R.C.M. 307(c)(3) 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
trial defense counsel in the future could avoid the applica-
tion of the maximum liberality standard for assessing a 
specification on appeal by raising an objection to the speci-
fication at trial. 
IV. Conclusion 
The granted issue is answered in the negative. The de-
cision of the United States Coast Guard Court of Criminal 
Appeals is affirmed. 
 
Discussion (2019 ed.) (“If the alleged act is not itself an offense 
but is made an offense either by applicable statute (including 
Articles 133 and 134), or regulation or custom having the effect 
of law, then words indicating criminality such as ‘ wrongfully,’ 
‘unlawfully,’ or ‘without authority’ (depending upon the nature 
of the offense) should be used to describe the accused’s acts.”). 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment. 
I agree that the decision of the United States Coast 
Guard Court of Criminal Appeals (CGCCA) should be af-
firmed. United States v. Shafran, 84 M.J. 548, 568 (C.G. Ct. 
Crim. App. 2024) (en banc). The specification provided Ap-
pellant with adequate notice of the offense alleged and the 
conduct he needed to defend against. The majority cor-
rectly recognizes that the specification need not express ly 
include words of criminality such as “wrongful” or “unlaw-
ful” and that the specification at issue sufficiently states an 
offense, especially considering the “maximum liberality” 
standard we use when an a ppellant does not object to the 
specification at trial. United States v. Turner, 79 M.J. 401, 
403 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Bryant , 30 M.J. 72, 73 (C.M.A. 
1990)). However, in reaching its conclusion, the majority 
unnecessarily infers that such words of criminality are “im-
plied” in the specification. United States v. Shafran, __ M.J. 
___, ___ ( 8) (C.A.A.F. 2025). I write separately because I 
believe that there is a much simpler way to resolve this 
case.  
Clauses 1 and 2 of Article 134, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934, criminalize “all disorders 
and neglects to the prejudice of good order and discipline in 
the armed forces” and “all conduct of a nature to bring dis-
credit upon the armed forces” so long as those disorders, 
neglects, and conduct are not specifically mentioned else-
where in the UCMJ. As the President explains in the Man-
ual for Courts- Martial, an Article  134 offense consists of 
only two elements: (1) that the accused did or failed to do 
certain acts, and (2) that, under the circumstances, such 
conduct either was prejudicial to good order and discipline 
(for clause 1 offenses) or was of a nature to bring discredit 
upon the armed forces (for clause 2 offenses). Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States, pt. IV, para. 91.b.(1) -(2) 
(2019 ed.) ( MCM or Manual). Notably, neither the text of 
Article 134, UCMJ, nor the President’s elements for the 
General Article make any mention of criminality.1 
 
1 This Court has frequently confirmed the same. S ee, e.g. , 
United States v. Gaskins, 72 M.J. 225, 233 (C.A.A.F. 2013) (“To 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY concurring in the judgment 
 
2 
 
In this case, Appellant argues that the specification 
alleging that he violated Article  134, UCMJ, by providing 
alcohol to a minor failed to state an offense because it failed 
to allege words of criminality. But neither the text of 
Article 134, UCMJ, nor t he President’s guidance in the 
Manual imposes such a requirement. Acts (or failures to 
act) are criminal in the military justice system under 
clause 1 or clause 2 of Article  134, UMCJ, solely  because 
they are either prejudicial to good order and discipline  or 
service discrediting. If an Article  134 specification alleges 
that the accused’s act (or failure to act) violated at least one 
of the terminal elements, then the specification is 
sufficient. Nothing more is required. See United States v. 
Fosler, 70 M.J. 225, 229 (“ ‘A specification is sufficient if it 
alleges every element of the charged offense expressly or 
by necessary implication.’  ” (quoting Rule for Court -
Martial 307(c)(3))). 
As the Supreme Court made clear in Parker v. Levy, 417 
U.S. 733, 749 (1974), the military has the authority under 
Article 134, UCMJ, to criminalize servicemembers’ 
conduct even when that conduct is not criminal in the 
civilian world. Indeed, this authority extends so far that 
the military can even crimin ally sanction conduct by 
servicemembers that would be constitutionally protected if 
performed by civilians. Id . at 758 (“The fundamental 
necessity for obedience, and the consequent necessity for 
imposition of discipline, may render permissible within the 
military that which would be constitutionally 
impermissible outside it.”). There is no requirement under 
clause 1 or clause 2 of Article 134, UCMJ, that the charged 
conduct be criminal in any sense beyond the  fact that the 
conduct is prejudicial to good order and discipline or is of a 
nature to be service discrediting. 
 
punish conduct that is to the prejudice of good order and disci-
pline in the armed forces, or of a nature to bring discredit upon 
the armed forces, the government must establish (1) a predicate 
act or failure to act, and (2) the terminal element. ”); United 
States v. Rice , 80 M.J. 36, 41 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (same); United 
States v. Anderson, 68 M.J. 378, 385 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (same). 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY concurring in the judgment 
 
3 
 
Appellant’s argument to the contrary is based on this 
Court’s statement in United States v. Vaughan that an un-
enumerated Article 134 offense “must have words of crim-
inality and provide an accused with notice as to the ele-
ments against which he or she must defend.” 58 M.J. 29, 
35 (C.A.A.F. 2003) (citing United States v. Davis, 26 M.J. 
445, 447- 48 (C.M.A. 1988)). Although this language ap-
pears on its face to support Appellant’s position, I disagree 
for two reasons. 
First, even if one accepts that the requirement for 
“words of criminality” from Vaughan and Davis is still good 
law (which I doubt for the reasons explained below), the 
specification in this case did contain “words of criminality” 
as defined by those cases. As our predecessor Court ex-
plained in Davis, the “essence” of an Article 134 clause 1 or 
clause 2 offense is that the defendant’s conduct “had an ad-
verse effect on military order and discipline and created a 
negative perception of the armed services.” 26 M.J. at 448. 
Thus: 
the “wrongfulness” of the conduct consisted of its 
threat to good order and discipline and its dis-
credit to the armed forces — these elements con-
forming to the first two clauses of Article 134. We 
can see no harm in alleging criminality in terms 
of the provisions of Article  134 which made the 
conduct wrongful, rather than by using a general 
allegation that appellant's activity was “wrongful” 
or “unlawful.” The objectives of notice and protec-
tion from double jeopardy are in our view satisfied 
by the language employed here. 
Id. at 448-49. 
In this case, the specification alleged that Appellant 
provided alcoholic beverages to a minor in the presence of 
other junior enlisted members of the Coast Guard and Air 
Force and “that said conduct was to the prejudice of good 
order and discipline in the  armed forces and was of a na-
ture to bring discredit upon the armed forces.” To whatever 
extent “words of criminality” are required under Vaughan 
(even if those words are not required under Article 134, 
UCMJ, or the Manual), the specification in this case satis-
fied that requirement by including the requirements of 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY concurring in the judgment 
 
4 
 
clause 1 and clause 2 of the terminal element. Even under 
the logic of Davis and Vaughan, nothing more is required. 
Of course, as this Court has recognized since 2011, the 
Constitution mandates that every  specification alleging a 
violation of Article  134, UCMJ, must specify that the de-
fendant’s conduct violated at least one of the clauses of the 
terminal element. See Fosler, 70 M.J. at 230 (“An accused 
must be given notice as to which clause or clauses he must 
defend against.”). Because reciting the language of the ter-
minal element satisfies Vaughan’s words-of-criminality re-
quirement, every specification alleging a viola tion of Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ, by referencing a terminal element contains 
the necessary words of criminality by definition. In other 
words, Davis’s and Vaughan’s concerns about including 
words of criminality like “wrongfully” in the specification 
are no longer relevant. 
Which brings us to the second reason why I believe that 
Vaughan does not support Appellant’s position: I do not 
believe that Vaughan is still good law. Although this Court 
has not expressly overturned Vaughan  or Davis, it is 
important to recognize that those cases were decided in an 
era when the military justice system took a dramatically 
different approach toward Article  134, UCMJ. See United 
States v. Richard, 82 M.J. 473, 479 (C.A.A.F. 2022) (noting 
“the sea change that occurred in this Court’s Article  134 
jurisprudence between 2008 and 2011”). When Vaughan  
and Davis were decided, the government was permitted to 
charge offenses under Article  134, UCMJ, without 
specifying which terminal element applied. See Fosler, 70 
M.J. at 227 (noting that prior to 2011 the “express 
allegation of the terminal element of Article 134 ha[d] not 
been viewed as necessary”). In that environment, it makes 
sense that this Court attempted to cabin the “seemingly 
imprecise standards” impo sed by Article  134, UCMJ, 
Parker, 417 U.S. at 747, by inserting a criminality 
requirement into the first element of Article 134, UCMJ—
that the accused did or failed to do certain criminal acts.  
But as explained above, that approach was never 
consistent with the text of Article  134, UCMJ, or the 
President’s guidance in the Manual. Plus, as noted by the 
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY concurring in the judgment 
 
5 
 
dissent below, when “[v]iewed through a post -Fosler lens, 
Davis’s dictum appears, frankly, outdated and unhelpful to 
the question of how to plead a particular Article  134 
offense.” United States v. Shafran , No. 1480, 2023 CCA 
LEXIS 427, at *69, 2023 WL 6534065, at *23 (C.G. Ct. 
Crim. App. Oct. 6, 2023) (Brubaker, J ., concurring in part 
and dissenting in part). Appellant argues that because the 
specification lacked specific words of criminality, the 
Government charged Appellant without identifying any 
standard by which his conduct was forbidden. In his view, 
he was unable to properly hold the Government to its 
burden of proof, and he was charged with a per se crime. I 
disagree with both of those assertions. 
First, I disagree that the Government left Appellant 
with no standard by which his conduct was forbidden. As 
charged in this case, Article  134, UCMJ, provides two 
standards by which Appellant’s conduct was forbidden: 
(1) his conduct was prejudicial to good order and discipline; 
and (2) his conduct was of a nature to bring discredit upon 
the armed forces. Whether Appellant’s conduct would have 
violated applicable state or federal laws might have been 
relevant to the members  in deciding whether his conduct 
violated clause 1 or clause 2 of the terminal element, but 
the Government was under no legal obligation to prove that 
it was. And after Parker, there is no basis for Appellant to 
argue that the standards imposed by clause 1 or clause 2 of 
the terminal element of Article 134, UCMJ, are too vague 
under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. 417 
U.S. at 752-57. 
Second, this Court has been adamant that there is no 
conduct that is either per se prejudicial to good order and 
discipline or per se service discrediting. See United States 
v. Phillips, 70 M.J. 161, 164- 65 (C.A.A.F. 2011) (“The use 
of conclusive presumptions to establish the elements of an 
offense is unconstitutional because such presumptions con-
flict with the presumption of innocence and invade the 
province of the trier of fact.”). To the contrary, this Court 
has repeatedly recognized “that the Constitution demands 
that the Government prove every element of an Article 134 
offense—including the second or ‘terminal’ element —
United States v. Shafran, No. 24-0134/CG 
Judge HARDY concurring in the judgment 
 
6 
 
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Richard, 82 M.J. at 476 (citing 
Phillips, 70 M.J. at 165, Fosler, 70 M.J. at 226; United 
States v. Wilcox , 66 M.J. 442, 448 (C.A.A.F. 2008)). This 
case was no different. 
To be clear, I agree wholeheartedly with Appellant that 
the unique nature of Article  134, UMCJ, makes it suscep-
tible to abuse by the government, and that this Court has 
a duty to protect servicemembers from that potential 
abuse. But in my view, this Court’s proper role is not to add 
extraneous, non -textual requirements to Article 134, 
UCMJ, but rather to rigorously enforce the requirement 
that the Government plead and prove the terminal element 
beyond a reasonable doubt.2 But that issue is not before us. 
Because the challenged specification states an offense un-
der Article 134, UCMJ, I agree with the majority that the 
decision of the United States Coast Guard Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals should be affirmed. 
 
2 See, e.g., Wilcox, 66 M.J. at 451-52 (concluding that the ap-
pellant’s conviction for violating clause 1 and clause 2 of Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ, was legally insufficient when the record did not 
contain sufficient evidence to prove either clause of the terminal 
element beyond a reasonable doubt); Richard , 82 M.J. at 479 
(concluding that the appellant’s three convictions for violating 
clause 1 of Article 134, UCMJ, were legally insufficient when the 
government failed to offer any evidence in support of the termi-
nal elements); United States v. Rocha,  84 M.J. 346, 352 -54 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) (Hardy, J., dissenting) (concluding that the ap-
pellant’s conviction for violating clause 2 of Article 134, UCMJ,  
was legally insufficient when the government failed to offer any 
evidence or argument in support of the terminal element); 
United States v. Wells, 85 M.J. 154, 162 (C.A.A.F. Sept. 24, 2024) 
(Hardy, J., with whom Ohlson, C.J., joined, dissenting) (conclud-
ing that the appellant’s conviction for violating Article  134, 
UCMJ, was legally insufficient when the only evidence pre-
sented at trial in support of the terminal element indicated that 
the appellant’s conduct was not service discrediting). 