This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Daniel R. CSITI, Staff Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0175 
Crim. App. No. 40386 
 
Argued February 25, 2025—Decided May 8, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Colin P. Eichenberger 
 
For Appellant: Major Megan R. Crouch  (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. Abrams,  and Megan P. 
Marinos, Esq. 
 
For Appellee: Major Jocelyn Q. Wright  (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
Jenny A. Liabenow, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A military judge sitting as a  general court -martial 
found Appellant guilty of one specification of sexual assault 
in violation of Article 120(b)(3)(A), Uniform Code of Mili-
tary Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920(b)(3)(A) (2018), which 
prohibits committing a sexual act on a person who is inca-
pable of consenting because of impairment by an intoxi-
cant.1 Appellant appealed to the United States Air Force 
Court of Criminal Appeals  (AFCCA), contending , among 
other things, that the evidence was legally and factually 
insufficient. United States v. Csiti , No. ACM 40386, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 160, at *2, 2024 WL 1856678, at *1 (A.F. Ct. 
Crim. App. Apr. 29, 2024) (unpublished). The AFCCA, how-
ever, rejected these contentions and affirmed. Id., 2024 WL 
1856678, at *1. 
We granted review of three issues: 
I. Whether the Court of Appeals for the A rmed 
Forces has statutory authority to decide whether 
a conviction is factually sufficient. 
II. Whether Appellant’s conviction for sexual as-
sault is factually and legally insufficient because 
[the victim] was capable of consenting —and did 
consent—t o sexual activity with Appellant. 
III. Whether the lower court erroneously inter-
preted and applied the amended factual suffi-
ciency standard under Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, 
[10 U.S.C. § 866(d)(1)(B) (Supp. II 2019-2021)]. 
United States v. Csiti , 85 M.J. 139  (C.A.A.F. 2024) (order 
granting review). 
For reasons explained below, we hold that this Court 
does not have statutory authority to review the factual suf-
ficiency of the evidence. We also hold that the evidence is 
legally sufficient. We further hold that any misconception 
by the AFCCA about the amended standards applicable to 
 
1 The military judge found Appellant not guilty of two other 
specifications alleging violations of Article 120, UCMJ. 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
its factual sufficiency review was harmless.  We therefore 
affirm the AFCCA’s decision. 
I. Background 
In May 2021, Appellant agreed to babysit A.H.’s son 
while she went out to a restaurant with friends. A.H. began 
drinking alcohol before leaving for the restaurant and then 
drank more at the restaurant. Although A.H.  vomited 
while at the restaurant, she continued to drink. A friend of 
A.H. drove her home because she felt too intoxicated to 
drive herself. Upon arriving home, A.H. consumed more al-
cohol as she engaged in a conversation with Appellant. 
A.H. has no memory of what happened from that point in 
the evening until the next morning when she woke up na-
ked in her bed with soreness around her vaginal area. 
A week later, Appellant told A.H. what happened dur-
ing the portion of the evening that she could not remember. 
A.H. used her phone to record Appellant ’s statements, 
which were later introduced at trial . Appellant informed 
A.H. that after their conversation, he helped her to go up-
stairs and go to bed. Appellant said that  A.H. returned 
minutes later and conversed with him again in the kitchen. 
Appellant stated that while they were in the kitchen, A.H. 
leaned back while sitting on a  chair and caused the chair 
to tip over and hit the wall. Appellant said that the two of 
them then moved to a couch, where they  began discussing 
A.H.’s body. Appellant said that  A.H. told him that “[her] 
body [was] not even that great,” and he responded by say-
ing her body was perfect. 
Appellant stated that  A.H. then said, “show me,” and 
removed her pants and underwear. Appellant said that he 
and A.H. kissed. Appellant said that he then performed 
oral sex on A.H. for approximately one minute. Appellant 
stated that A.H. stopped the oral sex , saying that  she 
needed to use the bathroom. Appellant said that he then 
assisted A.H. in putting on her pants and underwear. In 
recounting this information, Appellant told A.H. that he 
thought that she was “drunk.” He also apologized, stating 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
that it was “my fault for not telling myself, ‘No,’ [and] to 
just back away from [it] instead.” 
On the basis of this evidence, the military judge found 
Appellant guilty of one specification of sexual assault in vi-
olation of Article 120(b)(3) (A), UCMJ, and sentenced Ap-
pellant to a dishonorable discharge, two years of confine-
ment, a forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and a 
reduction to the lowest enlisted grade.  The AFCCA af-
firmed, rejecting Appellant’s contentions that the evidence 
was factually and legally insufficient to support the finding 
that he was guilty. Csiti, 2024 CCA LEXIS 160, at *2, 2024 
WL 1856678, at *1. In considering the factual sufficiency of 
the evidence, the AFCCA endeavored to apply the recently 
amended version of Article 66(d)(1 )(B), UCMJ (Supp. II 
2019-2021). See id. at *9-12, 2024 WL 1856678, at *3-4. The 
AFCCA stated that the amendment imposes “a more defer-
ential standard than [the prior law], but not one which de-
prives the [Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA)] of the power 
to determine the credibility of witnesses.”2 Id. at *19, 2024 
WL 1856678, at *6 (citation omitted)  (internal quotation 
marks omitted) . The AFCCA additionally observed  that 
“the significance of the credibility of particular witnesses 
or testimony will vary depending on the circumstances of 
the case.” Id.  at *19- 20, 2024 WL 1856678, at *6.  The 
AFCCA held that the evidence was factually sufficient, 
stating “we are not clearly convinced the military judge ’s 
findings of guilty were against the weight of the evidence.” 
Id. at *23, 2024 WL 1856678, at *8. 
II. Discussion 
The three granted questions concern  the authority of 
the AFCCA to act under Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, and the 
 
2 In making this statement, the AFCCA relied on the decision 
of the United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Ap-
peals (NMCCA) in United States v. Harvey, 83 M.J. 685, 693-94 
(N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2023), which this Court set aside in United 
States v. Harvey , 85 M.J. 127 (C.A.A.F. 2024). In setting aside 
the NMCCA’s decision, this Court did not specifically address 
the issue of whether the new standard is “more deferential.” 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
authority of this Court to act under Article 67(c), UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 867(c) (Supp. II 2019- 2021). Article 66(d)(1)(B), 
UCMJ, provides in relevant part: 
(B) FACTUAL SUFFICIENCY REVIEW. —(i) In 
an appeal of a finding of guilty under subsection 
(b), the Court [of Criminal Appeals] may consider 
whether the finding is correct in fact upon request 
of the accused if the accused makes a specific 
showing of a deficiency in proof. 
 (ii) After an accused has made such a showing, 
the Court may weigh the evidence and determine 
controverted questions of fact subject to—  
 (I) appropriate deference to the fact that 
the trial court saw and heard the witnesses 
and other evidence; 
 . . . . 
 (iii) If, as a result of the review conducted un-
der clause (ii), the Court is clearly convinced that 
the finding of guilty was against the weight of the 
evidence, the Court may dismiss, set aside, or 
modify the finding, or affirm a lesser finding. 
Article 67(c), UCMJ, states in relevant part: 
 (c)(1) In any case reviewed by it, the Court of 
Appeals for the Armed Forces may act only with 
respect to—  
 (A) the findings and sentence set forth in 
the entry of judgment, as affirmed or set aside 
as incorrect in law by the Court of Criminal 
Appeals; 
  . . . or 
 (C) the findings set forth in the entry of 
judgment, as affirmed, dismissed, set aside, or 
mod[i]fied by the Court of Criminal Appeals as 
incorrect in fact under section 866(d)(1)(B) of 
this title (article 66(d)(1)(B)). 
 . . . . 
 (4) The Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces 
shall take action only with respect to matters of 
law. 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
A. Authority of this Court to Review Factual Sufficiency 
The first granted question is whether this Court “has 
statutory authority to decide whether a conviction is factu-
ally sufficient.” Appellant urges us to answer this question 
in the affirmative. He asserts that we should interpret Ar-
ticle 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, as authorizing this Court to con-
duct a new weighing of the evidence and to come to its own 
conclusion as to whether a finding of guilty was against the 
weight of the evidence.  We address this question de novo 
because it is a matter  of statutory interpretation. United 
States v. Kohlbek, 78 M.J. 326, 330-31 (C.A.A.F. 2019). 
Appellant contends that Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, au-
thorizes “this Court [to] act with respect to any findings, 
reviewed by the AFCCA pursuant to 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(d)(1)(B), and affirmed as factually sufficient —which 
is what happened here. ” He reasons that for this Court to  
review the correctness of a CCA’s factual sufficiency deter-
mination, the Court logically must conduct its own factual 
sufficiency review. 
Appellant’s argument has two difficulties. First, it is not 
entirely clear that Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, applies  in a 
case in which the CCA has not held the findings to be “in-
correct in fact.”3 Second, even if Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, 
 
3 Appellant argues that Article 67(c)(1)(C) , UCMJ,  
unambiguously provides for factual sufficiency review in this 
case. But Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, authorizes this Court to act 
with respect to findings “as affirmed, dismissed, set aside, or 
mod[i]fied by the Court of Criminal Appeals as incorrect in fact.” 
(Emphasis added.) The CCA in this case “affirmed” the finding 
of guilty but did not hold that finding was “incorrect in fact. ” 
Thus, if the provision is read literally, it does not apply in this 
case. Appellant, however, suggests that we interpret the words 
“incorrect in fact” as referring only to findings that are 
dismissed, set aside, or modified, and not to findings that are 
affirmed. Appellant asserts that this interpretation would 
“make sense” because “a CCA cannot affirm findings which are 
incorrect in fact.” We need not  decide whether to adopt 
Appellant’s proposed interpretation in the case given the other 
difficulties with Appellant’s arguments. 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
does apply and does authorize this Court to act in this case 
with respect to the findings, it does not expressly address 
the question of whether this Court may act with respect to 
both matters of fact and matters of law. That question  is 
addressed in Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ, which provides: “The 
Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces shall take action 
only with respect to matters of law.”  This limitation is a 
roadblock to factual sufficiency review. When an appellant 
asks an appellate court to review the fact ual sufficiency of 
evidence, the appellant asks the appellate court to decide 
for itself whether the evidence presented at trial proves the 
elements of an offense. This is not a “matter of law” but is 
instead a “matter of fact. ” In assessing the factual suffi-
ciency, the appellate court must decide what the facts are, 
as opposed to interpreting the law or deciding how the law 
applies. Accordingly, on the basis of Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ, 
we hold that this Court does not have authority to conduct 
a factual sufficiency review.4 
Appellant attempts to escape this conclusion by assert-
ing that Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, is “an exception” to Ar-
ticle 67(c)(4), UCMJ. To support this argument, Appellant 
emphasizes that the restriction on this Court’s authority to 
review only matters of law  predates Article 67(c)( 1)(C), 
UCMJ, which was only added in 2021 .5 Appellant argues 
that if Congress had intended for th e restriction on this 
Court’s authority in Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ, to remain the 
same, then Congress  would have had no reason to add 
 
4 Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ, would not prevent this Court from 
deciding whether a CCA has followed the requirements of Article 
66, UCMJ, in conducting a factual sufficiency review  because 
compliance with a statute is a matter of law . See, e.g., Harvey, 
85 M.J. at 132 (holding that the CCA’s opinion was not entirely 
consistent with what Article 66, UCMJ, requires). 
5 Article 67, UCMJ, has provided that this Court “shall take 
action only with respect to matters of law” ever since the UCMJ 
was first enacted. 50 U.S.C. § 654(d) (1952). Congress added Ar-
ticle 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, in 2021 in the William M. (Mac) Thorn-
berry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, 
Pub. L. No. 116-283, § 542(c)(3), 134 Stat. 3388, 3612. 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ.  He asserts that  Article 
67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, and Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ,  can be 
made sensible by reading Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, to pro-
vide new authority to this Court to conduct  factual suffi-
ciency reviews. 
We agree with Appellant’s general point that “ [w]hen 
Congress acts to amend a statute, [courts must] presume it 
intends its amendment to have real and substantial effect.” 
Stone v. INS, 514 U.S. 386, 397 (1995). But we are still con-
strained by the language of the statute that we are inter-
preting. “Unless the text of a statute is ambiguous, the 
plain language of a statute will control unless it leads to an 
absurd result.” United States v. Schell , 72 M.J. 339, 343 
(C.A.A.F. 2013) (internal quotation marks omitted) (cita-
tion omitted). Here, we see no ambiguity in Article 67(c)(4), 
UCMJ, and  interpreting that provision to prohibit this 
Court from engaging in factual sufficiency review is not ab-
surd. Congress certainly could create an exception to Arti-
cle 67(c)(4), UCMJ, if it so desired.  But we see no way to 
read Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, as somehow implicitly cre-
ating such an exception. 
Appellant also argues that when two statutory provi-
sions conflict, the more specific provision should control. 
See Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The 
Interpretation of Legal Texts 183 (2012). Appellant asserts 
that Article 67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, is more specific than Article 
67(c)(4), UCMJ,  and he therefore reasons that Article 
67(c)(4), UCMJ, does not apply in this case. We disagree 
because, as we have stated above, we do not see an irrecon-
cilable conflict between the two provisions. While Arti cle 
67(c)(1)(C), UCMJ, may authorize this Court to act, it does 
not expressly address the question of whether the Court 
may act with respect to both matters of fact and matters of 
law. Only Article 67(c)(4), UCMJ, addresses that issue. 
B. Factual and Legal Sufficiency 
The second granted  issue is “whether A ppellant’s 
conviction for sexual assault is factually and legally 
insufficient because [the victim]  was capable of 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
consenting—an d did consent —t o sexual activity with 
Appellant.” As we have just explained , Article 67(c)(4), 
UCMJ, prevents us from reviewing the factual sufficiency 
of the evidence.  We therefore cannot answer that part of 
the grant ed issue. This Court , however,  may review the 
“legal sufficiency of the evidence to support a finding that 
an appellant is guilty of an offense.” United States v. Mays, 
83 M.J. 277, 279 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (citing United States v. 
Wilson, 76 M.J. 4, 6 (C.A.A.F. 2017)). 
We decide questions of legal sufficiency de novo. United 
States v. Smith , 83 M.J. 350, 359 (C.A.A.F. 2023)  (citing 
United States v. Robinson , 77 M.J. 294, 297 (C.A.A.F. 
2018)). Evidence is legally sufficient if “any rational fact-
finder . . . could have found all essential elements of the 
offense beyond a reasonable doubt.” Mays,  83 M.J. at 279 
(alteration in original) (quoting United States v. Nicola, 78 
M.J. 223, 226 (C.A.A.F. 2019)). In conducting a legal suffi-
ciency review, the “Court must ‘draw every reasonable in-
ference from the evidence of the record in favor of the pros-
ecution.’ ” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Blocker, 32 M.J. 281, 284 (C.M.A. 1991)). 
To find an accused guilty of sexual assault in violation 
of Article 1 20(b)(3)(A), UCMJ , a court -martial must find 
beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused “commit[ted] a 
sexual act upon another person when the other person 
[was] incapable of consenting to the sexual act due to 
. . . impairment by any drug, intoxicant, or other similar 
substance, and that condition [was] known or reasonably 
should [have been] known by the [accused].” In this appeal, 
Appellant does not dispute that he committed a sexual act 
upon A.H. when he performed oral sex on her. But he ar-
gues that the evidence was legally insufficient to show that 
A.H. was incapable of consenting or that Appellant reason-
ably should have known that A .H. was incapable of con-
senting. He asserts that despite all her drinking, A.H. 
“walked and talked like she was giving consent to the brief 
oral sex that occurred on the night in question.” 
We are unpersuaded by Appellant’s argument that the 
evidence was legally insufficient to prove that  A.H. was 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
incapable of consenting due to impairment because of alco-
hol. The record contains e vidence that A.H. drank before 
going to the restaurant, that she drank more at the restau-
rant, that she vomited, that she could not drive herself 
home, that she drank more when she returned home, that 
she had difficulty sitting on a chair, and that she could not 
form memories. D rawing every reasonable inference from 
this evidence in favor of the Government, we conclude that 
a rational factfinder could have found beyond a reasonable 
doubt that A.H. was incapable of consenting to the sexual 
act due to impairment by alcohol. The record also includes 
evidence that Appellant observed A .H.’s condition before 
the sexual act, that he thought she was drunk, and that he 
apologized for performing the sexual act on her when she 
was in that condition. Again, drawing every reasonable in-
ference from this evidence in favor of the G overnment, we 
conclude that a rational factfinder also could have found 
beyond a reasonable doubt that A .H.’s condition was 
known or reasonably should have been  known by Appel-
lant. Therefore, regardless of whether we would have found 
the evidence factually sufficient, we hold that it was legally 
sufficient. 
C. Compliance with Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ 
The third assigned issue is “whether the lower court er-
roneously interpreted and applied the amended factual suf-
ficiency standard under Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ.” Appel-
lant contends that the AFCCA’s decision is contrary to our 
recent decision in Harvey  because the AFCCA incorrectly 
believed that the amended statute imposed a “more defer-
ential standard” than the previous statut e. Appellant as-
serts that this belief contradict s our statement in Harvey  
that “the degree of deference will depend on the nature of  
the evidence at issue.” Harvey, 85 M.J. at 130. We review  
the AFCCA’s interpretation of Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, 
de novo because that is a question of law. Id. at 129. We 
review the AFCCA’s application  of Article 66(d)(1)(B), 
UCMJ, for abuse of discretion. Id. at 131. 
Before assessing Appellant’s argument, we note that 
the AFCCA issued its opinion in this case before this Court 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
decided Harvey. Accordingly, it is not surprising that the 
AFCCA use d language that did not exactly match the 
language this Court later used. We agree that what  the 
AFCCA said about deference might be seen as an 
overstatement: deference is not necessarily greater under 
amended Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, because the degree of 
deference depends on the evidence at issue. We  are, 
nevertheless, unpersuaded that this overstatement 
harmed Appellant. 
A complete review of the AF CCA’s opinion shows that 
the AFCCA expressly stated that “the significance of the 
credibility of particular witnesses or testimony will vary 
depending on the circumstances of the case.”  Csiti, 2024 
CCA LEXIS 160, at *19-20, 2024 WL 1856678, at *6. While 
the AFCCA’s general statement about deference may be an 
overstatement, this more specific statement is very similar 
to what this Court said in Harvey  about the degree of 
deference depending on the natur e of the evidence.  
Reviewing the Court’s opinion, we see nothing to indicate 
an abuse of discretion by the AFCCA in determining what 
deference to give to the court-martial with respect to any of 
the evidence.  
Appellant argues that we cannot be sure of this conclu-
sion because the lower court offered no express analysis of 
how it came to its holding that the conviction was factually 
sufficient. In many cases, it is helpful for a CCA to explain 
its reasoning when addressing an issue. This Court, how-
ever, has made clear  that CCAs are not required to state 
their reasoning for their decisions. United States v. Reed , 
54 M.J. 37, 42-43 (C.A.A.F. 2000). Accordingly, we decline 
to set aside the AFCCA’s decision on the ground that it did 
not fully explain its reasons for concluding that the evi-
dence was factually sufficient. 
III. Conclusion 
We answer the first granted question  in the negative.  
To the extent that the second granted question  asks 
whether the evidence was legally insufficien t, we answer 
the question in the negative; to the extent  that the second 
United States v. Csiti, No. 24-0175/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
issue asks whether the evidence was factually insufficient, 
we do not answer the question.  We answer the third 
granted question in the negative. The decision of the 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals is 
affirmed. 