This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Rodrigo L. URIETA, Specialist 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0172 
Crim. App. No. 20220432 
 
Argued December 11, 2024—Decided March 24, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Albert G. Courie III 
 
For Appellant: Captain Amir R. Hamdoun (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten, Lieutenant Colonel Au-
tumn R. Porter, Major Robert D. Luyties, and Cap-
tain Andrew W. Moore (on brief); Major Matthew S. 
Fields. 
 
For Appellee: Major Joseph H. Lam  (argued); Colo-
nel Richard E. Gorini  and Major Lisa Limb  (on 
brief); Captain Joshua A. Hartsell. 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge MAGGS, Judge HARDY, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a sep-
arate concurring opinion , and Judge SPARKS filed 
a separate concurring dubitante opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
Appellant was charged with multiple sexual assault of-
fenses and retained civilian defense counsel . During voir 
dire at his court-martial, Appellant challenged the selec-
tion of Sergeant First Class (SFC) Bravo1 as a panel mem-
ber on actual and implied bias  grounds. In support of his 
challenges, Appellant cited statements made by SFC Bravo 
regarding soldiers who retain civilian defense counsel. The 
military judge denied Appellant’s challenges and Appellant 
now argues that the military judge erred. We hold that the 
military judge did not abuse his discretion in denying Ap-
pellant’s challenge for actual bias. However, w e conclude 
that SFC Bravo’s responses during  voir dire presented a 
close case of implied bias. And b ecause the liberal grant 
mandate requires military judges to excuse potential panel 
members in close cases, we hold that the military judge 
erred by denying Appellant’s implied bias challenge. Ac-
cordingly, we reverse the judgment of the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA).  
I. Background 
A. Procedural History 
The Government charged Appellant, a specialist  (E-4) 
stationed at Fort Stewart, Georgia, with  one specification 
of false official statement and three specifications of sexual 
assault in violation of Articles 107 and 120, Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ),  10 U.S.C. §§ 907, 920  (2018).  
During panel selection  at a general court -martial, Appel-
lant challenged SFC Bravo for actual and implied bias, but 
the military judge denied those challenges. The court-mar-
tial panel, which included SFC Bravo, subsequently con-
victed Appellant of the false official statement specification 
and two of the specifications for sexual assault. The mili-
tary judge sentenced Appellant to a dishonorable dis-
charge, eight months of confinement, and reduction to the 
 
1 To preserve the panel member’s privacy, this opinion pre-
sents his name as a pseudonym.  
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
grade of E-1. The convening authority took no action on the 
findings or sentence, and the military judge entered judg-
ment. Before the CCA, Appellant argued that the military 
judge erred in denying Appellant’s challenges against SFC 
Bravo. Brief for Appellant at 1, 10 -13, United States v. 
Urieta, No. ARMY 20220432, 2024 CCA LEXIS 192 (A. Ct. 
Crim. App. Apr.  25, 2024). However, the CCA summarily 
affirmed the findings and sentence in this case.  United 
States v. Urieta, No. ARMY 20220432, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
192, at *1 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Apr . 25, 2024) (per curiam) 
(unpublished). Upon Appellant’s petition to this Court, we 
granted review to determine whether the military judge 
erred in denying Appellant’s actual and implied bias chal-
lenges to SFC Bravo.  United States v. Urieta, 85 M.J. 119 
(C.A.A.F. 2024) (order granting review).  
B. Appellant’s Challenges For Cause 
At trial, Appellant was represented by both military 
and civilian defense counsel. During group voir dire, Appel-
lant’s military defense counsel asked if “anyone here ever 
heard it said that if a Soldier hires civilian defense counsel, 
it must mean that Sold ier is guilty.” SFC Bravo answered 
in the affirmative. Appellant’s military defense counsel 
then asked “[w]ould anyone here hold it against [Appel-
lant] . . . for having hired a civil ian defense counsel?” All 
potential members answered in the negative. 
SFC Bravo was later recalled for individual voir dire 
and asked to further explain his views on soldiers who re-
tain civilian  defense counsel.  SFC Bravo  explained that  
“[t]o me, hiring an outside civilian lawyer means that you 
don’t trust your defense much.” He further stated:  
In my experience, I have only ever seen people 
hire civilian counsel after they have already been 
through the trial and their lawyers had let them 
down—I wouldn’t say let them down. They didn’t 
get the outcome they were looking for, so they 
went to retrial with a civilian lawyer, instead of a 
military [lawyer].  
The military judge asked SFC Bravo if, when he said 
“[it] means that you don’t trust your  defense much,” he 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
meant “your defense counsel as in the attorneys” or the 
“case you’re going to present?” SFC Bravo responded that 
he was referring to “[a]ll of it.” The military judge asked no 
additional questions.  
Trial counsel then asked follow-up questions, leading to 
the following exchange:  
[Trial Counsel]: . . . [W]ith regard to the Civilian 
Defense Counsel, do you think it’s more likely that 
[Appellant] is guilty solely because he has hired a 
Civilian Defense Counsel?  
[SFC Bravo]: I don’t think it’s an admission of 
guilt, or a thought of guilt, by hiring a civilian at-
torney. I just—it is unusual to me.  
[Trial Counsel]: When you said it has a perception, 
are you talking about at large or just in your—  
[SFC Bravo]: Just an outside perception of, yes, 
when you hire a civilian attorney, that basically, 
you don’t trust the system from the military 
standpoint—that you have to go outside the mili-
tary to bring somebody in. 
[Trial Counsel]: So,  . . . if you’re selected and 
you’re weighing the facts, and weighing the evi-
dence, considering everything , are you going to 
hold it against [Appellant] because he’s hired a Ci-
vilian Defense Counsel? 
[SFC Bravo]: Not at all.  
[Trial Counsel]: Will you consider that at all in 
reaching a finding during your deliberations? 
[SFC Bravo]: Just the facts.  
Appellant subsequently challenged SFC Bravo on ac-
tual and implied bias grounds , arguing SFC Bravo’s re-
sponses demonstrated he would hold Appellant’s decision 
to retain civilian defense counsel against him. The Govern-
ment disagreed. Trial counsel asserted there was no risk of 
actual or implied bias because SFC Bravo had only ex-
pressed a general, rather than personal, belief about  sol-
diers who retain civilian defense counsel. Trial counsel fur-
ther noted that SFC Bravo stated he would follow the 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
military judge’s instructions and independently weigh the 
facts in assessing Appellant’s guilt or innocence. 
The military judge denied Appellant’s challenges in a 
ruling that did not distinguish between actual and implied 
bias. In finding no risk of bias, the military judge agreed 
with the Government that SFC Bravo  had expressed “an 
outside perception” of soldiers who retain civil ian defense 
counsel and not a personal belief. He further relied on SFC 
Bravo’s assertions that he would not hold Appellant’s deci-
sion to retain civil ian defense counsel against him  and 
would “just look at the facts of the case.” After Appellant’s 
counsel stated they had no further challenges for cause, the 
military judge stated that he had considered the liberal 
grant mandate for all challenges. 
II. Applicable Law  
“As a matter of due process, an accused has a constitu-
tional right, as well as a regulatory right, to a fair and im-
partial panel. Indeed, ‘[i]mpartial court-members are a sine 
qua non for a fair court-martial.’ ” United States v. Wiesen, 
56 M.J. 172, 174 (C.A.A.F. 2001)  (footnote omitted) (cita-
tions omitted). Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 912(f)(1) 
(2019 ed.) provides  specific grounds for excusing panel 
members for cause. As relevant here, R.C.M. 912(f)(1)(N) 
states that “[a] member shall be excused for cause when-
ever it appears that the member  . . . [s]hould not sit as a 
member in the interest of having the court -martial free 
from substantial doubt as to legality, fairness, and impar-
tiality.”2 “We have held that this language encompasses 
the two types of bias: actual and implied.” United States v. 
Keago, 84 M.J. 367, 371 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (citing United 
States v. Miles, 58 M.J. 192, 194 (C.A.A.F. 2003)).  
 
2 “While this rule applies to both actual and implied bias, the 
thrust of this rule is implied bias.” United States v. Strand , 59 
M.J. 455, 458 (C.A.A.F. 2004)  (citing United States v. Minyard, 
46 M.J. 229, 231 (C.A.A.F. 1997)). 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
A. Actual Bias 
Actual bias is also known as “bias in fact.” United States 
v. Hennis, 79 M.J. 370, 384 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) (citation omitted). “It is ‘the exist-
ence of a state of mind that leads to an inference that the 
person will not act with entire impartiality .’ ” Id. (quoting 
Fields v. Brown, 503 F.3d 755, 767 (9th Cir. 2007)). The test 
for actual bias is whether a member’s personal bias 
“will . . . yield to the military judge’s instructions and the 
evidence presented at trial.” United States v. Nash, 71 M.J. 
83, 88 (C.A.A.F. 2012) (citing United States v. Reynolds, 23 
M.J. 292, 294 (C.M.A. 1987)). An actual bias challenge is 
evaluated based on the totality of the circumstances. 
United States v. Richardson , 61 M.J. 113, 118 (C.A.A.F. 
2005) (citing Strand, 59 M.J. at 459). “Because a challenge 
based on actual bias involves judgments regarding credi-
bility, and because ‘the military judge has an opportunity 
to observe the demeanor of court members and assess their 
credibility during voir dire,’ a military judge’s ruling on ac-
tual bias is afforded great deference.” United States v. Clay, 
64 M.J. 274, 276 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (quoting United States v. 
Daulton, 45 M.J. 212, 217 (C.A.A.F. 1996)). Accordingly, we 
review a military judge’s actual bias determinations for an 
abuse of discretion. Hennis, 79 M.J. at 384. 
B. Implied Bias 
Implied bias is “ ‘bias attributable in law to the prospec-
tive juror regardless of actual partiality.’ ” Id. at 385 (quot-
ing United States v. Wood , 299 U.S. 123, 134 (1936)). The 
test for implied bias is “whether the risk that the public 
will perceive that the accused received something less than 
a court of fair, impartial members is too high.” United 
States v. Woods, 74 M.J. 238, 243-44 (C.A.A.F. 2015) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted). In asking 
that question, courts consider “the totality of the circum-
stances[] and assume the public [ is] familiar with the 
unique structure of the military justice system.” Id. at 244 
(citation omitted).  
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
We review a military judge’s implied bias analysis un-
der a standard of review “that is less deferential than abuse 
of discretion, but more deferential  than de novo review.” 
United States v. Peters, 74 M.J. 31, 33-34 (C.A.A.F. 2015) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (citation s omitted). In 
Keago, we explained this standard as follows:  
 We interpret our case law as dictating a 
sliding standard of appellate review for implied 
bias challenges that falls somewhere on a 
spectrum between de novo and abuse of discretion 
based on the specific facts of the case. A military 
judge who cites the correct law and explains his 
implied bias reasoning on the recor d will receive 
greater deference (closer to the abuse of discretion 
standard), while a military judge who fails to do 
so will receive less deference (closer to the de novo 
standard). Accordingly, the more reasoning 
military judges provide, the more deferen ce they 
will receive. 
84 M.J. at 373 (citing United States v. Rogers, 75 M.J. 270, 
273 (C.A.A.F. 2016)). 
We have further noted that although “[w]e do not expect 
record dissertations” from military judges when they rule 
on implied bias challenges,  United States v. Downing , 56 
M.J. 419, 422 (C.A.A.F. 2002), “a mere ‘[i]ncantation of the 
legal test for [implied bias] without analysis is rarely suffi-
cient in close cases.” United States v. Dockery, 76 M.J. 91, 
96 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (alterations in original) (quoting Peters, 
74 M.J. at 34). 
C. Liberal Grant Mandate 
“Military judges must err on the side of granting d e-
fense challenges for cause.” Keago , 84 M.J. at 372 (citing 
Clay, 64 M.J. at 277).  
This “liberal grant mandate” recognizes that “the 
interests of justice are best served by addressing 
potential member issues at the outset of judicial 
proceedings,” and is intended to address “certain 
unique elements in the military justice system in-
cluding limited peremptory rights and the man-
ner of appointment of court-martial members that 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
presents perils that are not encountered else-
where.”  
Id. (quoting Peters, 74 M.J. at 34) . “This Court has held 
that, under the liberal grant mandate, if the military judge 
finds an implied bias challenge to be a close question, the 
challenge should be granted.” Id.  (citing Peters, 74 M.J. 
at 34).  
III. Discussion 
Appellant argues that the military judge erred by deny-
ing his actual and implied bias challenges against SFC 
Bravo. We address each argument in turn. 
A. Actual Bias 
We hold that the military judge did not abuse his dis-
cretion when he denied Appellant’s challenge for  actual 
bias. The “great deference” we afford military judges with 
respect to their actual bias determinations, Clay , 64 M.J. 
at 276, “reflects, among other things, the importance of de-
meanor in evaluating the credibility of a member’s answers 
during voir dire ,” Woods, 74 M.J. at 243.  In the instant 
case, in light of SFC Bravo’s statements that he could be 
fair and the military judge’s observation of those state-
ments, we do not “fault the military judge” for finding that 
SFC Bravo exhibited no actual bias.  United States v. 
Youngblood, 47 M.J. 341, 342 (C.A.A.F. 1997). 
In reaching this conclusion , we acknowledge that the 
military judge’s ruling did not contain explicit findings as 
to SFC Bravo’s demeanor and credibility. See United States 
v. Terry, 64 M.J. 295, 302- 03 (C.A.A.F. 2007) (finding no 
abuse of discretion as to actual bias where the military 
judge explicitly noted the demeanor of members in their re-
sponses, including that they appeared forthright, honest, 
and sincere) . Nevertheless, we recognize that military 
judges are “in the best position to judge the sincerity and 
truthfulness of the challenged member’s responses on voir 
dire.” Youngblood, 47 M.J. at 342 (citing Daulton, 45 M.J. 
at 217). In the instant case, implicit in the military judge’s 
finding of no actual bias is that he found SFC Bravo’s state-
ments of impartiality credible. Because there is nothing in 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
the record which outweighs or undermines this determina-
tion, there is an insufficient basis for this Court to conclude 
that the military judge abused his discretion. 
B. Implied Bias 
Appellant also argues that the military judge erred in 
his implied bias determination. We agree. Specifically, we 
hold that the facts in this case presented a close case of im-
plied bias, and therefore, the military judge was required 
to excuse SFC Bravo under the liberal grant mandate.  
In deciding this issue, we preliminarily note two points 
about the military judge’s ruling. First, the military judge 
failed to explain his implied bias reasoning. Keago, 84 M.J. 
at 373. And second, the military judge failed to distinguish 
between actual and implied bias, despite the fact that “the 
tests for actual and implied bias are not the same.” Id. In-
deed, these challenge- for-cause claims “require separate 
consideration under different principles of law.” United 
States v. Ai , 49 M.J. 1, 4 (C.A.A.F. 1998) (citing United 
States v. Velez, 48 M.J. 220, 224-25 (C.A.A.F. 1998)).  
In order to receive the amount of deference  to which 
they would otherwise be entitled, military judges must pro-
vide a “clear signal” on the record that they  “applied the 
right law.” Clay, 64 M.J. at 277. Here, “[t]he military judge 
may well have intellectually applied the right [ law],” but 
we do not know for certain because the military judge did 
not “place[] on the record his analysis and application of 
the law to the facts.” Downing, 56 M.J. at 422. “Without the 
benefit of knowing ‘how, and with what nuan ce, the mili-
tary judge applied the principles embodied in the implied 
bias doctrine,’ our standard of review moves significantly 
closer to de novo.” Keago, 84 M.J. at 373-74 (quoting Clay, 
64 M.J. at 278).3 
 
3 We also note that the military judge only invoked the lib-
eral grant mandate in a perfunctory manner. We do not condone 
this approach. See Peters, 74 M.J. at 35 (disapproving of the mil-
itary judge’s cursory invocation of the liberal grant mandate be-
cause he otherwise failed to explain on the record “why, given 
the specific factors in [the] case, the balance tipped in favor of 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
Applying this less deferential standard of review, sev-
eral factors lead us to conclude that  the challenge to SFC 
Bravo presented a close case of implied bias.  
First, the military judge’s ruling was predicated on a 
mistaken view of the facts. Specifically, in his analysis the 
military judge relied on the assertion that SFC Bravo had 
merely noted a negative “outside perception” of s oldiers 
who retain civilian defense counsel and had not stated that 
“he personally holds that perception .” (Emphasis added.) 
However, at a number of points in the record, SFC Bravo 
actually stated that he was expressing a personal view. For 
example, SFC Bravo stated that “[t]o me, hiring an outside 
civilian lawyer means that you don’t trust your defense 
very much.” (Emphasis added.) He also disclosed that “[i]n 
my experience, I have only ever  seen people hire civilian 
counsel after they have already been through the trial and 
their lawyers had let them down  . . . . so they went to re-
trial with a civilian lawyer, instead of a military [lawyer].” 
(Emphasis added.)  
Second, the military judge’s factual analysis was lack-
ing because he failed to consider the import of SFC Bravo’s 
responses. Specifically, SFC Bravo had expressed the view 
that soldiers who retain civilian defense counsel “didn’t get 
the outcome they were looking for [at their first trial], so 
they went to retrial with a civilian lawyer, instead of a mil-
itary [lawyer].” Thus, SFC Bravo appeared to enter the 
court-martial with the belief that Appellant had previously 
been found guilty because he now had retained civilian de-
fense counsel. And the military judge failed to consider this 
erroneous belief in the course of his implied bias analysis.  
Third, and related to the previous  points, the military 
judge failed to ask “critical questions that might  [have] 
fill[ed] any implied bias gaps left by counsel.” Clay, 64 M.J. 
at 277. Specifically, the military  judge never asked SFC 
 
denying the challenge”); Clay, 64 M.J. at 277 (“A military judge 
who addresses implied bias by applying the liberal grant man-
date on the record will receive more deference on review than 
one that does not.”). 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Bravo to clarif y what he meant by his observation  that it 
was “unusual” for soldiers to retain civilian defense coun-
sel. Similarly, the military judge never explored the ques-
tion of whether SFC Bravo believed Appellant had previ-
ously been found guilty because Appellant  had now 
retained civilian defense counsel.  Left unclarified, these 
statements suggest that SFC Bravo may have had a critical 
misunderstanding about Appellant’s constitutional right to 
counsel of choice and the role counsel plays in the court -
martial process. Rogers, 75 M.J. at 271. 
At one point, the military judge did ask  SFC Bravo to 
clarify what he meant when he said, “To me, hiring an 
outside civilian lawyer  means that you don’t trust your 
defense much.” The military judge questioned SFC Bravo 
whether by “defense” he meant the accused’s “defense 
counsel, as in the attorneys” or “the case [the accused was] 
going to present?” SFC Bravo responded that he was 
referring to “[a]ll of it.” However, the military judge ended 
his inquiry there. By not inquiring further into what SFC 
Bravo meant by “[a]ll of it,” the military judge has left this 
Court to speculate as to the nature and contours of  SFC 
Bravo’s beliefs on this subject . And the argument by 
Appellant’s counsel is well taken that SFC Bravo’s answer, 
when viewed with his other responses , likely could have 
caused an objective observe r to conclude  that SFC Bravo 
believed Appellant’s decision to retain civilian defense 
counsel meant Appellant realized that his defense to the 
pending charges was weak or nonexistent.  See Rogers, 75 
M.J. at 271.  
Fourth, the military judge never provided instructional 
guidance to SFC Bravo to  address his apparent incorrect 
belief about the circumstances under which a soldier may 
retain civilian defense counsel. Because the military judge 
failed to take this step, we agree with Appellant that this 
case is distinguishable from United States v. Napolitano , 
53 M.J. 162 (C.A.A.F. 2000). As in this case, the appellant 
in Napolitano claimed that a member of his court-martial, 
Captain (C apt) Malanowski, was both actually and 
impliedly biased against him because he chose to be 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
represented by civilian counsel. Id. at 163. Specifically, 
Capt Malanowski expressed the view that civilian lawyers 
were “freelance guns for hire, like Johnny Cochran ,” who 
would push aside their moral beliefs to represent someone 
they believe d was guilty. Id.  at 164. In response, the 
military judge gave a detailed instruction to C apt 
Malanowski on the duty of defense counsel to zealously 
represent their client and advised him that the law is “ ‘just 
the opposite of what you may think. ’ ” Id. at 165. C apt 
Malanowski responded that he was “  ‘not aware ’ ” of the 
duty of defense counsel as the military judge described it 
and conceded that this standard was “ ‘the only way [the 
system] could really work. ’ ” Id. On appeal, this Court did 
not find implied bias, noting that “after proper instruction 
by the trial judge, [Capt Malanowski] essentially retracted” 
his initial erroneous opinion and “ultimately stated that he 
held no bias against civilian defense counsel in general or 
appellant as a result of his civilian counsel of choice.” Id. at 
167. This type of in struction on the part of the military 
judge, followed by recantation and rehabilitation on the 
part of the prospective panel member, did not occur in the 
instant case. 
 In response, t he Government notes that SFC Bravo 
made other statements that contradicted,  or at least 
mitigated, his problematic statements. So, the Government 
reasons, no further inquiries and no instructional guidance 
was necessary here. To be sure, prospective panel members 
who initially express incorrect views of the law, the facts, 
or their duties can subsequently  clarify those views or be 
otherwise rehabilitated. However, the Government’s 
position is weakened  by the fact that SFC Bravo ’s 
assertions of impartiality  were in response to leading 
questions. As this Court noted in Keago, “a potential panel 
member’s predictable answers to leading questions are not 
enough to rebut the possibility of bias, especially when 
some of those questions lead to more problematic 
responses.” 84 M.J. at 374 (citing Nash, 71 M.J. at 89). The 
Government’s position also fails to take into account the 
fact that SFC Bravo never recanted his original view that 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
it was “unusual” for s oldiers to retain civilian defense 
counsel. As a result, we conclude that this is not a case in 
which effective rehabilitation occurred. 
At bottom, we conclude that SFC Bravo’s “uncorrected 
misunderstanding” of relevant facts and legal issues in this 
case could “cause an objective observer to have substantial 
doubt about the fairness of [Appellant]’s  court-martial 
panel.” Rogers, 75 M.J. at 271. As a consequence, upon con-
sidering the totality of the circumstances and applying a 
standard of review closer to de novo, we conclude that Ap-
pellant’s challenge presented a close case of implied bias. 
And “[b]ecause military judges are required to apply the 
liberal grant mandate and excuse members in close cases, 
the military judge erred by failing to do so.”  Keago, 84 M.J. 
at 375. 
IV. Decision 
The judgment of the United States Army Court of Crim-
inal Appeals is reversed. The findings and sentence are set 
aside. The record is  returned to the Judge Advocate Gen-
eral of the Army. A rehearing is authorized.  
 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring. 
I join the Court’s opinion because it follows this Court’s 
precedents on challenges of members for implied bias. But 
I write separately to address a subject not fully examined  
in the Court’s opinion, namely, the role of counsel  in liti-
gating implied bias motions. 
In its opinion, the Court identifies numerous shortcom-
ings and dispassionately ascribes all of them to the military 
judge: 
“[T]he military judge failed to explain his im-
plied bias reasoning.” 
“[T]he military judge failed to distinguish be-
tween actual and implied bias.” 
“[T]he military judge only invoked the liberal 
grant mandate in a perfunctory manner.” 
“[T]he military judge’s ruling was predicated 
on a mistaken view of the facts.” 
“[T]he military judge’s factual analysis was 
lacking because he failed to consider the import of 
[Sergeant First Class (SFC)] Bravo’s responses.” 
“[T]he military judge never asked SFC Bravo 
to clarify what he meant by his observation that it 
was ‘unusual’ for soldiers to retain civilian defense 
counsel.” 
“[T]he military judge never explored the ques-
tion of whether SFC Bravo believed Appellant had 
previously been found guilty because Appellant 
had now retained civilian defense counsel.” 
“[T]he military judge ended his inquiry” with-
out “inquiring further into what SFC Bravo meant 
by ‘[a]ll of it.’ ” 
“[T]he military judge never provided instruc-
tional guidance to SFC Bravo to address his ap-
parent incorrect belief about the circumstances 
under which a soldier may retain civilian defense 
counsel.” 
Anyone reading th is catalog of omissions  would 
understand that the Court is setting aside the findings and 
sentence in this case because the military judge did not do 
everything that this Court’s precedents (for better or 
worse) require. But such an understanding would be 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring 
2 
 
incomplete without an appreciation of the steps  that trial 
counsel could have taken that might have chang ed this 
result. I therefore believe it is valuable to discuss them. 
 During voir dire, Appellant moved to have SFC Bravo 
excused on grounds of actual and implied bias. Represent-
ing the  Government, t rial counsel  opposed the motion . 
When the military judge decided not to excuse SFC Bravo, 
that was a victory for trial counsel. But it was not enough. 
If trial counsel wanted the military judge’s ruling to stand 
on appeal, then trial counsel also needed to take whatever 
additional permissible actions were necessary to build a 
proper record. 
If a military judge does not sufficiently explain a deci-
sion, then trial counsel should ask the military judge to 
provide more complete reasoning . If a military judge mis-
apprehends a fact, then trial counsel should call the prob-
lem to the military judge’s attention.  If a military judge 
does not make sufficient inquir ies, then trial counsel 
should request the military judge to ask additional ques-
tions. Such steps by trial counsel  will help the military 
judge make a more informed and therefore better decision. 
They will help establish a better record of the military 
judge’s reasoning. And equally important, such steps might 
obviate any appellate issues, regardless of what  the mili-
tary judge decides. 
To be sure, t he military judge ultimately has the re-
sponsibility for ruling on an  excusal motion and for ex-
plaining his or her decision. But it is patently unreasonable 
for counsel to expect the military judge to ask all the ques-
tions and address all the points that might later be raised 
on appeal when counsel does not raise them or address 
them at trial. It is in this context that the Court concludes 
that the military judge in this case abused his discretion. 
United States v. Urieta, No. 24-0172/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring dubitante. 
I continue to doubt whether the so-called “sliding scale” 
for deference to the trial judge is a useful standard of re-
view. See United States v. Keago, 84 M.J. 367, 375 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (Sparks, J., concurring in part and dissenting in 
part). I have previously expressed my views on this issue, 
so it is not necessary to reiterate them here. However, I 
respect the Court’s position as precedent, and am oblige d 
to concur, dubitante, with the Court’s opinion in this case.  