This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jaquan Q. GREENE-WATSON, Senior Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0096 
Crim. App. No. 40293 
 
Argued October 10, 2024 —  Decided March 11, 2025  
 
Military Judge: Brett A. Landry 
 
For Appellant:  Major Heather M. Bruha (argued); 
Megan P. Marinos, Esq. 
 
For Appellee: Colonel Matthew D. Talcott  (argued); 
Mary Ellen Payne, Esq.  (on brief); Captain Tyler L. 
Washburn. 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court 
with respect to Part III.B. , which Chief Judge 
OHLSON, Judge SPARKS , Judge MAGGS, and 
Judge HARDY joined, and with respect to Parts I ., 
II., III.A., and IV ., which Judge MAGGS joined . 
Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate opinion con-
curring in part and in the judgment. Judge SPARKS 
filed a separate opinion concurring in part and in the 
judgment. Judge HARDY filed a separate opinion  
concurring in part and in the judgment , in which 
Judge SPARKS joined. 
 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
     Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court 
with respect to Part III.B., which Chief Judge OHLSON , 
Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined, 
and with respect to Parts I., II., III.A., and IV., which Judge 
MAGGS joined.1 
In this domestic violence case, Appellant argues that 
the United  States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals  
(AFCCA) erred in affirming the military judge’s denial of a 
defense motion to exclude evidence of uncharged miscon-
duct that allegedly occurred seventeen months after the 
charged conduct. W e conclude that even if the military 
judge abused his discretion in admitting the subsequent , 
uncharged conduct under Military Rule of Evidence 
(M.R.E.) 404(b) to show a common plan or scheme  to con-
trol his wife, the error did not materially prejudice Appel-
lant’s substantial rights. Therefore, we affirm the decision 
of the AFCCA. 
I. Background 
On September 19, 2020, Appellant was at home with his 
wife, MGW, and their three -month-old son , JGW. MGW 
stepped outside for a Zoom call. When she came back inside 
to check on the baby, she heard crying. MGW testified that 
she opened the door to JGW’s room and saw Appellant 
standing by the crib, holding a washcloth over the baby’s 
face. When she tried to grab Appellant’s hand, he picked 
JGW up and began shaking him. He then held JGW up in 
the air and told MGW, “If you come near me again, I’m go-
ing to throw him.” 
MGW testified that, after a while, she managed to take 
JGW from Appellant.  Appellant swung his fist  at her but 
missed. He swung again, missing MGW but grazing the top 
of JGW’s head with his fist. MGW set the baby down, and 
Appellant pushed her to the ground. She remained there 
 
1 The Court heard oral argument in this case at Hampton 
University in Hampton, Virginia, as part of the Court’s “Project 
Outreach.” Project Outreach is a public awareness program 
demonstrating the operation of a federal court of appeals and the 
military justice system. We thank the participants. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
for a minute, stunned, and then picked up the baby and ran 
downstairs. She retrieved her phone, which Appellant had 
thrown down the stairs, put JGW in his car seat, and began 
recording.  
On the recording, Appellant and MGW can be heard ar-
guing. She accused him of trying to kill their son by placing 
something over his mouth and  said that JGW could have 
died. Appellant responded: 
I don’t give a f[**]k. And if he did, then I’d be 
happy.  
 . . . . 
 . . . I swear to God, you better not come back in 
this house.  
 . . . . 
 . . . [A]fter you leave that door, if it’s not with 
the police it is in your best interest if you wish to 
continue breathing and trying to live a life, to not 
come back through . . . that door.  
 . . . .  
 . . . Try to come back through that door without 
the police and see what happens. 
MGW called 911. After police arrived, she took JGW to 
the hospital, where he remained for three days. 
Appellant also called 911. He told the operator that his 
wife had instigated the altercation. He said he had tried to 
de-escalate the situation but acknowledged that  “a few 
light grabs and shoves” were exchanged. Appellant told the 
911 operator that MGW threatened  to tell police he was 
abusing the baby. He explained that “usually ” he could 
calm the crying baby by “playing with his bottom lip or his 
jaw” and so he “was pushing up and down on his little jaw 
trying to get him to be quiet.” He insisted the baby was 
“fine.”  
Appellant was charged with assault and communi-
cating a threat, in violation of Article 128, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 928 (2018), and Arti-
cle 115, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 915 (2018). He was subject to a 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
no-contact order following the September 2020 incident , 
but after the order expired, he returned home and lived 
with MGW and JGW from October 2020 to February 2022.  
On February 8, 2022, approximately three weeks before 
the court-martial was scheduled to begin, the Government 
provided notice of intent to admit evidence of uncharged 
acts that allegedly occurred on or after February 6, 2022.  
Relevant to this appeal,2 the Government sought to admit 
the following uncharged acts pursuant to M.R.E. 404(b)(2): 
iii. The Accused physically got on top of M.G.W. 
and twisted her side with his hand, causing a 9 out 
of 10 pain level, leaving a red mark. The prosecu-
tion intends to offer this evidence of the Accused’s 
common plan to perpetuate control over M.G.W. 
iv. The Accused balled up his fists and acted like 
he was going to hit M.G.W. The prosecution in-
tends to offer this evidence of the Accused’s com-
mon plan to control M.G.W. 
v. The Accused told M.G.W. he was going to “put a 
bullet” in her back. The prosecution intends to of-
fer this evidence of the Accused’s common plan to 
control M.G.W. 
vi. The Accused took M.G.W.’s phone and threw it, 
stating he did so “ since [she’s] gonna be a dumb 
b[**]ch” and record him. The prosecution intends 
to offer this evidence of the Accused ’s conscious-
ness of guilt and common plan to control M.G.W. 
vii. M.G.W. ran to the vehicle with the couple ’s 
child, J.G.W. and locked herself inside. The Ac-
cused placed his foot behind the wheel so she 
couldn’t reverse the vehicle and pounded on the 
windows, yelling at  M.G.W. The prosecution in-
tends to offer this evidence of the Accused ’s con-
sciousness of guilt  and common plan to control 
M.G.W. 
 
2 Additional evidence noticed by the Government was either 
abandoned by the Government before the military judge ruled or 
ruled inadmissible by the military judge.  This additional evi-
dence is not at issue on this appeal.  
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
viii. M.G.W. left the residence with the couple ’s 
child and stayed in a hotel for safety. The Accused 
called her approximately seven times, demanding 
she return their vehicle. The Accused turned off 
all of the couple’s credit cards and removed all the 
cash from the joint bank account. The prosecution 
intends to offer this evidence of the Accused’s con-
sciousness of guilt and common plan to control 
M.G.W. 
ix. On or about 7 or 8 February 2022, the Accused 
shut off the utilities in M.G.W.’s home. The prose-
cution intends to offer this evidence of the Ac-
cused’s consciousness of guilt and common plan to 
control M.G.W.  
. . . . 
e. In the past, the Accused has turned off all credit 
cards and taken her car keys following arguments. 
The prosecution intends to offer this evidence of 
the Accused’s common plan to control M.G.W. 
(First alteration in original.) 
The defense filed a motion in limine to preclude admis-
sion of the evidence, arguing that there was no evidence 
the uncharged acts occurred, but even if they did , allega-
tions that Appellant attempted to control MGW in 2022 did 
not make it more likely that he suffocated JGW or threat-
ened MGW in 2020 as charged. According to the defense, 
the low probative value of the uncharged acts was substan-
tially outweighed by the danger that the y would influence 
the factfinder to “make a conscious or unconscious inferen-
tial leap towards a conclusion of propensity.” 
The military judge denied the defense motion and ruled 
the Government could introduce the uncharged acts. First, 
the military judge found that the evidence, including a po-
lice report, MGW’s statements during a law enforcement 
interview, and an oral stipulation of her expected testi-
mony, reasonably supported a finding by a preponderance 
of the evidence that the uncharged acts occurred.  
Then, the military judge determined that the evidence 
was admissible for one of the proffered purposes but not the 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
other. According to t he military judge , “evidence of a do-
mestic dispute that occurred approximately  17 months af-
ter the charged misconduct alleged  in this case cannot be 
evidence of the accused ’s consciousness of guilt of having 
committed the charged misconduct ” or his intent at the 
time of the charged offenses,  absent evidence that the un-
charged misconduct was Appellant’s attempt to intimidate 
or take revenge on MGW for her initial report  or linked in 
any other way  to his intent at the time of the charged of-
fenses. Nevertheless, the military judge found  “sufficient” 
similarities between the charged and uncharged miscon-
duct with respect to “the specifics of the accused’s behavior 
when he is frustrated with MGW”  to conclude the un-
charged misconduct was evidence of a common plan or 
scheme to control his wife and undermine any attempts she 
made to report him. The military judge reasoned: 
In each instance, the accused is alleged to have of-
fered or engaged in violence against MGW. Addi-
tionally, he is alleged to have made threats 
against MGW. Further, all of these behaviors, on 
both occasions, are alleged to have taken place 
while MGW was hol ding or in close proximity to 
JGW, causing fear on the part of MGW that their 
child would be involved or injured somehow in 
their altercation. Moreover, in both the incident 
underlying the charged offenses and the un-
charged incident addressed here, the accused is 
alleged to have engaged in certain acts to frus-
trate MGW’s ability or willingness to report these 
allegations by taking actual steps to prevent her 
from reporting and to increase his control over her 
so as to deter her from making a report. Finally, 
evidence exists that the accused, in each case, took 
steps to call 911, which the Gover nment intends 
to argue shows a common plan or scheme to un-
dercut what he anticipates MGW’s report to au-
thorities will be following their domestic disputes.  
The military judge  concluded that the probative value 
of the evidence was not outweighed by the danger of unfair 
prejudice or any other factor listed in M.R.E. 403 . Accord-
ingly, he ruled that the uncharged acts were admissible un-
der M.R.E. 404(b) as evidence of Appellant’s common plan 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
or scheme. He emphasized that he would consider this evi-
dence “only for the limited purpose that it may establish a 
common scheme or plan and not for reasons prohibited by 
M.R.E. 404(a) or for propensity purposes.”  
Consistent with the military judge’s ruling, MGW testi-
fied at trial that she and Appellant argued over the baby 
on February 6, 2022. She  testified that after accusing her 
of making excuses to avoid watching the baby, Appellant 
pinned her to the bed and twisted her side. He told her, “I 
will put a bullet in your back.” Upon releasing her, he fol-
lowed her into another room and said, “I’m going to beat 
the s[***] out of you.” Then he grabbed her phone and tried 
to throw it out the window.  
MGW testified that she ran from the house and locked 
herself into her car with JGW. Appellant was punching the 
windows and trying to get in. He told her she was not al-
lowed to leave and put his foot behind the wheel to prevent 
her from driving away. Then he called the police and re-
ported that she was trying to leave with his car and his son. 
After police arrived, MGW heeded their advice to leave the 
home. She soon discovered that her credit cards had been 
frozen and her joint bank account drained. Upon returning 
home a few days later, she discovered that all the utilities 
had been turned off. 
In closing, the Government argued that the uncharged 
events of February  6, 2022,  provided context for the 
charged offense of communicating a threat in violation of 
Article 115, UCMJ. After laying out the elements of the of-
fense, the Government argued that the uncharged conduct 
established the wrongfulness of the threat: 
[T]urning back to the context, the intent behind it, 
the accused is trying to control the victim and pre-
vent her from reporting. One of the ways in which 
you know that happens is in the context of the re-
lationship from the incident that happened in 
February of this year. The threats tied to the fact 
that there is the common plan to control MGW.  
When she’s doing something that he doesn’t want 
her to do, particularly in regards to their son, he’s 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
trying to control her with verbal threats and phys-
ical threats, which all should be considered in con-
text to the fact that this threat is part of this com-
mon plan to control Mrs. MGW. He tries to restrict 
her ability to report by taking her phone and 
throwing it, by being physically violent with her, 
by physically threatening her. All of this can be 
considered together to look at the intent behind 
his actions, which is to control her. And that’s the 
purpose of the threat, and that’s why this threat 
is wrongful. 
Appellant was convicted by a military judge sitting as a 
general court -martial, contrary to his pleas, of one 
specification of communicating a threat in violation  of 
Article 115, UCMJ. Consistent with his pleas, the military 
judge found Appellant not guilty of one specification of 
assault by suffocating a child in violation of Article 128, 
UCMJ. The military judge sentenced  Appellant to a bad -
conduct discharge, confinement for ninety  days, reduction 
to the grade of E -1, and a reprimand. The convening 
authority deferred the reduction in rank until the entry of 
judgment and waived automatic forfeitures for the benefit 
of MGW and JGW.  
The AFCCA affirmed the military judge’s ruling on the 
defense motion in limine and affirmed the findings and 
sentence. United States v. Greene-Watson, No. ACM 40293, 
2023 CCA LEXIS 542, at *2, 2023 WL 8943232, at *1 (A.F. 
Ct. Crim. App. Dec. 27, 2023) (unpublished). We granted 
review of the following issue: 
Whether the Air Force Court erred in affirming 
the military judge’s decision to admit evidence of 
domestic violence occurring 17 months after the 
charged offense to show a common scheme or plan 
under Mil. R. Evid. 404(b) —using a different ra-
tionale than the military judge. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, 84 M.J. 458, 458 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (order granting review) . For the reasons stated be-
low, we answer the granted issue in the negative and af-
firm the decision of the AFCCA. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
II. Standard of Review 
We review the military judge’s decision to admit or ex-
clude evidence for an abuse of discretion. United States v. 
Wilson, 84 M.J. 383, 390 (C.A.A.F. 2024). “Military judges 
abuse their discretion (1) if the findings of fact upon which 
they predicate their ruling  are not supported by the evi-
dence of record; (2) if they use incorrect legal principles; or 
(3) if their application of the correct legal principles to the 
facts is clearly unreasonable.” Id. 
III. Discussion 
Appellant argues that the military judge abused his dis-
cretion by allowing the Government to introduce evidence 
of uncharged acts that occurred seventeen months after the 
charged time frame to show a common plan or scheme to 
control MGW during the charged offenses. He argues that 
the military judge failed to identify a fact of consequence 
made more or less likely by the subsequent uncharged con-
duct and failed to conduct a thorough M.R.E. 403 balancing 
test articulating the probative value and weight of the evi-
dence. He contends he was prejudiced by the admission of 
evidence of uncharged conduct that w as more egregious 
than the charged conduct. Additionally, he argues that the 
AFCCA erroneously substituted its own rationale that the 
uncharged conduct was  probative of wrongfulness and 
could be used to show intent. We address each of these con-
tentions in turn. 
A. M.R.E. 404(b) evidence 
“[P]ropensity evidence is a generally impermissible 
form of character evidence in which members ‘ prove a 
person’s character in order to show that on a particular 
occasion the person acted in accordance with the 
character.’ ” United States v. Quezada, 82 M.J. 54, 59 
(C.A.A.F. 2021) (quoting M.R.E. 404(b)(1)). M .R.E. 404(b) 
provides that “[e]vidence of a crime, wrong, or other act is 
not admissible to prove a person’s character in order to 
show that on a particular occasion the person acted in 
accordance with the character.” M.R.E. 404(b)(1). However, 
“[t]his evidence may be ad missible for another purpose, 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
such as proving motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, 
plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake, or lack of 
accident.” M.R.E. 404(b)(2). Where M.R.E. 404(b) evidence 
is offered for a permissible, non-propensity purpose, the 
military judge “must conduct a M.R.E. 403 balancing test 
and exclude this otherwise admissible evidence ‘ if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by a danger of 
. . . unfair prejudice.’ ” Wilson, 84 M.J. at 390 (alteration in 
original) (quoting M.R.E. 403). 
We review a military judge’s decision to admit M.R.E. 
404(b) evidence under a  three-part test articulated by our 
predecessor in United States v. Reynolds: ( 1) does the evi-
dence reasonably support a finding that  the accused com-
mitted a specific act; (2) is a fact of consequence made more 
or less probable by the existence of this evidence; and (3) is 
the probative value of the evidence substantially out-
weighed by the danger of unfair prejudice? 29 M.J. 105, 109 
(C.M.A. 1989). “If the admitted evidence fails t o meet any 
of the factors laid out in  Reynolds, the military judge will 
have erred,” and we “must then assess the prejudice, if any, 
resulting from that error.” Wilson, 84 M.J. at 391. 
We conclude that each of the three Reynolds  factors is 
satisfied in this case. First, the Government proffered suf-
ficient evidence to reasonably support a finding that the 
uncharged conduct occurred. This evidence included a po-
lice report describing the February 6 , 2022, incident, re-
cordings of MGW’s statements to police, and a stipulation 
of MGW’s expected testimony. 
Second, the uncharged conduct made a fact of conse-
quence—the wrongfulness of the charged threat —more 
likely. The elements of the offense  of communicating a 
threat, as charged,  are (a) that Appellant communicated 
certain language expressing a present determination or in-
tent to kill MGW if she returned to their shared residence; 
(b) that the communication was made known to MGW; and 
(c) that the communication was wrongful . Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States pt . IV, para. 53.b.(1) (2019 
ed.). The military judge found that Appellant engaged in 
the uncharged conduct on February 6, 2022, to “frustrate 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
MGW’s ability or willingness to report these allegations by 
taking actual steps to prevent her from reporting and to 
increase his control over her so as to deter her from making 
a report.” Furthermore, the military judge found sufficient 
similarities between the charged and uncharged conduct to 
permit the Government to argue that taken together, they 
demonstrated that Appellant acted pursuant to a common 
plan or scheme to control MGW and prevent her from re-
porting the alleged domestic abuse. 
Although the military judge did not explicitly state that 
the uncharged acts made the wrongfulness of the charged 
threat more probable, we agree with the AFCCA that this 
conclusion was implicit in the military judge’s ruling.3 As 
the AFCCA explained, “[t]he existence of a common plan or 
scheme by Appellant to intimidate MGW from reporting 
his threatening behavior makes it more likely that his com-
munication was ‘wrongful’ because it indicates his commu-
nications were not in jest or idle banter—rather, they were 
serious attempts to intimidate her.” Greene- Watson, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 542, at * 35-36, 2023 WL 8943232, at *14. 
Moreover, trial counsel argued in closing , without objec-
tion, that the February 6, 2022,  uncharged acts were evi-
dence of the wrongfulness of the charged offense of com-
municating a threat. 
We are unpersuaded by Appellant’s contention that acts 
occurring seventeen months after the charged conduct are 
“too [r]emote” to prove a fact of consequence under M.R.E. 
404(b). Neither the rule nor our precedent imposes such a 
 
3 Because we agree with the AFCCA’s conclusion that the 
military judge implicitly ruled that the evidence could be offered 
to show wrongfulness, we do not reach the question whether the 
AFCCA was correct in stating that it could affirm the military 
judge’s decision even if the military judge did not implicitly rule 
that the evidence could be offered to show wrongfulness. Greene-
Watson, 2023 CCA LEXIS 542, at *36 n.18, 2023 WL 8943232, 
at *14 n.18. 
 
 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
temporal limit on M.R.E. 404(b) evidence. To the contrary, 
we have long recognized that evidence of both prior and 
subsequent uncharged conduct may be properly admitted 
under M.R.E. 404(b), “consistent with prevailing federal 
practice under Fed. R. Evid. 404(b), on which the military 
rule is based.” United States v. Young , 55 M.J. 193, 196 
(C.A.A.F. 2001) (citing cases); see United States v. James, 
63 M.J. 217, 222 (C.A.A.F. 2006) (“In United States v. 
Young, . . . we joined the ‘prevailing federal practice,’ which 
did not limit ‘other’ acts to ‘prior’ acts.”). “It is the fact of 
the other act that makes it probative, not whether it hap-
pened before or after the act now charged.” James, 63 M.J. 
at 221 (finding no temporal limitation on the admissibility 
of subsequent uncharged misconduct under M.R.E. 413 
and 414 where “[t]he rules simply discuss ‘one or more of-
fenses’ with absolutely no mention of wh en the offense(s) 
might have occurred”). 
We also reject Appellant’s argument that uncharged 
conduct must be virtually identical to the charged conduct 
to be admissible as evidence of a common plan or scheme 
under M.R.E. 404(b). In United States v. Hyppolite, we held 
that a military judge did not abuse his discretion by admit-
ting evidence of conduct that was similar but not identical 
to other conduct as M.R.E. 404(b) evidence of the accused’s 
“specific common plan . . . to engage in sexual conduct with 
his friends after they have been drinking and were asleep 
or falling asleep.” 79 M.J. 161, 166 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). While there were some dif-
ferences between the misconduct  allegations, they also 
shared “common factors,” including “the relationship of the 
alleged victims to the accused (friends), the circumstances 
surrounding the alleged commission of the offenses (after a 
night of drinking when the alleged victim was asleep or 
falling asleep), and the nature of the misconduct (touching 
the alleged victims’ genitalia).” Id. (internal quotation 
marks omitted). Here, as in Hyppolite, the M.R.E. 404(b) 
evidence was substantially similar to the charged domestic 
abuse allegations in that both involved Appellant physi-
cally assaulting MGW and threatening to hurt her after 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
they argued over the baby and while the baby was in her 
arms or close by, taking her phone away, and calling 911 to 
thwart her attempt to report him to law enforcement . 
Therefore, we conclude that the second prong of the Reyn-
olds test was satisfied.4 
As to the t hird Reynolds prong, the military judge did 
not articulate the reasoning for his determination that the 
probative value of the uncharged acts wa s not 
substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice, 
confusion of the issues, misleading  the members, 
considerations of undue delay, waste  of time, or needless 
presentation of cumulative evidence.  Therefore, his 
decision is entitled to less deference than if he had 
articulated his reasoning. United States v. Ediger, 68 M.J. 
243, 248-49 (C.A.A.F. 2010).  
Nevertheless, we find no error in the military judge’s 
M.R.E. 403 balancing . The probative value of the un-
charged acts was relatively low in light of the strength of 
the Government’s case, which included a recording of Ap-
pellant making the charged threat to MGW. 5 Moreover, 
 
4 Appellant argues that United States v. Morrison , 52 M.J. 
117, 120 (C.A.A.F. 1999), requires the uncharged conduct to be 
almost identical to the charged offense to prove a common plan 
or scheme. It is true that the Court in Morrison, id. at 122, stated 
that this Court’s opinion in United States v. Munoz, 32 M.J. 359 
(C.M.A. 1991),  was consistent with the Court’s decision in 
United States v. Brannan, 18 M.J. 181, 183 (C.M.A. 1984), where 
the Court held that uncharged acts “must be almost identical to 
the charged acts” to be admissible as evidence of a common plan 
or scheme. But the Court later clarified, in Hyppolite , that 
Munoz required only that there be “common factors” between the 
charged and uncharged acts for a military judge to admit evi-
dence to prove a scheme or plan, and held that “it was within the 
discretion of the two military judges to find a common plan or 
scheme based on the common factors among the specifications.” 
79 M.J. at 165-66 (emphasis added). 
5 The evidence did not figure prominently in the Govern-
ment’s case. Indeed, trial counsel made only a brief reference to 
the M.R.E. 404(b) evidence in closing, arguing that it provided 
context to understand Appellant’s intent to control MGW. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
there is little risk of unfair prejudice in this military judge-
alone trial where the military judge emphasized that he 
would consider the uncharged acts only for the limited pur-
pose of establishing a common scheme  or plan and not as 
improper propensity evidence or for any purpose prohibited 
by M.R.E. 404(b). The military judge’s finding that Appel-
lant was not guilty of assault by strangulation further sup-
ports the conclusion he did not improperly consider the un-
charged conduct. 
B. Prejudice 
Finally, we conclude that even if the military judge 
erred, the error did not have a substantial influence on the 
findings. United States v. Kohlbek , 78 M.J. 326,  334 
(C.A.A.F. 2019)  (testing preserved nonconstitutional evi-
dentiary error to determine “whether the error had a sub-
stantial influence on the findings”  (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (citation omitted)). In determining preju-
dice arising from nonconstitutional evidentiary errors, we  
weigh: “ ‘(1) the strength of the Government’s case, (2) the 
strength of the defense case, (3) the materiality of the evi-
dence in question, and (4) the quality of the evidence in 
question.’ ” Id. (quoting United States v. Norman , 74 M.J. 
144, 150 (C.A.A.F. 2015) ; United States v. Kerr, 51 M.J. 
401, 405 (C.A.A.F. 1999)). 
Here, as noted above, even without the uncharged con-
duct the Government’s case was strong , especially given 
that the threatening statement was recorded and admitted 
into evidence. Although the defense highlighted inconsist-
encies in MGW’s various reports  to medical and law en-
forcement personnel  to discredit her testimony that she 
was “scared” by his threat, the defense case with respect to 
the threat was comparatively weak.6  
Turning to the materiality and the quality of the evi-
dence, these factors favor a finding of harmlessness. “When 
 
6 The defense case with respect to the threat stands in 
marked contrast to the compelling defense that resulted in ac-
quittal on the strangulation offense. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
assessing the materiality and quality of the evidence, this 
Court considers the particular factual circumstances of 
each case.” United States v. Washington, 80 M.J. 106, 111 
(C.A.A.F. 2020). “In examining these factors, we essentially 
are assessing how much the erroneously admitted evidence 
may have affected the court-martial.” Id. We agree with the 
AFCCA’s determination that the uncharged conduct was 
similar to the charged conduct in that both involved death 
threats. Greene-Watson, 2023 CCA LEXIS 542, at * 40, 
2023 WL 8943232, at *15 (concluding that “[t]he gravamen 
of the uncharged threat was not significantly greater than 
the charged threat”). The similarity of the uncharged 
threat to the charged threat lessened its materiality, and 
thereby lessened its prejudicial impact on the findings. Wil-
son, 84 M.J. at 396 (concluding that the prejudicial impact 
of erroneously admitted M.R.E. 404(b) evidence is “ mini-
mal” where it was “of the same nature” as the charged con-
duct); United States v. Hursey , 55 M.J. 34, 36 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) (holding that erroneous admission of uncharged mis-
conduct evidence was harmless where the record “was re-
plete with admissi ble evidence” of similar misconduct ), 
cited in Washington, 80 M.J. at 111. At the same time, the 
quality of the evidence of the uncharged conduct was lower 
than the quality of the evidence of the charged threat  for 
which Appellant was convicted, which was captured by 
MGW’s cell phone and played in court. 
C. Conclusion 
In light of the foregoing, we conclude that the military 
judge did not abuse his discretion in admitting the un-
charged conduct to prove Appellant’s common plan or 
scheme to control MGW, and even if he erred, the error did 
not substantially influence the findings.  
IV. Judgment 
The decision of the  United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in part and in the 
judgment. 
I concur with the Court’s opinion insofar as it finds that 
any error did not prejudice Appellant’s substantial rights. 
Because I believe the case can be resolved on this basis  
alone, I only join Part III.B. of the Court’s opinion relating 
to its determination of no material prejudice.  
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and in the 
judgment. 
I join Part III.B. of the Court’s opinion in recognizing 
that Appellant was not prejudiced by the admission of 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 404(b) other acts 
evidence. I also join Judge Hardy in his expression of 
concern regarding where our precedent is leading us on 
exactly what constitutes evidence of a common plan or 
scheme under M.R.E. 404(b).  While conduct need not be 
identical, too often evidence admitted under the M.R.E. 
404(b) common scheme or plan exception is merely 
evidence of parallel offenses or a temporally p roximate 
series of events. What we seem to have here is a young man 
with a short temper. It is unlikely his behavior or 
motivations in either the charged or uncharged instances 
stemmed from anything more calculated than his inability 
to control his anger. However, because of what I believe 
may be a lack of clarity in this area, like Judge Hardy, I 
cannot conclude the military judge abused his discretion in 
admitting the evidence. I too implore the Court to remain 
open to reconsidering the proper scope of the common plan 
or scheme exception. Nonetheless, I feel compelled to 
address my separate concerns about applying the 
balancing test in M.R.E. 403 in military judge-alone trials. 
M.R.E. 404(b)(1)-(2) provides that “[e]vidence of a crime, 
wrong, or other act. . . . may be admissible for another pur-
pose, such as proving motive, opportunity, intent, prepara-
tion, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake, or lack 
of accident.” If a military judge determines that the prof-
fered evidence is properly admissible under M.R.E. 404(b), 
he or she then must conduct a M.R.E. 403 balancing test 
and exclude this otherwise admissible evidence “if its pro-
bative value is substantially outweighed by  a danger of 
. . . unfair prejudice.” This balancing test serves as a means 
of guarding against “[t]he general risk .  . . that members 
will treat evidence of uncharged acts as character evidence 
and use it to infer that an accused has acted in character, 
and thus convict.” United States v. Staton, 69 M.J. 228, 232 
(C.A.A.F. 2010). 
Appellant argues that the military judge’s M.R.E. 403 
balancing test was insufficient. Here, the military judge 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part 
and in the judgment 
 
2 
 
broadly found that “the probative value of this evidence is 
not substantially outweighed by the danger of unfair prej-
udice or any other factor that might be taken into consid-
eration under [M.R.E. 403].” This is effectively a recitation 
of the rule.  
The Court’s opinion correctly finds that the military 
judge did not err in his M.R.E. 403 balancing test. How-
ever, I would go further. It is essential to note that this was 
a military judge-alone trial. The risk of relevant evidence 
causing unfair prejudice in a bench trial is nonexistent be-
cause the risk addressed in Staton is eliminated by the ab-
sence of a members panel. As a result, a M.R.E. 403 bal-
ancing test should not be required.  
Not requiring the M.R.E. 403 balancing test in a mili-
tary judge-alone trial would bring this Court in line with 
most other federal courts. 1 The United States Court of 
 
1 The vast majority of federal courts have endorsed the idea 
that, in the judge -alone context, the risk of prejudice is signifi-
cantly reduced or eliminated outright. See Clark v. Quiros , No. 
3:19-cv-575 (VAB), 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 118046, at * 6, 2024 
WL 3292540, at *2 (D. Conn. July 3, 2024) (“In nonjury cases the 
district court can commit reversible error by excluding evidence 
but it is almost impossible for it to do so by admitting evidence.” 
(citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted) ); see also 
United States v. Hall, 202 F.3d 270 (6th Cir. 2000) (per curiam) 
(unpublished table decision) (“In bench trials, the application of 
the unfair prejudice portion of Rule 403 has been seen as an un-
necessary and useless procedure.” (citation omitted) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) ); United States v. Shukri , 207 F.3d 
412, 419 (7th Cir.  2000) (“In a bench trial, we assume that the 
district court was not influenced by evidence improperly brought 
before it unless there is evidence to the contrary.”); United States 
v. De Anda , No. 18 -cr-00538-TSH-1, 2019 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 
110880, at *13, 2019 WL 2863602, at *4 (N.D. Cal. July 2, 2019) 
(“[T]he Court finds [defendant’s] Rule 403 argument inapplica-
ble here because this action will be tried in a bench trial.”); 
Woods v. United States , 200 F. App ’x 848, 853 (11th Cir. 2006) 
(“[T]he part of Rule 403 that authorizes exclusion of evidence be-
cause of its unfair prejudicial impact ‘has no logical application 
to bench trials .’ ” (quoting Gulf States Utilities Co.  v. Ecodyne 
Corp, 635 F.2d 517, 519 (5th Cir. Unit A 1981) )); United States 
ex rel. Morsell v. NortonLifeLock, Inc., 567 F. Supp. 3d 248, 261 
(D.D.C. 2021) (“The Court similarly is not concerned with unfair 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part 
and in the judgment 
 
3 
 
Appeals for the Fifth Circuit takes the position that in 
bench trials “excluding relevant evidence on the basis of 
‘unfair prejudice’ is a useless procedure.” Gulf States Utili-
ties Co., 635 F.2d at 519. In a bench trial , the judge can 
“exclude those improper inferences from his mind in reach-
ing a decision.” Id. The United States Court of Appeals for 
the Fourth Circuit has taken the position that in a bench 
trial “evidence should not be excluded under 403 on the 
ground that it is unfairly prejudicial.” Schultz v. Butcher, 
24 F.3d 626, 632 (4th Cir. 1994). In an unpublished opin-
ion, the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Cir-
cuit adopted the reasoning of the Fourth and Fifth Circuits 
and stated that “Rule 403 does not provide a valid basis for 
contesting the admission” of evidence in a bench trial. 
United States v. Kienlen , 349 F. App’x 349, 351 (10th Cir. 
2009). The military justice system stands in the minority 
by requiring military judges in a military judge-alone trial 
to conduct a M.R.E. 403 balancing test.  
The M.R.E. 403 balancing test exists to prevent enflam-
ing the passions of servicemembers upon hearing prejudi-
cial evidence. Such an issue is not a concern in a bench 
trial. “A military judge is presumed to know the law and 
apply it correctly, is presumed capable of filtering out inad-
missible evidence, and is presumed not to have relied on 
such evidence on the question of guilt or innocence.” United 
States v. Robbins, 52 M.J. 455, 457 (C.A.A.F. 2000). At two 
separate places in his ruling, the military judge made clear 
the evidence would not be used for a propensity purpose:  
This is distinguishable from a propensity 
argument. . . . 
     . . . . 
     . . . the court will consider this M.R.E 404(b) 
evidence only for the limited purpose that it may 
establish a common scheme or plan and not for 
reasons prohibited by M.R.E. 404(a) or for propen-
sity purposes.  
 
prejudice from this document given that this will be a bench 
trial.”). 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part 
and in the judgment 
 
4 
 
     . . . .  
     . . . As the finder of fact in this military judge 
alone case, the Court will consider this M.R.E. 
404(b) evidence only for the limited purpose that 
it may establish a common scheme or plan and not 
for reasons prohibited by M.R.E. 404(a) or for pro-
pensity purposes. 
In a bench trial, the individual evaluating the evidence 
under M.R.E. 403 is determining whether they themselves 
will be prejudiced by the admission of said evidence. It is a 
legal fiction to pretend that once a military judge has re-
viewed the evidence that they could then put said evidence 
out of their mind as if they never saw it. Once, however, 
the military judge has stated that they will not misuse the 
evidence, we must trust the presumption that military 
judges know the law, can filter out inadmissible  evidence, 
and that they have not relied on such evidence on the ques-
tion of guilt or innocence.  
For these reasons, I respectfully concur  in part and in 
the judgment. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Judge SPARKS joins, con-
curring in part and in the judgment. 
Because I agree that Appellant was not prejudiced by 
the admission of evidence of his uncharged conduct under 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 404(b), I join Part III.B. 
of the Court’s opinion. I also agree that the military judge 
did not abuse his discretion by admitting that evidence, but 
I write separately to voice my concern about this Court’s 
precedent broadly interpreting the scope of the 
M.R.E. 404(b)(2) exception allowing the admission of oth-
erwise inadmissible evidence for the purpose of proving a 
common scheme or plan. See, e.g., United States v. Munoz, 
32 M.J. 359 (C.M.A. 1991) ; United States v. Johnson, 49 
M.J. 467 (C.A.A.F. 1998); United States v. Hyppolite, 79 
M.J. 161 (C.A.A.F. 2019). In a  future case, I believe that 
the Court should reconsider that precedent to prevent the 
common scheme or plan exception from swallowing 
M.R.E. 404(b)(1)’s general rule prohibiting the admission 
of propensity evidence. 
In a court-martial, the President has prohibited the ad-
mission of evidence of a crime, wrong, or other act “to prove 
a person’s character in order to show that on a particular 
occasion the person acted in accordance with the charac-
ter,” M.R.E. 404(b)(1), but nevertheless allows the admis-
sion of such evidence for another purpose including proving 
the existence of a “plan.” M.R.E. 404(b)(2). This Court and 
its predecessor have long interpreted this rule as applying 
the exception from civilian courts allowing “the introduc-
tion of evidence tending to show the existence of a plan, 
design or scheme on the part of an accused embracing the 
offenses with the commission of which he is charged.” 
United States v. Haimson , 5 C.M.A. 208, 227, 17 C.M.R. 
208, 227 (1954). 
Under this Court’s precedent, the distinction between 
admitting evidence to demonstrate propensity —an imper-
missible purpose under M.R.E.  404(b)(1)—and the admis-
sion of evidence to prove a common scheme or plan—a per-
missible purpose under M.R.E.  404(b)(2)— can be difficult 
to explain. Here, for instance, the military judge admitted 
the challenged evidence to demonstrate that Appellant 
acted according to a common scheme or plan of violence and 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge HARDY concurring in part and concurring in the judgment 
 
2 
 
intimidation against his wife. Yet, it is not clear how this 
differs meaningfully from admitting the evidence to 
demonstrate that Appellant simply possesses a propensity 
to act violently towards his spouse. 
To the casual observer, Appellant’s charged and un-
charged acts against his wife would not appear to be part 
of any greater plan or scheme. Although Appellant repeat-
edly lashed out at his wife, the evidence does not suggest 
that he acted systematically in pursuit of some preexisting, 
overarching goal. See Becker v. ARCO Chemical Co. , 207 
F.3d 176, 195-97 (3d Cir. 2000) (examining when evidence 
may be admitted to prove a plan or scheme under Fed. R. 
Evid. 404(b)(2)). Instead, the uncharged conduct seems to 
establish nothing more than how Appellant reacts when he 
becomes angry and frustrated with his wife. As Judge 
Sparks aptly puts it, Appellant simply appears to be “a 
young man with a short temper.” United States v. Green e-
Watson, __ M.J. __, __ (1) (C.A.A.F. 2025) (Sparks, J., con-
curring in part and in the judgment). 
Many commentators suggest that evidence of 
uncharged acts should only be admitted to establish a plan 
or scheme if that evidence demonstrates a conscious 
commitment by the accused to a specific premeditated 
course of conduct. See Becker, 207 F.3d at 195- 98 
(reviewing secondary sources). But unfortunately for 
Appellant, this Court has taken a different approach, 
repeatedly holding that that the Government may offer 
evidence of the accused’s uncharged misconduct that would 
otherwise be inadmissible as propens ity evidence under 
M.R.E. 404(b)(1) so long as  that conduct shares “common 
factors” with the charged conduct.  Hyppolite, 79 M.J. at 
166 (C.A.A.F. 2019) ( first citing Munoz, 32 M.J. at 363 ; 
then citing Johnson, 49 M.J. at 475). 
Appellant is correct that this Court’s predecessor once 
held that uncharged acts needed to be almost  identical to 
the charged acts to be admissible to prove a plan or scheme 
under M.R.E. 404(b)(2). United States v. Brannan, 18 M.J. 
181, 183 (C.M.A. 1984) (citing United States v. Danzey, 594 
F.2d 905, 913 (2d Cir. 1979)). But more recently, this Court 
has applied a much less demanding standard. In Munoz , 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge HARDY concurring in part and concurring in the judgment 
 
3 
 
this Court affirmed the military judge’s conclusion that un-
charged acts were admissible under M.R.E. 404(b)(2) when 
those acts shared “common factors” with the charged of-
fenses. 32 M.J. at 363- 64. And in Johnson, the Court con-
cluded that similar “factors” between the proffered evi-
dence of uncharged acts and the charged offenses was 
sufficient for the evidence to be admissible to prove a plan 
or scheme. 49 M.J. at 475. In 2019, this Court expressly 
relied on Munoz and Johnson in concluding that two mili-
tary judges did not abuse their discretion in admitting evi-
dence of other crimes to show that the accused acted pur-
suant to a “ ‘common plan to engage in sexual conduct with 
his friends after they have been drinking or were asleep or 
falling asleep’ ” when the various crimes shared “common 
factors.” Hyppolite, 79 M.J. at 163, 166. 
In light of Munoz, Johnson, and Hyppolite, I cannot con-
clude that the military judge in this case abused his discre-
tion because his ruling was not “arbitrary, fanciful, clearly 
unreasonable[,] or clearly erroneous.” United States v. 
Uribe, 80 M.J. 442, 446 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (citation omitted). Although Appellant 
makes a strong argument that the Government proffered 
the evidence of Appellant’s additional, uncharged miscon-
duct to establish that he has a propensity to commit crimes 
like the one with which he was charged, our precedent au-
thorizes military judges to find a common plan or scheme 
based solely on “common factors” among the various acts. 
Hyppolite, 79 M.J. at 166. 1 Moreover, as Judge Johnson 
rightly points out, the risk of prejudice to Appellant was 
extremely low in this military judge-alone case in which 
the military judge expressly stated that he would only con-
sider the evidence of the uncharged acts for the limited 
 
1 This expansive interpretation of the common scheme or 
plan exception evolved in cases dealing with child abuse, where 
courts faced difficult evidentiary circumstances. See Munoz, 32 
M.J. at 359 (admitting evidence of uncharged indecent acts with 
a child); Johnson 49 M.J. at 468 (same). Today, M.R.E. 413 and 
M.R.E. 414 would govern many such cases and would likely pro-
vide avenues for admitting evidence that were not previously 
available when these precedents were established. 
United States v. Greene-Watson, No. 24-0096/AF 
Judge HARDY concurring in part and concurring in the judgment 
 
4 
 
purpose of establishing a common scheme or plan and not 
as improper propensity evidence. Greene- Watson, __ M.J. 
at __ ( 14). For these reasons, I agree that the decision of 
the AFCCA should be affirmed. 
Nevertheless, in a future case I would be open to recon-
sidering the proper scope of the “common scheme or plan” 
exception. Doing so would allow this Court to ensure that 
we are sufficiently protecting defendants against the un-
fair prejudice that flows from  propensity evidence while 
still allowing for the admission of relevant, probative evi-
dence as authorized by the President.  