This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Juan I. CAMPOS, Sergeant 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0138 
Crim. App. No. 202200246 
 
Argued December 11, 2024—February 19, 2025  
 
Military Judges: Benjamin C. Robertson (arraignment) 
 and Adam M. King (pretrial motions and trial)  
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Zoe R. Danielczyk, JAGC, USN (ar-
gued); Captain Arthur L. Gaston III, JAGC, USN (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Lan T. Nguyen, JAGC, USN (argued); 
Major Candace G. White, USMC, and Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on 
brief); Colonel Joseph M. Jennings , USMC , and Lieutenant 
Commander James P. Wu Zhu, JAGC, USN; Lieutenant K. 
Matthew Parker, JAGC, USN. 
 
Amici Curiae in support of Appellee:  Lieutenant Commander 
Philip J. Corrigan , JAGC, USN, Major Brian L. Farrell, 
USMCR, and Lieutenant Emily N. Deliz , JAGC, USN (on be-
half of U.S. Navy Victims ’ Legal Counsel Program and U.S. 
Marine Corps Victims’ Legal Counsel Organization) (on brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, Judge 
HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined.   
_______________ 
 
 
 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-1038/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The granted issue  requires us to decide  whether the 
“military judge abuse[d] his discretion by admitting and 
considering, over defense objection, allegations of addi-
tional misconduct in the unsworn victim impact state-
ment.” We hold that the military judge abuse d his discre-
tion, but we determine that the error was not prejudicial. 
We therefore affirm the decision of the United States Navy-
Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA), which 
affirmed the finding s and sentence in this case. United 
States v. Campos, No. 202200246, 2024 CCA LEXIS 87,  at 
*28, 2024 WL 863364, at *11 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Feb. 29, 
2024) (unpublished). 
I. Background 
The victim in this case, J.A.P.P., married Appellant in 
July 2019 and joined him at his station in Japan on October 
27, 2019. Appellant’s misconduct began shortly afterward. 
At trial, Appellant stipulated the following facts: 
a. Between 1 November 2019 and 7 June 2020, Sgt 
Campos [i.e., Appellant] committed multiple un-
lawful acts of domestic violence against J.A.P.P. 
These acts include: 
i. On 11 January 2020, Sgt Campos became 
irritated with J.A.P.P., and pulled her hair 
in their house and pushed her against a 
wall. The push against the wall caused vis-
ible bruising to J.A.P.P.’s back.  
ii. During the first week in June of 2020, Sgt 
Campos became irritated with J.A.P.P. be-
cause she was crying in response to state-
ments he made earlier to her about their 
relationship. . . .  Sgt Campos . . .  struck 
J.A.P.P. in the face with his hand, kicked 
her shins, and pulled her hair. . . . 
 . . . . 
b. Strangulation and biting of J.A.P.P. on 8 March 
2022. 
 . . . . 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
ii. Shortly before 1950 hours on 8 March 
2022, Sgt Campos removed his shi rt and 
then repeatedly tried to hug J.A.P.P. and 
be affectionate. J.A.P.P. refused Sgt Cam-
pos’ advances. In response to J.A.P.P. re-
fusing his attempts, Sgt Campos pushed 
J.A.P.P. from their bed. Sgt Campos then 
continued to try to be affectionate with 
J.A.P.P., but he eventually fell to the 
ground when she avoided him. Sgt Campos 
then pulled J.A.P. P. to the ground by her 
hair. J.A.P.P. then exited the bedroom and 
made it to the landing. 
iii. Sgt Campos followed J.A.P.P. out of the 
bedroom and forced her face down onto the 
floor. Sgt Campos then placed his arms 
over J.A.P.P.’s throat, wrapped his legs 
around her legs, and placed his entire 
weight on her body. J.A.P.P. tried to yell 
for help, but Sgt Campos squeezed [her] 
airway preventing her from communi-
cating. Sgt Campos remained in this posi-
tion on top of J.A.P.P. for approximately 3 
minutes. 
iv. During one of the three minutes, Sgt Cam-
pos remained on top of J.A.P.P., Sgt Cam-
pos exerted pressure on J.A.P.P. ’s neck to 
the extent that he strangled her. While 
strangling J.A.P.P., Sgt Campos intention-
ally impeded the normal breathing and cir-
culation of blood of J.A.P.P. by applying 
pressure through his hands to J.A.P.P. ’s 
neck. The impediment of air flow pre-
vented J.A.P.P. from taking a breath for 
approximately one minute. The impedi-
ment of blood flow prevented blood from 
flowing through J.A.P.P. ’s neck, causing 
several blood vessels to explode on 
J.A.P.P.’s face in the form of petechiae. 
v. During the strangulation, Sgt Campos 
changed his hand position on J.A.P.P. ’s 
neck, and placed his fingers directly on her 
throat. Additionally, Sgt Campos bit the 
back of J.A.P.P.’ s neck with enough 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
pressure to leave a visible bite mark on her 
neck from his teeth.1 
The military judge found Appellant guilty , consistent 
with his pleas, of three specifications of domestic violence 
in violation of Article 128b, Uniform Code of Military Jus-
tice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 928b (2018). One specification al-
leged that Appellant “did, at or near Iwakuni, Japan, on or 
about 8 March 2022, commit an assault upon 
J.A.P.P. . . . by unlawfully strangling her.” Another specifi-
cation alleged that Appellant  did at the same time and 
place “unlawfully bit e J.A.P.P. on th e neck with [his] 
teeth.” The third alleged that Appellant did:  
at or near Iwakuni, Japan, on divers occasions 
between on or about 1 November 2019 and 7 
June 2020, commit a violent offense against 
J.A.P.P. . . . to wit: unlawfully  
a) pull the hair of J.A.P.P. with [his] hand;  
b) strike J.A.P.P. on the head with [his] hand; 
[and]  
c) kick J.A.P.P. on the leg with [his] leg.2  
During the sentencing phase of the trial, J.A.P.P. deliv-
ered an unsworn statement of approximately 1,150 words.  
In this statement, J.A.P.P. described numerous  impacts 
that resulted from the offenses of which Appellant had 
been found guilty . She explained that Appellant ’s act of 
 
1 “Petechia,” referred to in paragraph iv., is “a minute red-
dish or purplish spot containing blood that appears in skin or 
mucous membrane as a result of localized hemorrhage. ” Mer-
riam-Webster Unabridged Dictionary , https://unabridged.mer-
riam-webster.com/unabridged/petechia (last visited Feb . 14, 
2025). 
2 This specification also alleged that Appellant bit J.A.P.P. 
on the lip and chest, but the military judge found Appellant not 
guilty of these words of the specification. The military judge also 
found Appellant guilty of damaging military property, drunk-
enly operating a vehicle, and drunk and disorderly conduct in 
violation of Art icles 108, 113, 134,  UCMJ.  The military judge 
found Appellant not guilty of other charged offenses. 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
strangling her gave her a feeling of “hopelessness.” She de-
scribed returning to work as “horrible” because she had to 
cover up bruises and because her body and head ached. She 
said that she felt “shame and embarrass ment.” She de-
clared that “anxiety attacks not only happen when I would 
see people that remotely resemble him, but also when I will 
see his friends in and around the base.” She also stated that 
her social life  has been affected, that she ha s flashbacks, 
and that she has trouble focusing and sleeping.  
In addition, J.A.P.P. made the following assertion s 
which mentioned  some misconduct for which Appellant 
had not been charged:  
Although, 8 March [is] the day I will never forget 
due to the emotional and physical trauma I expe-
rienced, this was not the first incident of emo-
tional and physical abuse from him. It started 
with him yelling at me occasionally then he began 
to grab and pull my arms. Then he started pulling 
on my hair. Other times he will kick me, and there 
were times when he will get angry and slap me. 
 He progressively got worse to a point where he 
will have me immobilized against the wall. He 
would also take my phone away from me, kept it 
from me. He cut the Internet off, which restricted 
my communication with anyone outside of our 
home. 
J.A.P.P. concluded her unsworn statement by saying: “I am 
thankful I am alive . . . because I am standing here telling 
all of you what type of person Juan  [i.e., Appellant] is and 
how he impacted me. I want to ensure he never does this to 
anyone else when he is released.” 
Appellant objected to the following a ccusations in 
J.A.P.P.’s unsworn statement: that he yelled at her, that 
he grabbed and pulled her arms, that he  immobilized her 
against the wall, and that he took her phone away and cut 
off the internet. He argued that these statements were im-
proper allegations of uncharged misconduct with “no direct 
relation” to the offenses to which he had pleaded guilty . 
The military judge , however, overruled Appellant’s objec-
tion, reasoning: 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
[This portion of J.A.P.P. ’s statement concerns] a 
continuous course of conduct regarding similar 
crimes. Domestic violence, including physical and 
emotional intimidation and isolation against the 
same victim, the accused’s spouse . . . and primar-
ily in the same general location in and around 
their residence and relatively close timeframe. 
They had only lived together at this time since Oc-
tober of 2019.  
 Of note, the additional charge to which the ac-
cused pleaded guilty included multiple prior inci-
dents of domestic violence throughout 2020. Thus, 
. . . to the extent the challenge[d]  statements are 
not actually related to the actual offenses that the 
accused pleaded guilty to under the additional 
charge, his statements contain matters consid-
ered as a continuing course of domestic abuse 
aimed at [J.A.P.P.] by the accused resulting in 
negative social and psychological harm which is 
proper for me to consider under R.C.M. 1001(c). 
The military judge further stated: “I will note that I make 
these considerations of the victim impact statement as a 
matter before the Court in sentencing the accused only for 
the offenses that he has been found guilty.”  
The plea agreement limited Appellant’s confinement to 
seventy-two months. Consistent with this limitation, t he 
military judge sentenced Appellant to confinement for a 
total of seventy months. The military judge also sentenced 
Appellant to be reduced to the grade of E -1 and  
dishonorably discharged. The NMCCA affirmed the 
findings and sentence.  Campos, 2024 CCA LEXIS 87, at 
*28, 2024 WL 863364 , at *11.  The NMCCA held that the 
military judge had not abused his discretion in allowing 
J.A.P.P. to discuss the unc harged misconduct and that 
even if there were an error, the error would be harmless. 
Id. at *26-27, 2024 WL 863364, at *10-11. 
II. Standards of Review and Applicable Law 
The meaning of Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1001 
is a question of law that this Court reviews de novo. United 
States v. Edwards, 82 M.J. 239, 243 (C.A.A.F. 2022). This 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Court reviews a military judge’s ruling on an objection to a 
victim’s unsworn statement for abuse of discretion. United 
States v. Hamilton , 78 M.J. 335,  340 (C.A.A.F. 2019) . 
“Abuse of discretion occurs when the military judge: (1) ba-
ses a ruling on findings of fact that are not supported by 
the evidence; (2) uses incorrect legal principles; (3) applies 
correct legal principles in a clearly unreasonable way; or 
(4) does not cons ider important facts. ” United States v. 
Ramirez, 84 M.J. 173, 176 (C.A.A.F. 2024)  (citing United 
States v. Commisso, 76 M.J. 315, 321 (C.A.A.F. 2017)). 
Rule for Courts-Martial 1001(c) (2019 ed.) governs the 
victim’s unsworn statement in this case . Three clauses of 
this rule are pertinent. R.C.M. 1001(c)(5)(A) provides: “The 
crime victim may make an unsworn statement and may not 
be cross-examined by trial counsel or defense counsel, or 
examined upon it by the court -martial.” R.C.M. 1001(c)(3) 
further provides: “The content of statements made under 
paragraph[] . . . (5) may only include victim impact and 
matters in mitigation. ” And R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) state s: 
“For purposes of this subsection, victim impact includes 
any financial, social, psychological, or medical impact on 
the crime victim directly relating to or arising from the of-
fense of which the accused has been found guilty.” 
When a military judge has abused his discretion in re-
jecting objections to a victim ’s unsworn statement, the 
Court will grant relief only if the Court is persuaded that 
the improper portion of the victim impact statement “sub-
stantially influenced the adjudged sentence.” Hamilton, 78 
M.J. at 342-43 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted). In determining whether improperly admitted ev-
idence substantially influenced a sentence, this Court con-
siders four factors: “(1) the strength of the Government ’s 
case; (2) the strength of the defense case; (3) the materiality 
of the evidence in question; and (4) the quality of the evi-
dence in question. ” Id. at 343 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted). Although unsworn statements 
are not evidence, this Court  has applied the same factors 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
in considering whether improper aspects of unsworn state-
ments caused prejudice.3  
III. Discussion 
Appellant asserts that the military judge abused his 
discretion in overruling his challenges to J.A.P.P. ’s 
unsworn statement under R.C.M. 1001 (c). We agree with 
Appellant that an error occurred but conclude that the 
error did not substantially influence the sentence. 
A. Application of R.C.M. 1001(c) 
In her unsworn statement, J.A.P.P. accused Appellant 
of yelling at her, grabbing and pull ing her arms, 
immobilizing her against a wall, taking her phone a way, 
and cutting off her internet service . Appellant, however, 
was not charged with any offense in connection with these 
alleged acts. The  general question  in this appeal is 
therefore whether, or under what circumstances, a victim’s 
unsworn statement may contain allegations of uncharged 
misconduct. 
Appellant asserts that  the military judge should have 
sustained his objections to the accusations of uncharged 
misconduct because R.C.M. 1001(c)(3) provides that a vic-
tim’s unsworn statement “may only include victim impact 
and matters in mitigation.” Appellant contends that the ac-
cusations of uncharged misconduct are not “victim impact” 
within the meaning of  R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) because they 
are not descriptions of the “financial, social, psychological, 
or medical impact on the crime victim directly relatin g to 
or arising from the offense[s] of which the accused has been 
found guilty.” Instead, Appellant asserts, the accusations 
concerned offenses of which he had not been found guilty, 
and which served only to persuade the military judge that 
Appellant is a bad person. 
 
3 This Court has noted concerns about the helpfulness of 
these factors in assessing prejudice at sentencing. Edwards, 82 
M.J. at 247. In this case, however, neither party has questioned 
the use of these factors. 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
We agree with Appellant that the military judge abused 
his discretion. The definition of “victim impact” in R.C.M. 
1001(c)(2)(B) includes two distinct elements: the offenses of 
which the accused has been found guilty and the impacts of 
those offenses on the victim. Both elements must be satis-
fied. For example, in unobjectionable portions of her state-
ment, J.A.P.P. described: (1) the various offenses of which 
Appellant was found guilty , and (2) how those offenses 
caused her feelings of pain, embarrassment, and anxiety . 
These portions of her statement met the requirements of 
“victim impact” under R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) because she  
discussed both elements. In contrast, J.A.P.P.’s accusations 
of uncharged misconduct addressed neither the offenses of 
which Appellant was found guilty nor the impact of those 
offenses. We therefore conclude that J.A.P.P.’s accusations 
of uncharged conduct were not “victim impact” within the 
meaning of R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) and that including the se 
accusations in the unsworn statement violated R.C.M. 
1001(c)(3). 
Our holding is consistent with what J.A.P.P. herself 
said in her unsworn statement . As noted above, she 
concluded the statement by explaining that she hoped her 
remarks revealed both “what type of person [Appellant] is” 
and “how he impacted [her] .” Describing the impacts of 
offenses for which Appellant was found guilty was  
permissible under R.C.M. 1001( c)(2)(B). But nothing in 
R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) and 1001(c)(3) authorizes an unsworn 
statement to provide information about the accused ’s bad 
character. The military judge therefore abused his 
discretion in overruling  Appellant’s objections to the 
unsworn statement. 
The Government makes two significant arguments in 
response. First, the Government contends that a victim  
may provide context for understanding the impact of the 
accused’s offenses and  that the description about Appel-
lant’s uncharged misconduct  properly provided such con-
text in this case. We agree that an unsworn statement may 
contain information that is relevant for understanding the 
impact of  offenses for which the accused has been found 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
guilty. For example, in her unsworn statement, J.A.P.P. ex-
plained that she had to go to work, despite her pain  and 
embarrassment, because she needed to support herself . 
This explanation provided context for understanding the 
impact of Appellant ’s offenses by making clear that 
J.A.P.P. could not avoid her pain and embarrassment 
simply by staying home. But we disagree with the Govern-
ment’s assertion that the uncharged misconduct also pro-
vided relevant context in this case. When J.A.P.P. accused 
Appellant of the uncharged misconduct, her statement pro-
vided no explicit or implicit explanation of how the un-
charged misconduct was relevant to the impact of the 
charged offenses. Accordingly, as Appellant contends , the 
description of the uncharged misconduct appears to be rel-
evant only to understanding Appellant ’s character which , 
again, is not “victim impact” as defined in  R.C.M. 
1001(c)(2)(B).  
Second, the Government argues that the description of 
the uncharged misconduct in the victim impact state ment 
was proper under this Court’s decision in United States v. 
Mullens, 29 M.J. 398 ( C.M.A. 1990). In Mullens, the ac-
cused pleaded guilty to t wo specifications of sodomy with  
his minor son  and one specification each of indecent acts 
with his minor son and with his minor daughter. Id. at 398-
99. As part of his plea agreement, the accused made a stip-
ulation of fact in which he admitted to committing addi-
tional instances of sodomy and indecent acts that were not 
charged. Id. at 399. The government presented this stipu-
lation of fact to the members during presentencing . Id. at 
400. This Court held that no error occurred because the un-
charged misconduct was proper evidence in aggravation 
under R.C.M. 1001(b)(4) (1984 ed.).4 The Court reasoned: 
     Clearly, the uncharged misconduct delineated 
in this stipulation was directly related to the con-
duct for which appellant was found guilty. The 
 
4 At the time, this provision (which has since been expanded) 
stated: “The trial counsel may present evidence as to any aggra-
vating circumstances directly relating to or resulting from the 
offenses of which the accused has been found guilty.” 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
stipulation evidenced a continuous course of con-
duct involving the same or similar crimes, the 
same victims, and a similar situs within the mili-
tary community, i.e.,  the servicemember’s home. 
These incidents demonstrate not only the depth of 
appellant’s sexual problems, but also the true im-
pact of the charged offenses on the members of his 
family. These were appropriate sentence consider-
ations under the above Manual rule. 
29 M.J. at 400 (citation omitted). The Government argues 
that the uncharged misconduct in J.A.P.P.’s unsworn state-
ment in this case similarly shows a continuous course of 
conduct involving the same victim in the same place  and 
that it was therefore proper. The Government further notes 
that the Mullens opinion specifically stated that the un-
charged misconduct could show the “ impact” of the ac-
cused’s offenses. 
Although we recognize  similarities between this case  
and Mullens, we decline to extend the holding of Mullens  
with respect to evidence in aggravation under R.C.M. 
1001(b)(4) (1984 ed.) to apply to victim impact statements  
under R.C.M. 1001(c)  (2019 ed.). Evidence in aggravation 
is different from a victim’s statement under R.C.M. 1001(c) 
in significant ways. Aggravation evidence is subject to the 
Military Rules of Evidence  (M.R.E.), which means that a 
witness who provides such evidence must testify under 
oath and be subjected to c ross-examination. In addition, 
the military judge must test the evidence for unfair preju-
dice under M.R.E. 403.  United States v. Nourse, 55 M.J. 
229, 232 (C.A.A.F. 2001) (following Mullens where the mil-
itary judge expressly assessed  the evidence under M.R.E. 
403). In addition, the term “victim impact” now has a spe-
cific definition in R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B), which did not exist 
at the time Mullens  was decided. A s explained above, 
J.A.P.P.’s accusations of uncharged misconduct do  not fit 
this definition.5 We thus find the Government’s arguments 
unpersuasive. 
 
5 Our conclusion here concerns only victim statements under 
R.C.M. 1001(c). We agree with the Discussion in the Manual for 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
B. Prejudice 
Although we have held that the military judge abused 
his discretion in allowing J.A.P.P. to accuse Appellant of 
uncharged misconduct in her unsworn statement , we can-
not grant relief unless  the error substantially influenced 
the sentence.  Hamilton, 78 M.J. at 343 (citing United 
States v. Sanders, 67 M.J. 344, 346 (C.A.A.F. 2009)). Appel-
lant argues that the error was prejudicial for several rea-
sons. He notes that the military judge specifically stated 
that he would consider the statements for context and 
course of conduct. Appellant also emphasizes that the mil-
itary judge ultimately adjudged a sentence close to the 
maximum allowed by the sentencing agreement. Appellant 
additionally asserts that the accusation of uncharged mis-
conduct provided “new ammunition” against him  which 
may have increased his sentence. 
As explained above, our precedent establishes four fac-
tors for assessing prejudice when evidence is improperly 
admitted. The first two factors that we consider are the 
strength of the Government’s case and the strength of the 
defense case. These factors , however, provide little assis-
tance here because Appellant pleaded guilty and made  a 
stipulation of fact. In this situation, the Government’s case 
naturally is very strong, and the defense case is not. 
The third and fourth factors are the materiality and 
quality of the evidence in question. 6 Here, we assess the 
 
Courts-Martial, United States  (2019 ed.),  following R.C.M. 
1001(c)(5), which explains that while a “victim’s statement 
should not exceed what is permitted under R.C.M. 1001(c)(3)”—
meaning the victim’s statement may only contain “victim im-
pact” as defined in R.C.M. 1001(c)(2)(B) —the “victim may al so 
testify as a witness during presentencing proceedings in order to 
present evidence admissible under a rule other than R.C.M. 
1001(c)(3).” We do not address the permissible content of such 
testimony in this opinion. 
6 We again recognize that the accusations in J.A.P.P.’s state-
ment are not “evidence,” but we may still assess their material-
ity in sentencing and their quality. 
United States v. Campos, No. 24-0138/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
materiality of the accusations of uncharged misconduct as 
low, even though the military judge said that he would con-
sider the misconduct. The accusations of the nonviolent 
conduct of yelling, taking away a cell phone, and turning 
off the internet were likely not significant in setting the 
sentence when compared to the serious acts of violence to 
which Appellant pleaded guilty—strangling J.A.P.P., bit-
ing her neck, pulling her hair, and striking and kicking 
her—and the impacts of those acts. In addition, although 
the accusations that Appellant pulled J.A.P.P.’s arms and 
immobilized her against the wall did involve physical con-
duct, their materiality was still low because they added lit-
tle to the more egregious violent conduct of which he 
pleaded guilty. 
We also assess the quality of the accusations as low. The 
accusations were not sworn an d were not tested by cross-
examination. In addition, the accusations were very brief 
and contained little or no detail about the harm they may 
have caused. The military judge, accordingly, was unlikely 
to give them as much weight as he would have given to ac-
tual evidence or to more in formative statements. In the 
light of these factors, we are convinced that the improper 
content of the unsworn statement did not substantially in-
fluence the sentence. Thus, while we disagree with the 
NMCCA about whether the military judge abused his dis-
cretion, we agree with the NMCCA’s decision that there 
was no prejudice and that the findings and sentence must 
be affirmed. 
IV. Conclusion 
The granted issue is answered  in the affirmative, but 
the error caused no prejudice.  The decision of the United 
States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals is 
affirmed. 