This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Tayron D. DAVIS, Specialist 
United States Army, Appellee 
 
No. 24-0152 
Crim. App. No. 20220272 
 
Argued October 9, 2024—Decided February 13, 2025 
 
Military Judges: Charles L. Pritchard Jr. (arraign- 
ment) and Thomas P. Hynes (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Captain Stewart A. Miller (argued); 
Colonel Christopher B. Burgess,  Major Chase C. 
Cleveland, and Major Timothy R. Emmons (on brief); 
Colonel Richard E. Gorini and Major Justin L. 
Talley. 
 
For Appellee:  Major Bryan A. Osterhage (argued) ; 
Jonathan F. Potter, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge MAGGS and Judge HARDY 
joined. Judge SPARKS  filed a separate opinion, 
concurring in part and dissenting in part,  in which 
Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court.1 
Before trial, t he Chief Circuit Military Judge of the  
United States Army’s 5th Judicial Circuit stepped aside2 
as the presiding judge in Appellee’s court-martial and 
detailed as his replacement the only other military judge 
in the circuit. These facts, on  their face, appear routine. 
However, unusual circumstances surrounding this 
incident—which are detailed later in this opinion —
prompted the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA) to hold that the Chief Circuit Military 
Judge’s action of either removing or recusing himself 
resulted in his disqualification  from Appellee’s case and 
that his subsequent act of detailing the other military 
judge in his stead was therefore ultra vires. Moreover, the 
ACCA opined that the Chief Circuit Military Judge  took 
these steps in order  to orchestrate a particular result  in 
this case that was against Appellee’s interests, and the 
lower court also determined that the successor military 
judge was biased against Appellee. The ACCA went on to 
hold that the Chief Circuit Military Judge ’s conduct 
resulted in  structural error, and then held in the  
alternative that even if there was no structural error here, 
reversal was still warranted under the third prong of the 
test from Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp. , 
486 U.S. 847 (1988) . The ACCA concluded that under 
either analytical approach the only proper remedy was to 
dismiss the case with prejudice. As can be seen  then, this 
case was anything but routine. 
 
1 The Court heard oral argument in this case at Naval 
Station Norfolk,  Virginia, as part of the Court’s “Project 
Outreach.” Project Outreach seeks to expand awareness of the 
military justice appellate process by taking appellate hearings 
to military bases and educational institutions around the 
country. We thank the participants. 
2 As shall be seen, the precise nature of the Chief Circuit 
Military Judge’s action is of central importance to the disposition 
of this case.  
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
Upon issuance of the A CCA’s decision, the Judge 
Advocate General of the Army (TJAG) certif ied two issues 
for review  in this Court —whether the A CCA erred in 
finding structural error and, if so, whether the A CCA also 
erred in alternatively holding that Appellee was prejudiced 
and that dismissal with preju dice was the appropriate 
remedy. For the reasons that follow, we answer both of 
these certified issues in the affirmative and reverse the 
judgment of the ACCA. 
I. Background 
Appellee was a s pecialist (E -4) in the United States 
Army assigned to the 554th Military Police Company at the 
U.S. Army Garrison in Stuttgart, Germany. On the 
evening of November 24, 2020, Appellee sexually assaulted 
Sergeant (SGT) LT on two occasions at her home. The 
convening authority refer red three offenses against 
Appellee: one attempted sexual assault specification and 
two sexual assault specifications, in violation of Articles 80 
and 120, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § § 880, 920 (2018). Colonel (COL) Charles 
Pritchard, the Chief Circuit Judge of the Army’s 5th 
Judicial Circuit, was the docketing judge for this c ircuit, 
and he initially  detailed himself to Appellee’s case . On 
February 14, 2022, Judge Pritchard arraigned Appellee. 
One month prior  to Appellee’s arraignment , Judge 
Pritchard issued rulings in two unrelated cases, United 
States v. Dial and United States. v. Ferreira. In both cases, 
Judge Pritchard ruled that a military accused has a 
constitutional right to a unanimous verdict if he is to be 
found guilty.  In order to prevent Judge Pritchard from 
proceeding in this manner, the Government petitioned the 
ACCA for writs of prohibition in Dial and Ferreira, and the 
ACCA then stayed the proceedings in each case.  
Judge Pritchard subsequently decided that he would 
not “rule on any further unanimous verdict motions until 
the Army Court issued an opinion on the [unanimous guilty 
verdict] issue.” In an affidavit to the ACCA that he filed in 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
the course of the current litigation , Judge Pritchard 
explained his reasoning: 
• “[I]t was likely the defense would continue to file 
[unanimous guilty verdict] motions in all future 
cases regardless of the presiding judge.” 
 
• The government likely would not provide any 
additional authorities to support its position on 
this issue in any future case , and thus Judge 
Pritchard’s future rulings would likely be the 
same. 
• This state of affairs would result in additional 
stays of proceedings which “would last around six 
months” and would “essentially shut down at 
least half of the courts-martial in Europe and the 
Middle East [ i.e., in the Army’s 5th Judicial 
Circuit] for lengthy periods of time.” 
• Such delays “would be inconsistent with military 
justice.” 
Judge Pritchard also clarified that his decision not to 
preside over trials with panel members  “was not [an] 
attempt[] to arrange a particular result (i.e., a denial of the 
unanimous verdict motion) , because [he] could not be 
certain how other military judges would rule.” Further, he 
did not tell any other military judge how to rule  “either 
expressly or impliedly.” He decided to “only detail [himself] 
to or remain detailed on bench trials and to move other 
cases toward trial .” His actions in t his latter capacity 
would be confined to “handl[ing] arraignments and any 
motions for which the parties needed rulings significantly 
before trial in order to properly prepare (e.g., compel 
experts, compel discovery, compel witnesses, etc.) and to 
defer other motions, including unanimous verdict motions, 
to the trial judge for resolution.” 
On April 4, 2022—which was after the ACCA stayed the 
proceedings in Dial and Ferreira but before it ruled on the 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Government’s writs 3—Judge Pritchard emailed 
Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Hynes, the only other military 
judge in the circuit. Judge Pritchard stated that he would 
“take [Judge Hynes ] up on [his] offer to take” Appellee’s 
case, but that “[i]f [the] ACCA issues a [unanimous verdict] 
opinion in the meantime, [he] may take it back (or not).” 
This reassignment occurred the day of the deadline for 
filing motions but before Appellee filed his unanimous 
verdict motion although the defense appears to have 
previously placed Judge Pritchard on notice that it 
intended to file a unanimous verdict motion.  
In his initial affidavit to the ACCA, Judge Hynes stated 
that he had been “asked to be detailed to U.S. v. Davis” and 
explained: 
In an earlier discussion with [Judge Pritchard] we 
talked about the U.S. v. Dial  ruling and the 
potential for a case backlog in the 5th Circuit 
related to the automatic stay provision in R.C.M. 
908(b)(4) while U.S. v. Dial was pending appeal. I 
asked to take U.S. v. Davis  to do my part to 
mitigate any potential case backlog while U.S. v. 
Dial was pending appeal. 
(Emphasis added.) In his affidavit, Judge Pritchard 
recounted that he did not indicate to Judge Hynes that “he 
should rule on any motion in any particular manner,” and 
he “did not discuss [with Judge Hynes] the unanimous 
verdict issue in relation to [Appellee’s] case.” However, 
after Judge Pritchard’s Dial and Ferreira rulings, he had a 
phone conversation with Judge Hynes “about the issues 
involved in a unanimous verdict motion he was 
adjudicating in another case.” In this conversation: 
I told him he should not be swayed, one way or the 
other, by the fact that I was his supervisor or by 
how I had ruled in other cases on that issue and 
 
3 These writs were resolved in favor of the g overnment in 
June 2022. United States v. Pritchard, 82 M.J. 686, 689 (A. Ct. 
Crim. App. 2022); United States v. Ferreira, No. A RMY MISC 
20220034 (A. Ct. Crim. App. June 24, 2022) (unpublished) 
(order). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
that he should make an independent 
determination based on his analysis of the law.4 
A supplemental affidavit  submitted by Judge Hynes 
stated that the “do my part” language from his prior 
affidavit had been “unfairly twisted by appellate counsel to 
suggest a ‘nefarious’ motive.” He explained that  these 
words “refer[red] only to my desire to take any available 
cases in my circuit that my chief trial judge did not want to 
take, for whatever reasons he did not want to take them” 
and “was not in reference to U.S. v. Davis or any other case 
specifically; I would have been happy to take any case( s).” 
Judge Hynes further stated that “[e]very case I have been 
detailed to has been without any conditions of any kind” 
and that “[o]nce reassigned, the Davis case was my 
responsibility and mine alone.” 
On April 4, 2022, the same day that Judge Pritchard 
detailed Judge Hynes to the case, Appellee filed a motion 
for a unanimous verdict. Judge Hynes announced his 
appearance on the record during an April 11, 2022, Article 
39(a), UCMJ,5 session, stating that he had been “detailed 
to this court-martial by” Judge Pritchard. The parties did 
not question or challenge his appearance. In this session, 
Judge Hynes orally denied the Appellee’s unanimous 
verdict motion and t hen followed it up with a written 
ruling. In his supplemental affidavit, Judge Hynes stated 
that his denial of Appellee’s motion for a unanimous verdict 
“speak[s] for” itself. 
Appellee requested to be tried by Judge Hynes alone on 
May 23, 2022, after initially  requesting trial by a panel 
with enlisted members . It was not until this point that  
 
4 There is a notation in the record indicating that  Judge 
Hynes denied a unanimous verdict motion in a different case on 
March 8, 2022. However, there is no indication Judge Pritchard 
knew about this ruling. His affidavit states, “My recollection is 
that [Judge Hynes] did not tell me how he was going to rule in 
that case. We did not have another conversation about the 
unanimous verdict issue.” 
5 10 U.S.C. § 839(a) (2018). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
Judge Hynes assembled  the court-martial. Appellee then 
entered pleas of not guilty to all charges and specifications. 
In an affidavit filed with the ACCA, Appellee stated: 
Had I become aware that Judge Pritchard was 
being replaced as the military judge in my 
court-martial to avoid ruling on my unanimous 
verdict motion, and that Judge Hynes was being 
detailed who would “do [his] part,” I would not 
have requested a judge alone trial with Judge 
Hynes. I would have also asked Judge Hynes to be 
recused. 
(Alteration in original.) 
Judge Hynes acquitted Appellee of the Article 80 
attempt offense and  convicted him of the two Article 120 
offenses. At sentencing, he rejected the Government’s 
proposed sentence of twenty -four months of confinement 
for each specification , to be served  concurrently, among 
other penalties. Instead, he imposed Appellee ’s requested 
sentence—a dishonorable discharge and 120 days of 
confinement for each specification to be served 
concurrently. The convening authority took no action with 
respect to the findings and sentence, and the military judge 
subsequently entered the judgment of the court. 
Appellee assigned the following error to the A CCA: 
“Whether the judicial reassignment of [Appellee’s] case 
warrants reversal of the conviction.” A unanimous A CCA 
set aside the findings and sentence and dismissed the 
charges with prejudice. United States v. Davis, No.  ARMY 
20220272, 2024 CCA LEXIS 144, at *18, 2024 WL 1652642, 
at *8 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Mar. 27, 2024) (unpublished). 
At the outset of its decision , the ACCA found that 
reassignment of the case by Judge Pritchard to Judge 
Hynes was “structural error mandating reversal, because 
the improper conduct of both trial judges ‘affected the 
framework within which the trial proceed[ed.]’ ” Id. at *15, 
2024 WL 1652642, at *6 (alteration in original). The lower 
court explained that with his removal, “ Judge Pritchard 
was disqualified from taking any further action regardless 
of his stated reason ,” rendering his act of detailing Judge 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Hynes “ultra vires.” Id. at *13, 2024 WL 1652642, at *6. 
The ACCA further stated that Judge Pritchard’s  
reassignment decision was  unlawful because “it was in 
pursuit of a particular result on an anticipated issue in the 
case.” Id., 2024 WL 1652642, at *6.  
As for Judge Hynes, the ACCA interpreted his  first 
affidavit’s “do my part” language as “ a predetermined 
intent to deny a likely” unanimous verdict motion. Id., 2024 
WL 1652642, at *6. The ACCA also faulted both Judge 
Hynes and Judge Pritchard for failing to disclose to the 
parties “out-of-court events bearing upon [their] actions 
and the issue of judicial impartiality.”6 Id. at *14, 2024 WL 
1652642, at *6 (alteration in original) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Quintanilla, 56 
M.J. 37, 77 (C.A.A.F. 2001)). According to the ACCA, “[t]his 
sub rosa episode  violated the 5th Amendment’ s Due 
Process clause ” and resulted in “structural error 
mandating reversal.” Id. at *15, 2024 WL 1652642, at *6. 
The ACCA next determined that even if there was no 
structural error, Appellee still satisfied the plain error 
standard of review because Judge Pritchard “clearly erred 
in detailing the case to Judge Hynes after he made the 
decision to ‘remove’ himself” and “[t]he government ha[d] 
not disproven prejudice to [Appellee]  beyond a reasonable 
doubt.” Id. at *12, *15 n.10, 2024 WL 1652642, at *5 , *6 
n.10. Additionally, the ACCA determined that reversal of 
the findings and sentence was warranted “under [ United 
States v. Roach, 69 M.J. 17, 20 (C.A.A.F. 2010)] and the 
 
6 On April 13, 2022, assistant trial defense counsel in 
Appellee’s case sent an email to Judge Pritchard requesting an 
interview “to address how judges are detailed in cases in the 
circuit,” and he copied counsel in “cases where the detailed judge 
was changed.” The following day,  Judge Pritchard stated that 
“[c]onsistent with [Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.)] 505(e)(1), I 
do not intend to discuss my pre -assembly detailing decisions.” 
(This rule provides that before assembly “the military 
judge . . . may be changed by an authority competent to detail 
the military judge  . . . , without cause shown on the record.” 
R.C.M. 505(e)(1) (2019 ed.).)  
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
third prong of the Liljeberg  test: the risk of undermining 
the public’s confidence in the judicial process.” Id.  at 
*15-17, 2024 WL 1652642, at *6- 7. Finally, the ACCA 
dismissed the case with prejudice  because of the  
“irregularities . . . at the trial level” and the circumstances 
of Judge Hynes’s supplemental  affidavit. Id. at * 17-18, 
2024 WL 1652642, at *7. 
TJAG then filed a certificate for review of the following 
two issues: 
I. Whether the Army Court erred in finding the 
reassignment of [Appellee’s ] case resulted in 
structural error. 
II. Whether the Army Court erred in finding the 
reassignment of [Appellee’s ] case resulted in 
prejudice and thus dismissing the case with 
prejudice. 
United States v. Davis, 84 M.J. 462, 462-63 (C.A.A.F. 2024) 
(certificate for review). We address each issue in turn. 
II. Certified Issue I: Structural Error 
A. Standard of Review 
In regard to the first certified issue, we apply a de novo 
standard of review when deciding the legal question of 
whether there was structural error in a given 
court-martial. United States v. Paul , 73 M.J. 274, 277 
(C.A.A.F. 2014) (“This Court reviews questions of law de 
novo.”); see also United States v. Calhoun, 276 F. App’x 114, 
117 (3d Cir. 2008) ( “the question of whether a judge’s 
absence from the bench arises to a constitutional structural 
error is reviewed de novo”). In making this structural error 
determination, we examine the conduct and the rulings of 
the two trial military judges involved in this case  rather 
than the reasoning contained in the ACCA’s opinion. 
B. Discussion 
1. Judge Pritchard’s Reassignment Decision 
A preliminary question  we need to decide is whether 
Judge Pritchard’s act of detailing Judge Hynes to this 
case—after Judge Pritchard had initially detailed himself 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
and presided over  Appellee’s arraignment—constituted a 
reassignment, a removal, a recusal , or a disqualification.7 
The reason why such a distinction needs to be drawn is 
because different rules and case law may apply depending 
on the characterization of the action.  
For a number of  reasons, w e conclude that Judge 
Pritchard’s actions in this case  should be construed as  a 
reassignment. To begin with , Judge Pritchard viewed his 
action as a reassignment and acted in accordance with his 
belief; Judge Pritchard, as the Circuit Chief Judge, had the 
authority to reassign the case in this manner ; Judge 
Pritchard had routinely reassigned cases to Judge Hynes 
in the past ; and Judge Hynes viewed Judge Pritchard’s  
detailing action as a reassignment and proceeded  
accordingly. 
Next, w e note that there is no evidence in the record 
that Judge Pritchard was removed from  this case by the 
Chief Trial Judge of the Army or by any other authority.8  
And finally, we are not persuaded by Appellee ’s 
argument that Judge Pritchard’ s impartiality could 
reasonably be questioned and  that he therefore was 
automatically recused/disqualified from this case. Appellee 
first avers that Judge Pritchard’s refusal to disclose the 
reasons for the reassignment demonstrates that “he knew 
what he was doing was unjust .” Brief for Appell ee at 10, 
United States v. Davis, No. 2 4˗0152 (C.A.A.F. July 15, 
2024). Although it is true that Judge Pritchard declined to 
explain his “pre -assembly detailing decision [],” R.C.M. 
 
7 “The terms ‘disqualification’ and ‘recusal’ are closely 
related. Whereas disqualification refers to the basis for a judge 
not to be able to sit on a case, ‘recusal’ refers to the judge’s 
refusing to sit on grounds of disqualification.” United States v. 
Witt, 75 M.J. 380, 384 n.12 (C.A.A.F. 2016). 
8 The Chief Trial Judge of the Army  informed Appellee’s 
counsel, “COL Pritchard was not removed from  . . . Davis . . . , 
nor am I aware of any case that COL Pritchard has ever been 
removed from in the nine years that he has been a military 
judge.”  
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
505(e)(1) (2019 ed.) states in pertinent part: “Before the 
court-martial is assembled, the military judge  . . . may be 
changed . . . without cause shown in the record.” (Emphasis 
added.)9 
Moreover, we now know Judge Pritchard’s rationale for 
reassigning the case; from his perspective, he was merely 
seeking to improve the efficiency of his judicial circuit. This 
benign intent—no matter how misguided —does  not serve 
as a sufficient basis for a reasonable person knowing all of 
the relevant facts to question Judge Pritchard’s 
impartiality in regard to Appellee and his case. See R.C.M. 
902(a) (2019 ed.).  
This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that “[t]here is 
a strong presumption that a judge is impartial, and a party 
seeking to demonstrate bias must overcome a high hurdle.” 
Quintanilla, 56 M.J. at  44. Here, there is insufficient 
evidence in the record that would serve to rebut this 
presumption, such as persuasive material indicating that 
Judge Pritchard was  biased against Appellee or biased 
towards the Government. Although, as will be seen, we 
disagree with Judge Pritchard’s key decision here, the 
record also does not support the contention that he was 
seeking to obtain a particular result in this case, including 
the unanimous verdict motion.  For example, Judge 
Pritchard stated in his affidavit —and there is no thing in 
the record that contradicts this assertion—that he did not 
know how Judge Hynes would rule in regard to a 
unanimous verdict motion, and that he did not state or 
 
9 It is important not to read too much into the words “without 
cause shown in the record.” R.C.M. 505(e)(1) (2019 ed.).  This 
provision presumes that the reason for the reassignment is 
proper; it does not excuse or place beyond the reach of legal 
review a reassignment of a case for an improper motive or 
reason. United States v. Smith, 3 M.J. 490, 492 n.5 (C.M.A. 1975) 
(This Court “in no way condones the replacement of a military 
judge prior to assembly for improper motives.”); United States v. 
Gray, 876 F.2d 1411, 1415 (9th Cir. 1989) (“Judges may reassign 
cases for almost any reason, provided that the assignment is not 
for an impermissible reason.”). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
imply how he wanted Judge Hynes to decide this matter.10 
Thus, there is no basis to conclude that Judge Pritchard 
was disqualified from this case. 
Appellee similarly provides us with no convincing 
reason to conclude that Judge Pritchard sought to, needed 
to, or did recuse himself.  As the ACCA itself noted, Judge 
Pritchard’s rationale for reassigning this case  to Judge 
Hynes—his concern  that future appellate stays in cases 
where unanimous verdict motions were granted  would 
negatively affect his circuit’s docket—“ does not seem to fit 
neatly into any of the categories recognized under R.C.M. 
902.” Davis, 2024 CCA LEXIS 144, at * 12, 2024 WL 
1652642, at *5. Indeed, as noted above, the record indicates 
that Judge Pritchard merely saw himself as a logistical 
impediment to the timely disposition of Appellee’s case, a 
concern that does not rise to the level of prejudice or a 
conflict of interest  that is typically inherent to a recusal 
mandate. 
Nevertheless, the ACCA concluded that “once he took 
himself off” Appellee’s case , “under R.C.M. 902  Judge 
Pritchard was disqualified from taking any further action.” 
Id., 2024 WL 1652642, at *5. We disagree. Part of the role 
of a chief circuit judge is to detail military judges to cases, 
including those instances where a different military judge 
initially had been detailed to serve. See Dep’t of the Army, 
Reg. 27-10, Legal Services, Military Justice paras. 7-5, 7-6 
 
10 The ACCA made a factual finding that Judge Pritchard’s 
decision to detail Judge Hynes “was in pursuit of a particular 
result on an anticipated issue in the case” and he “expected the 
replacement [military] judge would likely rule a certain way on 
an anticipated motion therein.” Davis, 2024 CCA LEXIS 144, at 
*13, *15, 2024 WL 1652642, at *6 . However, this finding was 
based upon insufficiently supported inferences arising from the 
military judges’ affidavits. See United States v. Lewis , 78 M.J. 
447, 454 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (concluding that , “[i]n the absence of 
any such evidence , . . . the military judge’s inference  . . . was 
unreasonable and that his finding was clearly erroneous”). Thus, 
the ACCA’s finding was clearly erroneous and we do not rely 
upon it in the course of this opinion. 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
(Nov. 20 , 202 0) (designating the responsibilities and 
detailing authority of chief circuit judges) ; see also R.C.M. 
505(e)(1) (authorizing military judges to be changed before 
assembly “by an authority competent to detail the military 
judge,” e.g., the chief circuit judge, “without cause shown 
on the record”). In order to fulfill this role, Judge Pritchard 
had the authority to reassign cases in his circuit even when 
he decided not to preside over Appellee’s case personally.11 
As can be seen then, Judge Pritchard was no t 
disqualified, remov ed, or recus ed from Appellee’s case. 
Accordingly, we deem it appropriate to analyze the legal 
issues presented here within the context of the conclusion 
that Judge Pritchard reassigned  Appellee’s case from 
himself to Judge Hynes.  Importantly, however, for the 
reasons cited below we conclude that this  reassignment 
was improper. 
2. Improper Reassignment 
In essence, Judge Pritchard reassigned Appellee’s case 
because he did not want to favorably rule on a likely 
defense motion for a unanimous verdict . Such a ruling  
would have resulted in a n ACCA stay of the proceedings 
and, consequently, a multi-month delay in the trial. Simply 
stated, this reasoning was fundamentally flawed. Concerns 
about court efficiency cannot arbitrarily trump a military 
 
11 Judge Pritchard reassigned Appell ee’s case to Judge 
Hynes on April 4, 2022. As noted above, Judge Hynes did not 
assemble Appellee ’s court -martial until after the forum 
selection, which occurred on May 23, 2022. See United States v. 
Dixon, 18 M.J. 310, 313 (C.M.A. 1984) (Reassignment of military 
judges prior to assembly “gives the needed flexibility for the 
timely assignment of military judges to facilitate the 
administration of military justice in a highly effective and 
efficient manner and yet avoid any unlawful interruption or 
interference with the trial proper.”  (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting Smith, 3 M.J. at 492)); cf. Article 29(e), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 829(e) (2018) (authorizing new military judge to be 
detailed after assembly “[i] f the military judge is unable to 
proceed with the trial because of disability or otherwise ”); 
R.C.M. 505(e)(2) (2019 ed.). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
judge’s duty to protect the rights of an accused. 12 Judges 
have an obligation “to guard and enforce every right [of an 
accused] secured by [the] Constitution.” Smith v. O’Grady, 
312 U.S. 329, 331 (1941)  (citation omitted) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) . Moreover, we note that the 
Constitution “recognizes higher values than speed and 
efficiency.” Stanley v. Illinois , 405 U.S. 645, 656 (1972). 
Here, Judge Pritchard placed undue emphasis on the 
efficiency of his circuit, improperly subordinating what he 
then believed to be Appellee’s constitutional right to a 
unanimous verdict. Thus, his reason for reassigning the 
case was improper. 
3. Judge Hynes’s Impartiality 
Appellee next argues that Judge Pritchard’s 
replacement, Judge Hynes, was disqualified under R.C.M. 
902 from presiding over  this case. Appellee cites two 
reasons for this assertion: (1) Judge Hynes did not disclose 
to the parties the behind -the-scenes actions of  Judge 
Pritchard regarding the reassignment of this case, thereby 
calling his own impartiality in to question, and (2)  Judge 
Hynes did not have an open mind on the defense motion for 
a unanimous verdict. 
We reject Appellee’s first disqualification rationale 
because there was no basis for Judge Hynes to believe that 
Judge Pritchard was acting in an inappropriate manner in 
this case, and thus Judge Hynes’s nondisclosure does not 
demonstrate a lack of impartiality on his own part.   
As for the second  reason, the record does not reflect a 
sufficient basis to conclude  that Judge Hynes  sought to 
decide the issues presented to him in Appellee’s case  in 
anything other than  a fair and open -minded manner.  
Although it is true that Judge Hynes’s stated in an email 
to Judge Pritchard that he would “do [his] part to mitigate 
 
12 Of course, consistent with the UCMJ and the Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States , military judges have the 
responsibility and authority to exercise reasonable control over 
court-martial proceedings. See R.C.M. 801(a)(3). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
any potential case backlog while U.S. v. Dial was pending 
appeal,” we do not ascribe to this comment the same 
nefarious meaning as Appellee now urges.  Rather, Judge 
Hynes subsequently clarified that he simply meant that he 
was willing to assist on any pending cases if doing so would 
increase the efficiency of the 5th Judicial Circuit—not that 
he had a predetermined, inflexible intent to deny the  
unanimous verdict motion that was subsequently filed by 
Appellee.13 As a result, Judge Hynes was not disqualified 
from handling Appellee’s case. 
4. No Structural Error 
With these  reassignment and impartiality issues 
resolved, we now turn to the central question in Certified 
Issue I: Did Judge Pritchard’s reassignment of Appellee’s 
case to Judge Hynes constitute structural error? We 
conclude that it did not. 
To begin with, as indicated earlier we  reject the 
argument that Judge Prichard’s actions resulted in his  
disqualification, recusal, or removal from Appellee’s case, 
and we reject the argument  that Judge Hynes was biased  
against Appellee . Thus, in deciding whether there was 
structural error here, we do so by focusing on the fact that 
Judge Pritchard’s reassignment to Judge Hynes was done 
for an improper purpose.  
Next, we note that  the Supreme Court has held that 
errors will be deemed “structural” in nature —thereby 
requiring no proof of prejudice —only in “a very limited 
class of cases.” Johnson v. United States, 520 U.S. 461, 468 
(1997); see also United States v. Hasan , 84 M.J. 181, 217  
n.24 (C.A.A.F. 2024) . Indeed, “[t] here is a strong 
presumption that an error is not structural.” United States 
v. Bartlett , 66 M.J. 426, 430 (C.A.A.F. 2008). And the 
Supreme Court, the various federal circuit courts of 
 
13 For this reason, the ACCA’s factual finding that Judge 
Hynes had “a predetermined intent to deny a likely motion in 
[Appellee’s] case” was clearly erroneous , Davis, 2024 CCA 
LEXIS 144, at *13, 2024 WL 1652642, at *6, and we do not rely 
on it in the course of this opinion.  
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
appeals, and this Court have never held that a trial judge’s 
reassignment of a case for an improper purpose is part of 
this “limited class”  of cases.  See McIntyre v. Williams, 
216 F.3d 1254, 1258, 1260 (11th Cir. 2000) (noting that no 
Supreme Court cases  “indicate that the substitution of 
judges is a structural defect requiring automatic reversal ” 
and holding state court’s conclusion that “the substitution 
[of judges] is not a structural defect but rather a trial error 
subject to harmless error analysis ” wa s not “ an 
unreasonable application of clearly established Federal 
law as determined by the U.S. Supreme Court”).14  
In addition, the Supreme Court has made it clear that 
an error is structural only if it “affect[s] the entire conduct 
of the [proceeding] from beginning to end . . . . [and] 
render[s] a criminal trial fundamentally unfair or an 
unreliable vehicle for determining guilt or innocence.” 
Greer v. United States, 593 U.S. 503, 513 (2021)  (second 
alteration in original) (citations omitted) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). Because there is nothing in the 
record demonstrating that Appellee’s trial before Judge 
Hynes was unfair or unreliable,  Judge Pritchard’s 
improper actions do not meet this standard. Therefore, “a  
structural error approach is [not] warranted under the 
circumstances” of Appellee’s case. Bartlett, 66 M.J. at 430. 
Accordingly, we answer Certified Issue I in the affirmative 
and now turn to the question of prejudice raised by the  
second certified issue. 
 
14 The federal circuit courts test  improper judicial 
substitutions for prejudice. See, e.g., United States v. Dhaliwal, 
464 F . App’x 498, 510 (6th Cir. 2012) (holding that even if a 
judicial “substitution was improper, [the appellant] is not 
entitled to a new trial unless he has been prejudiced by the 
substitution”); United States v. Yellowbear , 382 F . App’x 715, 
720 n.1 (10th Cir. 2010) (holding that “any error resulting from 
the late unexplained substitution [of judges] would be 
harmless”); United States v.  Lane, 708 F.2d 1394,1396-98 (9th 
Cir. 1983) (holding that improper substitution of judges was not 
prejudicial). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
III. Certified Issue II: Prejudice 
A. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews p rejudice determinations de novo. 
United States v. King, 83 M.J. 115, 120 (C.A.A.F 2023). 
B. Discussion 
Appellee argu es that in the course of this Court 
conducting its prejudice analysis, he should  receive the 
benefit of a  significantly heightened constitutional 
standard of review  whereby the Government has the 
burden of demonstrating that Judge Pritchard’s legal error 
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. We disagree.  
First, although it is true that a constitutional issue was 
the catalyst for Judge Pritchard’s reassignment of 
Appellee’s case, the constitutional right in question—
unanimous verdicts in the military  justice system —was 
actually nonexistent. Unless the Supreme Court holds to 
the contrary, an accused servicemember who is being 
court-martialed is not entitled to a unanimous guilty 
verdict in order to be convicted. United States v. Anderson, 
83 M.J. 291, 293 (C.A.A.F. 2023) , cert. denied, 144 S. Ct. 
1003 (2024). And the mere invocation of a  nonmeritorious 
constitutional right at the trial level  does not entitle an 
accused to the heightened harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt standard of review at the appellate level. 
Second, Appellee argues that the harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt standard applies because the actions of 
Judge Pritchard constituted a due process violation. 
Appellee cites Williams v. Pennsylvania for the proposition 
that a due process violation occurs in a case such as this 
one where the “likelihood of bias on the part of the judge is 
too high to be constitutionally tolerable.” 579 U.S. 1, 4 
(2016) (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).  But here, we have concluded that there was no 
bias on the part of either Judge Pritchard or Judge Hynes.  
Appellee further contends that a reassignment with the 
aim “ ‘to influence the outcome of the proceedings’ ” is a due 
process violation. Brief for Appell ee at 9 (quoting Cruz v. 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
Abbate, 812 F.2d 571, 574 (9th Cir. 1987) ). Although we 
agree that the reassignment was improper, we have 
concluded that this error did not constitute a violation of 
Appellee’s due process rights because the record before us 
does not demonstrate that Judge Pritchard wanted to 
influence the outcome of any aspect of Appellee’s case. See 
supra note 10. 
At oral argument before this Court, Appellee’s counsel 
stated without elaboration that Judge Hynes’s denial of an 
expert in the field of alcohol intoxication, alcohol’s effects 
on memory, and automatism was sufficient  to undermine 
confidence that the trial was fair and that Judge Hynes 
was impartial. However, (1) the record indicates that when 
deciding this issue Judge Hynes considered the defense 
motion, the Government response, and the parties’ 
arguments at an Article 39(a) session , so there were no 
obvious deficiencies in the manner in which he performed 
his judicial duties; (2) Appellee has not given us a sufficient 
reason to question the legal soundness of Judge Hynes’s 
decision on the defense motion; and (3) the mere denial of 
a motion without more does not serve as a  proper basis to 
conclude that Judge Hynes was biased against Appellee or 
that Appellee’s trial was unfair. Liteky v. U nited States, 
510 U.S. 540, 555 (1994) (articulating that “judicial rulings 
alone almost never constitute a valid basis for a bias or 
partiality motion”). 
Because we conclude that  Judge Pritchard’s improper 
reassignment of Appellee’s case did not rise to the level of 
a constitutional violation, we must apply the Article 59(a), 
UCMJ,15 standard of prejudice  for nonconstitutional 
errors. United States v. Diaz , 69  M.J. 127, 137 (C.A.A.F. 
2010) (“Nonconstitutional errors are reviewed for prejudice 
under Article 59(a), UCMJ  . . . .”). Accordingly, we must 
determine whether “the error materially prejudice[d] the 
substantial rights of the accused .” Article 59(a) , UCMJ.  
Stated differently, “ In the context of nonconstitutional 
errors, courts consider whether there is a ‘ reasonable 
 
15 10 U.S.C. § 859(a) (2018). 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
19 
 
probability that, but for the error, the outcome of the 
proceedings would have been different .’ ” United States v. 
Tovarchavez, 78 M.J. 458, 462 n.5 (C.A.A.F 2019) (quoting 
Molina-Martinez v. United States, 578 U.S. 189, 194  
(2016)). 
Here, there is no basis to conclude that Appellee would 
have fared any better before Judge Pritchard, any other 
military judge, or a panel of members  than he did before 
Judge Hynes . First, i t is worth underscoring  that at the 
bench trial, Judge Hynes acquitted  Appellee of one of the 
two charges he was facing, and he adjudged the exact 
sentence that Appellee  requested. Second, t he mere fact 
that Appellee would have received a delay in his trial if, as 
anticipated, Judge Pritchard had ruled favorably on a 
motion for a unanimous verdict and the ACCA then had 
stayed that decision, is not sufficient to meet the Article 
59(a) standard. To begin with, this chain of events is 
speculative. But more importantly, any benefit to Appellee 
that might have arisen from such a delay is impossible  to 
qualify or quantify in any meaningful way. And third, 
although Appellee avers that if he  had known that Judge 
Hynes took this case in order “to do [ his] part” in 
addressing the circuit’s backlog, he would not have 
consented to a military judge alone trial , Appellee 
completed his affidavit attesting to this fact before Judge 
Hynes’s supplemental affidavit . Therefore , Appellee did 
not know all of the relevant circumstances at the time of 
his affidavit. Accordingly, we are left with nothing but 
speculation about what forum Appellee actually would 
have selected. 
Despite the fact that Judge Pritchard erred when he 
reassigned Appellee’s case to Judge Hynes, we conclude  
that there was  no prejudicial effect  arising from this 
reassignment because, in the final analysis,  Appellee 
received a fair trial before an impartial military judge.16 
 
16 Appellee also asserts that “ there is prejudice under 
Liljeberg.” Brief for Appellee at 16. The Liljeberg analysis 
applies when there is a recusal or disqualification error. See 
 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
20 
 
Accordingly, we answer Certified Issue II in the affirmative 
and hold that the A CCA erred in deciding that the 
reassignment of Appellee’s  case constituted structural 
error, or alternatively, that it resulted in prejudice.17 
IV. Judgment 
We answer both certified issues in the affirmative. 
Therefore, we reverse the decision of the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals. The case  is returned to 
the Judge Advocate General of the Army for remand to the 
Court of Criminal Appeals for a further review under 
Article 66, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (2018), of the claims that 
were mooted by the lower court’s prior decision to overturn 
the conviction. 
 
 
United States v. Armstrong, 85 M.J. 31, 34 (C.A.A.F. 2024) (“If a 
military judge erroneously decided to not recuse because of an 
appearance of bias, this Court analyzes three factors established 
in the Supreme Court ’s decision in Liljeberg . . . to determine 
whether reversal is warranted .”). Because w e have concluded 
that the military judges were impartial in Appellee’s case, there 
is no need to engage in a Liljeberg analysis. 
17 We recognize that our predecessor court stated that “the 
replacement of a military judge prior to assembly for improper 
motives. . . . would warrant severe remedial action.” Smith, 
3 M.J. at 492 n.5. However, we must account for Article 59(a) 
before taking remedial action, and because we find no prejudice, 
there is no basis for us to consider remedies. 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Judge SPARKS, with whom Judge JOHNSON joins, 
concurring in part and dissenting in part. 
I concur with the majority opinion as to the first 
certified question, but I dissent as to the second certified 
question. As an initial matter, I agree with the majority 
that Judge Pritchard’s reasoning for transferring the case 
was fundamentally flawed , as  concerns about court 
efficiency cannot arbitrarily trump a military judge’s duty 
to protect the rights of an accused. My disagreement stems 
from the majority ’s holding that Judge Pritchard’s action 
to transfer the case did not result in his disqualification but 
instead constituted an improper reassignment.1 
It is true that Judge Pritchard had the authority to 
reassign cases in his circuit pursuant to Rule for Courts -
Martial (R.C.M.) 505(e)(1) prior to assembly. Underlying 
this power and responsibility is that the reassignment will 
be done for a proper motive, which in some circumstances 
could be for judicial efficiency. In United States v. Smith, 3 
M.J. 490, 492 n.5 (C.M.A. 1975), we cautioned , however,  
that there would be severe remedial action if a military 
judge was replaced prior to assembly for an improper 
motive. The majority opinion takes no such action despite 
correctly holding that Judge Pritchard’s reason for 
reassigning the case was improper. Judge Pritchard’s 
decision to focus on judicial efficiency instead of protecting 
Appellee’s right to a unanimous verdict missed the forest 
for the trees and led to the appearance of his lack of 
impartiality. 
“An accused has a constitutional right to an impartial 
judge.” United States v. Butcher , 56 M.J. 87, 90 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) (citations omitted)  (internal quotation marks 
 
1 This distinction is important because  this Court has 
adopted the prejudice standard the Supreme Court set forth in 
Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp., 486 U.S. 847, 864 
(1988), for determining whether a military judge’s failure to 
disqualify warrants a remedy to vindicate public confidence in 
the military justice system. United States v. Martinez , 70 M.J. 
154, 158 -59 (C.A.A.F. 2011).  For an improper reassignment 
error, this Court  does not apply the Liljeberg standard and 
instead applies the Article 59(a), Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 859(a) (2018), standard of prejudice.  
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
2 
 
omitted). In furtherance of this right, the President 
promulgated R.C.M. 902, which provides the framework for 
when a military judge must be disqualified from 
participating in a court -martial. R.C.M. 902(a) -(b) 
establishes grounds for disqualification when  a military 
judge is either actually biased or conflicted based on some 
specific grounds, or when the military judge appears to lack 
impartiality under all the facts and circumstances.  
Here, the issue is Judge Pritchard’s  appearance of 
impartiality. “[A] military judge shall disqualify himself or 
herself in any proceeding in which that military judge’s 
impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” R.C.M. 
902(a). To determine if a military judge should disqualify 
himself, “the test is whether, taken as  a whole in the 
context of this trial, a court-martial’s legality, fairness, and 
impartiality were put into doubt” by the military judge’s 
actions. United States v. Burton, 52 M.J. 223, 226 (C.A.A.F. 
2000) (citation omitted)  (internal quotation marks 
omitted). When conducting this test, this Court applies an 
objective standard to identify  “[a]ny conduct that would 
lead a reasonable [person]  knowing all the circumstances 
to the conclusion that the judge’s impartiality might 
reasonably be questioned.” United States v. Kincheloe, 14 
M.J. 40, 50 (C.M.A. 1982) (alterations in original) (citation 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Judge Pritchard transferred Appellee’s case to Judge 
Hynes because he did not want to favorably rule on a likely 
defense motion for a unanimous verdict. Such a ruling 
would have resulted in a stay of the proceedings and, 
consequently, a delay in the trial. Although judicial 
efficiency is not without importance, th e Constitution, as 
the majority opinion notes, “recognizes higher values than 
speed and efficiency.” Stanley v. Illinois, 405 U.S. 645, 656 
(1972). A reasonable person knowing all the circumstances 
might reasonably question Judge Pritchard’s impartiality 
by failing to protect what he believed was Appellee’s right 
to a unanimous verdict for the sake of judicial efficiency.  I 
agree with the majority that Judge Pritchard believed 
Appellee had a constitutional right to a unanimous verdict 
when he removed himself from the case. Although this 
Court subsequently held that an accused does not have a 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
3 
 
constitutional right to a unanimous verdict, and the 
Supreme Court denied certiorari review of the issue, Judge 
Pritchard’s motive was no less improper simply because his 
view of the law was later rejected. This decision warranted 
Judge Pritchard’s disqualification, and he was therefore 
without proper authority to reassign the case to Judge 
Hynes. See United States v. Witt, 75 M.J. 380, 384 (C.A.A.F. 
2016) (“Once disqualified, the judge is prohibited from 
further participation in the case.”). 
This Court has recognized that not every judicial 
disqualification error requires reversal and has adopted 
the standard the Supreme Court set forth  in Liljeberg for 
determining whether a military judge’s failure to 
disqualify warrants a remedy  to vindicate public 
confidence in the military justice system. Martinez, 70 M.J. 
at 158-59. The Liljeberg factors are: “[1] the risk of injustice 
to the parties in the particular case, [2] the risk that the 
denial of relief will produce injustice in other cases, and 
[3] the risk of undermining the public ’s confidence in the 
judicial process.” 486 U.S. at 864.  
In this case, i t is the third Liljeberg factor that is 
relevant to this inquiry. T he risk of undermining the 
public’s confidence in the military justice system is high 
when a military judge refuses to rule on a likely defense 
motion that he believed should be granted. Further,  the 
lower court’s factual finding  regarding Judge Hynes 
further erodes public confidence in the miliary justice 
system. Here, t he lower court interpreted Judge Hynes’s 
statement that he volunteered to take the case, “ ‘to do my 
part to mitigate any potential case backlog while Dial was 
pending appeal,’ ” as a predetermined intent to deny a 
unanimous verdict motion filed in Appellee’s case. United 
States v. Davis, No.  ARMY 20220272, 2024 CCA LEXIS 
144, at *13 , 2024 WL 1652642, at * 6 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 
Mar. 27, 2024) (unpublished). 
This Court will not overturn a lower court’s factual 
findings unless they are clearly erroneous or unsupported 
by the record. United States v. Katso , 74 M.J. 273, 279 
(C.A.A.F. 2015). The majority opinion disagrees with th e 
lower court’s factual finding , choosing instead to credit 
Judge Hynes’s subsequent explanation  that he simply 
United States v. Davis, No. 24-0152/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
4 
 
meant that he was willing to assist on any pending cases if 
doing so would increase the efficiency of the 5th Judicial 
Circuit. While the majority’s reading of Judge Hynes’s 
statement is reasonable, I cannot say that the lower court’s 
interpretation was clearly erroneous . The only way that 
Judge Pritchard’s concern about the docket delay could 
have been  alleviated was if Judge Hynes did his part  to 
deny any unanimous verdict motion. Taken together, both 
military judges’ actions could only create doubt in th e 
public’s mind as to the legitimacy of the military justice 
system. Accordingly, considering the unique facts of this 
case, I conclude that the risk of undermining the public’s 
confidence in the military justice system warrants setting 
aside Appellee’s convictions and sentence. I therefore must 
respectfully dissent from the majority’s conclusion as to the 
second certified question. 