 This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Kyle A. SHELBY, Sergeant 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0186 
Crim. App. No. 202200213 
 
Argued November 6, 2024—Decided January 28, 2025 
 
Military Judge: Adam M. King  
 
For Appellant : Lieutenant Commander Leah M. 
Fontenot, JAGC, USN (argued). 
 
For Appellee:  Lieutenant Lan T. Nguyen , JAGC, 
USN (argued); Major Candace G. White, USMC, and 
Brian K. Keller, Esq. 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined.  
_______________ 
 
  
United States v. Shelby, No. 24-0186/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Pretrial, the military judge dismissed a charge with 
prejudice pursuant to the cumulative error doctrine. The 
Government then filed an interlocutory appeal under 
Article 62, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § 862 (2018). On appeal, t he United States Navy -
Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals vacated the 
military judge’s dismissal. United States v. Shelby, 84 M.J. 
639, 650 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2024). We granted review to 
determine whether the cumulative error doctrine applied 
in the pretri al context. 1 We hold that the military judge 
abused his discretion because the cumulative error 
doctrine does not apply pretrial. As the United States 
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals reached the 
same conclusion, we affirm the judgment of the lower court.  
I. Background 
In January 2022, at the first court -martial, the 
Government charged Appellant with making a false official 
statement, abusive sexual contact  (Charge II) , indecent 
exposure, assault consummated by a battery, and indecent 
conduct, in violation of Articles 107, 120, 120c, 128, and 
134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §§ 907, 920, 920c, 928, 934 (2018). 
Appellant was represented by individual military counsel 
(IMC), Captain (Capt) Adcock.  Prior to trial, the military 
judge determined that trial counsel’s  misleading 
representation for Charge II to the s taff judge advocate 
prior to preferring charges resulted in unlawful command 
influence (UCI). As a remedy for the UCI, the military 
judge dismissed Charge II without prejudice, disqualified 
the convening authority from further action on Charge II, 
and the offending trial counsel from the case.  The 
 
1 We granted review on the following issue: 
Did the military judge err when he dismissed Charge II 
with prejudice after “considering the interests of justice, 
the accused’s right to a fair trial, and the cumulative 
error” of the Government?  
United States v. Shelby, No. 24-0186/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
convening authority subsequently withdrew and dismissed 
the remaining charges. 
In June  2023, at the second court -martial, a new 
convening authority rereferred the same charges from the 
first court -martial under a new convening order. Capt 
Adcock notified Appellant that he was terminating  his 
legal representation. Appellant nonetheless submitted a 
request that Capt Adcock  again serve as his IMC  for the 
second court-martial. The convening authority denied the 
request finding that  Capt Adcock  was not reasonably 
available to represent Appellant. Appellant then filed a 
motion to compel Capt Adcock as IMC. The military judge 
found that Appellant’s IMC request was improperly 
denied. Considered together with the UCI ruling in the 
first court-martial, the military judge concluded that these 
errors warranted dismissal of Charge II with prejudice on 
the basis of cumulative error  and the totality of the 
circumstances. The military judge’s ruling prompted the 
Government to file an Article 62, UMCJ, appeal with the 
lower court. In relevant part, the lower court found that the 
military judge erred because the cumulative error doctrine 
did not apply pretrial.  Shelby, 84 M.J. at 650. The lower 
court vacated the military judge’s ruling and remanded the 
case for further proceedings. Id. Appellant’s appeal to this 
Court followed.  
II. Standard of Review 
We review a military judge’s ruling to dismiss a charge 
and its specification for an abuse of discretion. United 
States v. Gore, 60 M.J. 178, 187 (C.A.A.F. 2004). Abuse of 
discretion occurs when the military judge: (1) bases a 
ruling on findings of fact that are not supported by the 
evidence; (2) uses incorrect legal principles; (3) applies 
correct legal principles in a clearly unreasonable way; or 
(4) does not cons ider important facts. United States v. 
Commisso, 76 M.J. 315, 321 (C.A.A.F. 2017). “In an Article 
62, UCMJ, appeal, this Court reviews the military judge’s 
decision directly and reviews the evidence in the light most 
favorable to the party which prevailed at trial,” which in 
this case is Appellant. United States v. Pugh , 77 M.J. 1, 3 
United States v. Shelby, No. 24-0186/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
(C.A.A.F. 2017) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). 
III. Applicable Law 
We have “long held that dismissal is a drastic remedy 
and courts must look to see whether alternative remedies 
are available.” Gore, 60 M.J. at 187 (citations omitted). 
“When an error can be rendered harmless, dismissal is not 
an appropriate remedy.” Id . (citation omitted).  The 
cumulative error doctrine is a prejudice test that looks 
retrospectively at a trial’s execution and results to assess 
the “cumulative effect of all plain errors and preserved 
errors.” United States v. Pope , 69 M.J. 328, 335 (C.A.A.F.  
2011). Under the doctrine, appellate courts determine if “ ‘a 
number of errors, no one perhaps sufficient to merit 
reversal, in combination necessitate the disapproval of a 
finding.’ ” Id. (quoting United States v. Banks, 36 M.J. 150, 
170-71 (C.M.A. 1992)). An appellate court will reverse only 
if it finds the cumulative errors denied the appellant a fair 
trial. Id. 
IV. Discussion 
The military judge abused his discretion in using the 
cumulative error doctrine because that legal principle does 
not apply in the pretrial context.  The cumulative error 
doctrine is a prejudice test that looks retrospectively at a 
court-martial’s execution and results to assess the 
cumulative effect of all plain errors and preserved errors.  
Furthermore, the military judge appears to have 
dismissed Charge II with prejudice based, in part, on his 
dissatisfaction with the UCI remedy at the first  
court-martial. Although the military judge had the 
authority to consider the totality of the circumstances in 
selecting a remedy to preserve the accused’s right to a fair 
trial, see, e.g., United States v. Stellato , 74 M.J. 473, 476 
(C.A.A.F. 2015), his decision to dismiss with prejudice 
Charge II and its specification was an abuse of discretion 
for two r easons. First, the military judge did not identify 
how the taint of the previous court-martial carried into the 
present court-martial, particularly in light of the fact that 
United States v. Shelby, No. 24-0186/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
the military judge already had disqualified the initial trial 
counsel and the initial convening authority, and already 
had dismissed the charge and its specification without 
prejudice. Therefore, the UCI issue did not serve as a 
proper basis for the milita ry judge to dismiss the charge 
and specification with prejudice. Second, the military judge 
remedied any interference with Appellant’s right to counsel 
of choice by ordering Capt Adcock to serve as Appellant’s 
IMC; resetting the case management deadlines t o 
accommodate Capt Adcock’s belated appointment; and 
allowing Capt Adcock to supplement any pleadings already 
filed. Therefore, because less drastic alternatives remedied 
the concerns raised by the military judge, his decision to 
dismiss the charge and spe cification with prejudice 
constituted an abuse of discretion. Gore, 60 M.J. at 187. 
V. Judgment 
The military judge abused his discretion by dismissing 
Charge II with prejudice. The judgment of the United 
States Navy -Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals is 
affirmed. 