This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Samuel H. SMITH, Airman First Class 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0207 
Crim. App. No. 40202 
 
Argued January 24, 2024—Decided November 26, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Rebecca E. Schmidt (arraignment and 
pretrial motions) and Colin P. Eichenberger (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Captain Trevor N. Ward  (argued); 
Daniel Conway, Esq. (on brief); Major David L. Bos-
ner and Scott Hockenberry, Esq. 
 
For Appellee:  Captain Vanessa Ba iros (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
James P. Ferrell , and  Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief). 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge  SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge JOHNSON joined.  
_______________ 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court -martial convicted Appellant , contrary 
to his pleas, of one specification each of breach of the peace, 
aggravated assault with a dangerous weapon, wrongful use 
of marijuana, and two specifications of communicating a 
threat in violation of Articles 116, 128, 112a, and 115, Uni-
form Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 916, 
928, 912a, 915 (2018). Appellant’s breach of the peace con-
viction stems from aggressive comments that he made  off 
duty and out of uniform to an employee at a gas station far 
from base. Before this Court, Appellant challenges the con-
stitutionality and legal sufficiency of that conviction.  
We hold that Appellant’s conviction under Article 116, 
UCMJ, was unconstitutional  as applied and must be set 
aside. The statements Appellant made to the gas station 
clerk did not fall within any of the unprotected categories 
of speech and were thus protected by the First Amendment. 
The judgment of the United States Air Force Court of Crim-
inal Appeals (AFCCA) is reversed as to Appellant’s convic-
tion under Article 116, UCMJ.  
I. Background 
In January 2020, Appellant and his friend, AL, arrived 
at a gas station near Las Vegas, Nevada. Appellant parked 
his car and entered the gas station to buy cigarettes while 
AL waited inside of the vehicle. AB, who was the cashier at 
the gas station that night, saw Appellant enter the store 
while she was outside taking a work break. 
Appellant attempted to purchase cigarettes from  the 
other cashier working that night, but she was too young to 
make tobacco sales and asked AB to come inside and assist 
Appellant. AB came back inside to help, but Appellant was 
apparently displeased with the delay  and began to rant 
about AB’s lack of professionalism. Micky, another patron, 
reacted to Appellant’s angry remarks by responding “don’t 
yell at [AB] like that, she’s doing her job and she’s damn 
good at it.” Appellant allegedly turned toward Micky and 
told him, “stay out of this man, you don’t want to get hurt.” 
The tension between Appellant and Micky did not escalate 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
into a physical altercation, and Micky subsequently exited 
the store. Appellant also left the store shortly thereafter, 
but no evidence in the record suggests that he saw Micky 
again or communicated with him any further. After her in-
teraction with Appellant, AB also went back outside to talk 
with some of her family members who had come to visit her 
at work. 
Upon leaving the store, Appellant walked back to his 
car where PF, another gas station patron, was waiting to 
fuel his truck. When PF asked Appellant to move his car 
out of the way so that he could access  a gas pump, Appel-
lant complained to PF about what had just occurred inside. 
PF testified that Appellant was “disturbed” and “angry” 
and used profane language when describing  the incident. 
Then Appellant got back into his car, drove it towards the 
entrance of the store near to where AB had congregated 
with her visitors, and yelled out of his window  for AB to  
“tell that pretty boy mother f [***]er in there he needs to 
watch his a [**], there are some hard hitting guys in the 
street” (or words to that effect). Micky—the apparent sub-
ject of Appellant’s statement—had returned inside the gas 
station and was out of earshot. However, Appellant’s state-
ment was made  directly in front of AB who testified that 
she responded by chuckling at Appellant and telling him to 
get out of her parking lot. At that point, Appellant began to 
pull a firearm from his side and point it at AB. AL quickly 
intervened and pushed Appellant’s arm down , and they 
sped out of the gas station in their car.  
In addition to other charges related to brandishing his 
loaded handgun, driving recklessly, communicating sev-
eral threats, and wrongfully using marijuana , A ppellant 
was also charged with breaching the peace in  violation of 
Article 116, UCMJ. In relevant part, the charging language 
for that specification stated that Appellant  “cause[d] a 
breach of the peace by using the following provoking lan-
guage toward [AB], to wit: ‘Tell that pretty boy in there that 
there are some hard hitting people in these streets, and he 
better watch his back,’ or words to that effect.” A panel of 
officer and enlisted members convicted Appellant of 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
breaching the peace, and the military judge sentenced him 
to one month of confinement for that specific offense. 
As relevant to this appeal, Appellant challenged the le-
gal and factual sufficiency of his Article 116 conviction be-
fore the AFCCA. United States v. Smith, No. ACM 40202,  
2023 CCA LEXIS 196, at * 43, 2023 WL 3294709,  at *19 
(A.F. Ct. Crim. App. May 5, 2023) (unpublished). Appellant 
raised multiple arguments, including that his charged con-
duct was constitutionally protected speech. The AFCCA de-
nied relief, concluding that a rational factfinder could de-
termine that the Government proved the elements of the 
Article 116 offense beyond a reasonable doub t. Id. at *54, 
2023 WL 3294709, at *19. 
First, the court held that Appellant “ ‘caused or partici-
pated in a certain act of a violent or turbulent nature ’ ” 
through his loud and profane statement to AB. Id. at *56, 
2023 WL 3294709, at *19. In doing so, the AFCCA did not 
look at Appellant’s words in a vacuum, but considered the 
context in which they were made—especially  in light of his 
incident with AB and Micky in the gas station and his act 
of brandishing a firearm. Id. at *56-57, 2023 WL 3294709, 
at *19. For similar reasons, the AFCCA also concluded that 
a rational factfinder could find Appellant’s language un-
lawfully disturbed the peace. Id. at *57, 2023 WL 3294709, 
at *20. Specifically, the court determined that Appellant’s 
language—when viewed in context —disturbed the public’s 
entitlement to tranquility, peace, and good order. Id., 2023 
WL 3294709, at *20.  
The AFCCA also discarded Appellant’s argument that 
“the absence of ‘fighting words’ in the charged language” 
made his speech constitutionally protected. Id. at *60, 2023 
WL 3294709, at *20. The court decided that fighting words 
are not the only category of prohibited speech because  
“there are categories of communication and certain special 
utterances to which the majestic protection of the First 
Amendment does not extend ” because such words “are no 
essential part of any exposition of ideas, and are of such 
slight social value as a step to truth that any benefit that 
may be derived from them is clearly outweighed by the 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
social interest in order and morality. ” Id. at *60-61, 2023 
WL 3294709,  at * 20 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Bose Corp. v. Consumers Union, 466 U.S. 485, 504 
(1984)). The AFCCA  explained that Appellant’s “pretty 
boy” threat “was not an essential part of any exposition of 
ideas,” had arguably “no social value,” and its benefits, if 
any, did not outweigh society’s interest in order and moral-
ity. Id. at *61, 2023 WL 3294709, at *21 (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (citation omitted) . Thus, the AFCCA con-
cluded that Appellant’s language did not merit constitu-
tional protection. Id. at *62, 2023 WL 3294709, at *21.  
We granted review of the following issue: 
Whether Appellant’s conviction for breach of 
peace, based exclusively on speech, is legally in-
sufficient and unconstitutional where , inter alia, 
all parties agree the charged speech did not con-
stitute “fighting words.” 
United States v. Smith, 83 M.J. 479 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order 
granting review).  
II. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews issues of legal sufficiency de novo. 
United States v. Richard, 82 M.J. 473, 476 (C.A.A.F. 2022). 
Whether a statute is constitutional as applied is also an 
issue this Court reviews de novo. United States v. Goings, 
72 M.J. 202, 205 (C.A.A.F. 2013); United States v. Ali , 71 
M.J. 256, 265 (C.A.A.F. 2012). There is “ a presumption 
against the waiver of constitutional rights, and for a waiver 
to be effective it must be clearly established that there was 
an intentional relinquishment of a known right or privi-
lege.” United States v. Sweeney , 70  M.J. 296, 303- 04 
(C.A.A.F. 2011). For these reasons, w hen an appellant al-
leges for the first time on appeal that his conviction was 
unconstitutional as applied to him, this Court generally de-
clines to find waiver and instead applies plain error review. 
Goings, 72 M.J. at 205. Under such review, the appellant 
bears the burden of pointing to particular facts in the rec-
ord that prove why his interests should overcome the de-
terminations of Congress and the President that his con-
duct should be proscribed. Id. 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
III. Discussion 
Article 116, UCMJ, states that any servicemember 
“who causes or participates in any riot or breach of the 
peace shall be punished as a court-martial may direct.” The 
President has further directed that servicemember s can 
breach the peace under Article  116, UCMJ, in two ways: 
(1) by partaking in a violent or turbulent act; or (2) by using 
provocative speech. 1 The Government charged Appellant 
with causing a breach of peace solely by using “provoking 
language” toward AB, without any reference to his other 
conduct. Thus, under the Government’s selected charging 
scheme, Appellant was convicted of breaching the peace 
based on his spoken words alone. 
In its arguments, the Government repeatedly  refer-
ences Appellant’s unruly conduct in addition to the provok-
ing statement he made to AB—particularly the fact that he 
brandished a firearm. The Government forgets, however, 
that it controls the charge sheet, United States v. Simmons, 
82 M.J. 134, 141 (C.A.A.F. 2022) , and the Government  
chose to charge Appellant under Article 116, UCMJ, based 
solely on his speech. The Government could have charged 
Appellant with breaching the peace through both his words 
 
1 The elements of the offense of breach of the peace under 
Article 116, UCMJ, are that (a) the accused caused or partici-
pated in a certain act of a violent or turbulent nature; and (b) the 
peace was thereby unlawfully disturbed.  Manual for Courts-
Martial, United States  pt. IV, para.  54.b.(2) (2019 ed.) ( MCM). 
The MCM further explains:  
Loud speech and unruly conduct may also consti-
tute a breach of the peace by the speaker. A 
speaker may also be guilty of causing a breach of 
the peace if the speaker uses language which can 
reasonably be expected to produce a violent or tur-
bulent response and a breach of the peace results. 
The fact that the words are true or used under 
provocation is not a defense, nor is tumultuous 
conduct excusable because incited by others.  
MCM pt. IV, para. 54.c.(2).  
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
and conduct,2 but it elected not to do so. We therefore must 
review Appellant’s Article  116 conviction to determine 
whether the Government’s criminalization of Appellant’s 
speech violates Appellant’s First Amendment rights. 
A. Free Speech in the Military 
To avoid any future confusion, we begin by acknowledg-
ing that both the Supreme Court and this Court have rec-
ognized that the government may place additional burdens 
on a servicemember’s First Amendment free speech rights 
due to the unique character of the military community and 
mission. United States v. Wilcox , 66 M.J. 442, 448 n.3 
(C.A.A.F. 2008) (citing Parker v. Levy , 417 U.S. 733, 758 
(1974)); United States v. Priest, 21 C.M.A. 564, 570- 72, 45 
C.M.R. 338, 344 -46 (1972); United States v. Gray , 20 
C.M.A. 63, 66, 42 C.M.R. 255, 258 (1970). Yet despite Ap-
pellant’s status as an active  duty member of the a rmed 
forces at the time of his offense, the Government  concedes 
that this case should be governed by the same First 
Amendment standards that apply in civilian courts.  We 
agree. 
Appellant’s speech occurred far off base in a civilian set-
ting. Appellant was wearing his civilian clothes, and there 
is no evidence in the record that there were any other visi-
ble indications of Appellant’s military status. To all the 
other people involved in the incident, Appellant  appeared 
 
2 See, e.g., United States v. Stevens, 19 M.J. 284, 284 (C.M.A. 
1985) (alleging that the accused caused “a breach of the peace by 
painting a bull’s eye on his torso and wrongfully entering the 
Flight Deck . . . [and] by wrongfully boarding an F -14 aircraft, 
pulling the ejection system safety pins, and threatening to kill 
himself while seated in the ejection seat”); United States v. Kel-
son, 3 M.J. 139, 140 (C.M.A. 1977) (claiming that the accused 
breached the peace “ ‘by wrongfully standing on tables, shouting 
and throwing beer mugs in the Beer Tent ’ ”); United States v. 
Hewson, 13 C.M.A. 506, 507, 33 C.M.R. 38, 39 (1963)  (charging 
a servicemember under Article 116, UCMJ, for “[causing] ‘ a 
breach of the peace by wrongfully shouting, striking the bars of 
his cell, shaking his cell door, jumping and kicking in his cell and 
on his bunk, and starting a fire in his cell’ ”). 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
to be a civilian. The Government agrees that Appellant’s 
speech in no way interfered with the military mission and 
had no nexus to the military  environment. W e therefore 
apply the same First Amendment law that applies  in the 
civilian courts. 
B. Breach of the Peace and 
the First Amendment 
The First Amendment provides that “Congress shall 
make no law  . . . abridging the freedom of speech.” U.S. 
Const. amend. I. Since its enactment, the First Amend-
ment has “permitted restrictions upon the content of 
speech in a few limited areas.” United States v. Stevens, 559 
U.S. 460, 468 (2010). These “historic and traditional cate-
gories” are “long familiar to the bar.” Id. (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (citation omitted). They include: (1) in-
citement to imminent lawless action ; (2) obscenity; 
(3) defamation; (4) speech integral to cri minal conduct; 
(5) fighting words; (6) child pornography; (7) fraud; (8) true 
threats; and (9) speech presenting some grave and immi-
nent threat the Government has the power to prevent. 
United States v. Alvarez, 567 U.S. 709, 717 (2012). If a con-
tent-based restriction on speech does not fall within one of 
these historically recognized categories, the restriction is 
presumed to be unconstitutional.
3 Chaplinsky v. New 
Hampshire, 315 U.S. 568, 571 (1942); Ashcroft v. American 
Civil Liberties Union, 542 U.S. 656, 660 (2004); see also Al-
varez, 567 U.S. 709. 
The Government argues that Appellant’s statements to 
AB were unprotected by the First Amendment for two rea-
sons. First, the Government contends  that under the Su-
preme Court’s decision in Bose Corp. , some speech that 
 
3 The Supreme Court has established that content-based re-
strictions on speech “may be justified,” notwithstanding this pre-
sumption, “if the government proves that they are narrowly tai-
lored to serve compelling state interests.” Reed v. Town of 
Gilbert, 576 U.S. 155, 163 (2015) (describing the test of “strict 
scrutiny” to which content-based restrictions on speech are sub-
jected). The Government, however, makes no argument that it 
has offered such proof in this case.  
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
does not qualify as one of the specifically enumerated cate-
gories of unprotected speech may still be unprotected by 
the First Amendment if it has such minimal societal value 
that “any benefit that may be derived from [it] is clearly 
outweighed by the social interest in order and morality.” 
466 U.S. at 504. Second, the Government claims  that Ap-
pellant’s statements to AB qualify as unprotected danger-
ous speech. We disagree on both counts. 
1. No First Amendment Balancing Test 
First, we reject the Government’s assertion that the Su-
preme Court has created a catchall First Amendment test 
that operates outside of the traditional categorical ap-
proach. The Government’s theory is based on a line from 
Bose Corp. in which the Supreme Court stated:  
[T]here are categories of communication and cer-
tain special utterances to which the majestic pro-
tection of the First Amendment does not extend 
because they “are no essential part of any exposi-
tion of ideas, and are of such slight social value as 
a step to truth that any benefit that may be de-
rived from them is clearly outweighed by the so-
cial interest in order and morality.” 
Id. (quoting Chaplinsky, 315 U.S. at 572). 
We disagree that this language  established a First 
Amendment balancing test for speech that falls outside the 
designated categories of unprotected speech. Instead, we 
read this line as merely explaining why some of those  cat-
egories—including libelous speech  (the type of speech at is-
sue in Bose Corp.)—are not protected by the First Amend-
ment. Our interpretation is supported by the fact that the 
Bose Corp. majority applied the traditional categorical ap-
proach throughout its opinion rather than balancing the  
value of the speech in question against  any societal inter-
ests. Moreover, the Supreme Court stated in Stevens that 
it “has often described historically unprotected categories 
of speech as being of such slight social value as a step to 
truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is 
clearly ou tweighed by the social interest in order and 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
morality.” 559 U.S. at 470 (internal quotation marks omit-
ted) (citations omitted). 
In Stevens, the Supreme Court confronted the same the-
ory that the Government presents to us now—that whether 
particular speech receives constitutional protection  “ ‘de-
pends upon a categorical balancing of the value of the 
speech against its societal costs.’ ” Id. (quoting Brief for the 
United States at 8). The Stevens Court rejected the exist-
ence of a First Amendment balancing test, explaining that 
the Government is not permitted as a general matter “to 
imprison any speaker so long as his speech is deemed v al-
ueless or unnecessary, or so long as an ad hoc calculus of 
costs and benefits tilts in a statute’s favor.” Id. at 471; see 
also Alvarez, 567 U.S. at 717 (“In light of the substantial 
and expansive threats to free expression posed by content-
based restrictions, this Court has rejected as ‘startling and 
dangerous’ a ‘free-floating test for First Amendment cover-
age . . . [based on] an ad hoc balancing of relative social 
costs and benefits.’ ” (alterations in original) (quoting Ste-
vens, 559 U.S. at 470)). 
2. Dangerous Speech and Incitement 
The Government also asserts that Appellant’s state-
ments to AB qualified as unprotected “dangerous speech.” 
See Schenck v. United States, 249 U.S. 47, 52 (1919) (hold-
ing that words constitute dangerous speech where they 
“are used in such circumstances and are of such a nature 
as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring 
about the substantive evils that Congress has a right to 
prevent”). The problem for the Government, however, is 
that—at least in the civilian context —the category of dan-
gerous speech identified by the Supreme Court in Schenck 
has been supplanted by i nciting speech. See Alvarez, 567 
U.S. at 717 (including “advocacy intended, and likely, to in-
cite imminent lawless action” as a category of unprotected 
speech but not “dangerous speech”). 
The Schenck dangerous speech test has been the subject 
of substantial criticism since its inception. See 
Brandenburg v. Ohio , 395 U.S. 444, 454 (1969) (Douglas, 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
J., concurring) (“When one reads the opinions closely and 
sees when and how the ‘clear and present danger’ test has 
been applied, great misgivings are aroused.”); Gitlow v. 
New York, 268 U.S. 652, 673 (1925) (Holmes, J., dissenting) 
(criticizing the broad use of the clear and present danger 
test in part because “[e]very idea is an incitement”). 
Although the Supreme Court has never officially overruled 
the dangerous speech test from Schenck , that test has 
effectively been abrogated by the more speaker -friendly 
Brandenburg test in which speech constitutes incitement 
only if it is “directed to inciting or producing imminent 
lawless action and is likely to incite or produce such 
action.” 395 U.S. at 447; see also Denver Area Educ.  
Telecomms. Consortium, Inc. v. FCC , 518 U.S. 727, 778 
(Souter, J., concurring) (“[T]he clear and present danger 
[test] of Schenck v. United States . . . evolved into the 
modern incitement rule of Brandenburg v. Ohio.”). 
Applying the Brandenburg test, Appellant’s speech was 
not unprotected because it was not likely to incite an y 
imminent lawless action. The Government argues that 
Appellant’s statements to AB were likely to cause a 
physical altercation between Appellant and Micky, but we 
find no evidence to support that assertion. Micky was 
completely unaware of Appellant’s statement because he 
was browsing the aisle s inside the gas station  when 
Appellant made his statement. AB—the actual recipient of 
Appellant’s words—state d that she chuckled in response to 
Appellant’s outburst and told Appellant to leave. Nothing 
in the record supports the  Government’s theory that AB 
was likely to relay Appellant’s words to Micky, or that 
Micky would have responded to hearing them by starting a 
fight with Appellant. 
3. Fighting Words 
Having rejected the Government’s argument for a gen-
eral balancing test and having concluded  that Appellant’s 
speech does not qualify as incitement under Brandenburg, 
we are still left with the question  whether Appellant’s 
statements to AB fall within a different unprotected cate-
gory and thus could be criminal under Article 116, UCMJ. 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
Appellant argues that only one category of unprotected 
speech is relevant to convictions for breaching the peace: 
fighting words. We are not aware of any binding case  law 
supporting that broad assertion (and Appellant cites none), 
but it is true that fighting words are often associated with 
breach of the peace statutes. See, e.g., Chaplinsky, 315 U.S. 
at 572 (noting that “fighting words” are “those which by 
their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an im-
mediate breach of the peace”  (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (citation omitted)) ; Gooding v. Wilson , 405 U.S. 
518, 528 (1972) (holding that a Georgia breach of the peace 
statute that criminalized protected speech beyond unpro-
tected fighting words was unconstitutional). Regardless, in 
this case, the Government has conceded that Appellant’s 
statements that form the basis of his Article 116 conviction 
do not qualify as fighting words . Although we are not 
bound by the partie s’ arguments on questions of law, we 
agree that Appellant’s statements to AB are not fighting 
words. 
In Chaplinsky, the Supreme Court recognized a cate-
gory of unprotected “fighting words” that are “likely to pro-
voke the average person to retaliation.” 315 U.S. at 574. In 
Cohen v. California , the Supreme Court clarified  that 
speech does not fall within the fighting words category if it 
was not directed to a specific person  and was unlikely to 
provoke a violent response. 403 U.S.  15, 20 (1971). Cohen 
addressed an appellant’s conviction for wearing a jacket in 
a courthouse that was inscribed with vulgar and poten-
tially provoking language regarding the draft. Id. at 16. Be-
cause the words displayed on the jacket were not “directed 
to the person of the hearer” and “[n]o individual actually or 
likely to be present could reasonably have regarded the 
words on appellant’s jacket as a direct personal insult,” the 
language written on it did not constitute fighting words. Id. 
at 20.
4 Consistent with Supreme Court precedent, this 
 
4 See also Texas v. Johnson , 491 U.S. 397, 409 ( 1989) (con-
cluding that the accused’s expression did not qualify as fighting 
words because it was neither a direct personal insult nor an in-
vitation to exchange fisticuffs). 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
Court has held that “ [i]n order to be fighting words, the 
words must constitute a direct personal insult.” United 
States v. Brown, 45 M.J. 389, 395 (1996) (citing Cohen, 403 
U.S. at 15). 
We agree with the parties that the charged speech in 
the present case does not fit within the fighting words cat-
egory. Although Appellant’s statements to AB cautioned 
Micky to “watch his back,” the record indicates that Micky 
was inside of the gas station at that time and did not hear 
Appellant’s warnings. Rather, because  Appellant pulled 
his car up next to AB and yelled at her out his window, his 
comments were directed only towards AB. But Appellant’s 
comments were not about  AB, she was just the conduit 
through which Appellant chose to express  his views about 
Micky, an absent third party. AB—the intended and actual 
hearer of Appellant’s words—was not the subject of Appel-
lant’s message and therefore Appellant’s words did not con-
stitute a direct personal insult. Similarly, nothing in the 
record suggests that Appellant invited AB to exchange fist-
icuffs. Thus, Appellant’s charged speech did not amount to 
fighting words. 
4. True Threats 
In its filings submitting citation s to supplemental au-
thorities, the Government argues  that fighting words are 
not the only category of unprotected speech that can breach 
the peace and suggests that Appellant’s statements to AB 
qualify either as incitement or true threats.  Because we 
have already decided that Appellant’s speech did not qual-
ify as incitement under Brandenburg , we need only con-
sider whether it qualifies as a true threat. 
The Government is correct that t he First Amendment 
permits a ban on “true threats.” Virginia v. Black, 538 U.S. 
343, 344 (2003) ; see also R.A.V. v. St. Paul , 505 U.S. 377, 
388 (1992) ( explaining that threats of violence are unpro-
tected to guard “individuals from the fear of violence, from 
the disruption that fear engenders, and from the possibility 
that the threatened violence will occur ”). “ ‘True threats ’ 
encompass those statements where the speaker means to 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
communicate a serious expression of an intent to commit 
an act of unlawful violence to a particular individual or 
group of individuals.” Black, 538 U.S. at 359.  
Appellant’s statement to AB does not qualify  as a true 
threat. Appellant did not claim that he was going to harm 
Micky that night or at some point in the future. Instead, he 
only suggested that someone might try and harm Micky if 
Micky did not watch his back. Further, Appellant advised 
Micky that a “hard hitter” could cause him injury. But Ap-
pellant did not claim to be a “hard hitter” himself and did 
not assert that he knew any such person. Appellant’s words 
can be interpreted as a warning, but he did not specifically 
threaten to cause Micky any harm . Accordingly, Appel-
lant’s words did not constitute a true threat. 
C. Conclusion 
In this case, Appellant satisfied his burden on plain er-
ror review by pointing to specific facts in the record that 
established that the charged conduct —his statements to 
gas station attendant AB —qualified as protected speech 
under the First Amendment in a civilian context. In his 
briefs and at oral argument, A ppellant’s counsel persua-
sively argued that there is no free- floating balancing test 
for free speech, and that the speech that formed the basis 
of his Article 116 conviction does not fall within any o f the 
traditionally recognized categories of unprotected speech—
fighting words, true threats, or inciting speech. Because 
the Government elected to charge Appellant for breaching 
the peace based on his speech alone, his Article 116 convic-
tion violates the First Amendment and must be set aside. 
IV. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is reversed as to Charge IV and its spec-
ification and sentence. The findings of guilty with respect 
to this charge and specification are set aside, and Charge 
IV and its specification are dismissed. We affirm the lower 
court with respect to all other findings. The record of trial 
is returned to the Judge Advocate General of the Air Force 
for remand to the Court of Criminal Appeals for 
United States v. Smith, No. 23-0207/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
reassessment of the sentence, or for a rehearing on the sen-
tence, if necessary.5 
 
5 Historically, it has been this Court’s general practice to re-
mand to the courts of criminal appeals (CCAs) for sentence re-
assessment or a rehearing on the sentence whenever we set 
aside at least one finding of guilty. In the Military Justice Act of 
2016, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017, 
Pub. L. No. 114-328, 130 Stat. 2000 (2016), Congress introduced 
segmented sentencing in which a separate term of confinement 
and fine is adjudged for each specification in which there was a 
finding of guilty when sentencing is conducted by the military 
judge. These provisions became effective on January 1, 2019, 
and cases with segmented sentences —like this one —are now 
reaching this Court. Although segmented sentencing signifi-
cantly simplifies sentence reassessment after a specification has 
been dismissed, we are mindful that some reassessment is still 
necessary for the unitary (nonsegmented) component of the sen-
tence, such as the forfeiture of pay and allowances, the reduction 
in pay grade, and the punitive separation. Because Congress 
vested the CCAs with express statutory authority to conduct 
sentence reassessment in Article 66(d)(1)(A), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(d)(1)(A) (Supp. III 2019-2022), and because a remand will 
give the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard, we find 
it appropriate to continue our general practice of remanding 
cases to the CCAs after a specification has been set aside for sen-
tence reassessment or a rehearing on the sentence. 