This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Isac D. MENDOZA, Staff Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0210 
Crim. App. No. 20210647 
 
Argued March 5, 2024—Decided October 7, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Steven C. Henricks 
and Ryan W. Rosauer 
 
For Appellant: Captain Matthew S. Fields (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten, Major Bryan A. Osterhage, 
and Jonathan F. Potter, Esq. (on brief) ; Captain 
Carol K. Rim.  
 
For Appellee: Captain Anthony J. Scarpati (argued); 
Colonel Christopher B. Burgess,  Lieutenant Colonel 
Jacqueline J. DeGaine , and Major Chase C. Cleve-
land (on brief). 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON and Judge JOHNSON 
joined. Judge SPARKS filed a separate opinion, con-
curring in part and dissenting in part and in the 
judgment. Judge MAGGS filed a separate opinion, 
concurring in part and dissenting in part. 
 _______________ 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
After a night of socializing  and heavy drinking with 
other soldiers, JW blacked out, leaving her with no further 
memories until the following morning. An investigation by 
the United States Army Criminal Investigation Division 
(CID) established that later that night, JW and Appellant 
went to Appellant’s barracks room where Appellant per-
formed a sexual act upon JW. Under the theory that JW 
did not consent to the act, the Government charged Appel-
lant with sexual assault in violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 920(b)(2)(A) (2018).1 Notably, the Government did not 
charge Appellant with a sexual assault under Arti-
cle 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, which would have required the 
Government to prove both that Appellant committed a sex-
ual act on JW when JW was incapable of consenting to the 
sexual act due to impairment by any drug, intoxicant, or 
other similar substance and that Appellant knew or should 
have known that JW was incapable of consenting. 
At trial, the Government presented evidence of JW’s ex-
treme intoxication and argued to the military judge sitting 
alone both that JW would not have consented to sexual in-
tercourse with Appellant and that she was incapable of 
consenting to sexual intercourse due to her high level of in-
toxication. The military judge found Appellant guilty, con-
trary to his plea, of one specification of sexual assault in 
violation of Article 120, UCMJ, and the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) affirmed. United 
States v. Mendoza, No. ARMY 20210647, 2023 CCA LEXIS 
198, at *10, 2023 WL 3540415, at *4 (A. Ct. Crim. App. May 
8, 2023) (unpublished). 
Before this Court, Appellant challenges the legal suffi-
ciency of his conviction  on the grounds that the Govern-
ment failed to introduce affirmative evidence of the lack of 
 
1 Appellant was also charged with and acquitted of a second 
specification of abusive sexual contact in violation of Article 120, 
UCMJ. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
consent beyond a reasonable doubt.  We disagree with Ap-
pellant that direct evidence of JW’s lack of consent was nec-
essary for his conviction to be legally sufficient, but we do 
agree with his secondary argument that Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ,  and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, 
create separate theories of criminal liabilit y. Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, criminalizes engaging in a sexual 
act with a  person capable of consenting who did not con-
sent, and Article  120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, criminalizes engag-
ing in a sexual  act with a person who is incapable of con-
senting due to impairment by any drug, intoxicant, or other 
similar substance when the accused knows or should have 
known that the person was incapable of consenting.  
In this case, the Government elected not to charge Ap-
pellant with sexual assault under Article  120(b)(3)(A), 
UCMJ (a sexual act upon a person incapable of consenting), 
and instead charged Appellant with sexual assault under 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ (a sexual act upon a person ca-
pable of consenting who did not consent ). Nevertheless, at 
trial t he Government presented significant evidence of 
JW’s extreme intoxication and argued that JW’s inability 
to consent established the absence of consent. The Govern-
ment’s approach—which conflated two different and incon-
sistent theories of criminal liability—raises significant due 
process concerns. Because the ACCA’s decision upholding 
Appellant’s conviction does not explain how or why the ev-
idence of JW’s intoxication factored into its analysis, we re-
verse the decision of the ACCA and remand the case for the 
court to reconsider its legal and factual sufficiency analysis 
in light of this opinion. 
I. Background 
In July 2020, Appellant and JW were both stationed at 
Camp Casey, Korea. On July 11, 2020, JW went off-post to 
eat and drink with fellow soldiers. When the group  re-
turned to the barracks, they joined other soldiers, including 
Appellant, who were socializing outside. JW testified that 
she recalled coming back to the barracks, seeing the other 
soldiers outside, and continuing to drink with them before 
she eventually blacked out.  
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
JW’s next memory was waking up the following morn-
ing to Appellant knocking on her barracks room door to re-
turn her shoes. JW did not recognize Appellant and did not 
know why he was at her door.  JW went back to sleep and 
woke up to Appellant again knocking at her door to ask if 
she was okay.  
Afterwards, JW went to the bathroom and “realized 
something was wrong.” JW noticed that she was not wear-
ing the underwear she had been wearing the night before 
and that her tampon was pushed all the way inside her to 
the extent that she could not reach the string. JW testified 
that she had never inserted a tampon so far , and that she 
would never have sex with her tampon in or when she was 
on her period. Realizing that something was wrong and 
starting to panic, JW went to the barracks Charge of Quar-
ters (CQ) desk to try to identify Appellant and learn what 
happened the night before. 
The CQ noncommissioned officer ( NCO) testified that 
JW was crying and was very upset when she came to the 
CQ desk. The CQ NCO contacted a Sexual Harassment/As-
sault Response and Prevention (SHARP) program repre-
sentative, who later met with JW and arranged for her to 
file a report and to receive a sexual assault forensic exam-
ination (SAFE) at the troop medical clinic. 
While she was waiting to be taken to the medical clinic, 
JW went to her friend, Specialist ( SPC) RL, to ask what 
had happened the night before. SPC  RL testified that JW 
was upset, crying, and confused when they spoke. After JW 
left for the clinic, SPC RL and his NCO spoke to Appellant 
after hearing reports of his interactions with JW the previ-
ous night. Appellant told SPC RL and his  NCO that JW 
had fallen asleep in his bed. During their conversation, JW 
called SPC  RL, who handed the phone to Appellant. JW 
asked Appellant what happened, and he replied that noth-
ing happened, and that she had locked herself in his bath-
room. Appellant then requested to accompany SPC RL and 
his NCO to the clinic to see JW. On the way, Appellant told 
SPC RL that JW had taken a shower in his room and then 
put her shirt on backwards. At the parking lot of the clinic, 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Appellant told a CID agent who was conducting canvassing 
interviews that JW had been in his room the night before. 
During a later interview with the CID agent, Appellant 
admitted to having sexual intercourse with JW in his bed-
room. He acknowledged that JW was extremely intoxicated 
at the time and that s he was incapable of consenting be-
cause of her intoxication. Appellant also admitted that he 
“was in control the whole time” during intercourse; how-
ever, he never admitted that JW verbally or physically 
withheld consent.  U.S. Army Criminal Investigation La-
boratory testing of cervical swabs taken from JW during 
her SAFE exam confirmed the presence of semen matching 
Appellant’s DNA profile. 
Evidence collected by CID during its investigation, in-
cluding CCTV footage from the barracks, helped recon-
struct the events at the barracks during the period when 
JW blacked out. Witnesses testified that they saw JW 
drink and socialize with other soldiers,  including Appel-
lant, while displaying symptoms of intoxication, including 
slurred speech and unsteady movements. Some soldiers 
also noted JW’s flirtatious behavior with Appellant and 
others. The CCTV footage from the barracks showed that 
JW walked unsteadily with Appellant to his room while 
Appellant grabbed her crotch. Later, the footage captured 
JW and Appellant exiting his room with JW’s arms seem-
ingly draped over Appellant’s shoulders for  support. JW 
testified that she remembered nothing of her encounter 
with Appellant. 
A military judge sitting as a general court-martial con-
victed Appellant of one specification of sexual assault in vi-
olation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, and sentenced him 
to a dishonorable discharge, thirty months of confinement, 
and reduction to the grade of E-1. The convening authority 
approved the sentence and waived automatic forfeitures of 
all pay and allowances for six months for the benefit of Ap-
pellant’s wife. 
On appeal before the ACCA, Appellant argued that the 
evidence was factually insufficient because the 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
Government “produced no evidence that the victim did not 
consent to sexual intercourse.” Mendoza, 2023 CCA LEXIS 
198, at *8, 2023 WL 3540415, at *3. The ACCA rejected this 
argument, explaining that several factors led it to find Ap-
pellant’s conviction factually sufficient, “including but not 
limited to: the victim ’s high level of intoxication, [A] ppel-
lant’s statement to CID, eyewitness testimony, and the 
CCTV footage.” Id., 2023 WL 3540415, at *3. Because the 
ACCA was “convinced of [A]ppellant’s guilt beyond a rea-
sonable doubt,” it affirmed his conviction. Id. at *10, 2023 
WL 3540415, at *3-4 (citation omitted) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). 
We granted review to determine whether Appellant’s 
conviction for sexual assault without consent was legally 
sufficient. United States v. Mendoza, 84 M.J. 105 (C.A.A.F. 
2023) (order granting review). 
II. Discussion 
In most legal sufficiency cases, which we review de 
novo, the Court asks “whether, after viewing the evidence 
in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational 
trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the 
crime beyond a reasonable doubt.” United States v. Smith, 
83 M.J. 350, 359 (C.A.A.F. 2023)  (citations omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) . Because the Court 
draws every reasonable inference from the evidence in 
favor of the prosecution, “[ t]he standard for legal 
sufficiency involves a very low threshold to sustain a 
conviction.” United States v. King , 78 M.J. 218, 221 
(C.A.A.F. 2019) (alteration in original) (citations omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted).  This deferential 
standard impinges upon the factfinder’s discretion “ ‘only 
to the extent necessary to guarantee the fundamental 
protection of due process of law.’ ” Id. (quoting Jackson v. 
Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979)). 
This case, however, departs from the usual “reasonable 
trier of fact” analysis because Appellant challenges the le-
gal sufficiency of his sexual assault conviction on two unu-
sual grounds. First, Appellant argues that the evidence 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
was legally in sufficient because the Government relied 
solely on circumstantial evidence to prove that JW did not 
consent to the sexual activity. In Appellant’s view, the Gov-
ernment’s failure to present any “affirmative” evidence of 
JW’s lack of consent means that no rational factfinder 
could legally find him guilty under Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UMCJ. 
In the alternative, Appellant argues that his conviction 
was legally insufficient because the Government violated 
his due process rights by conflating two different  theories 
of criminal liability under Article 120, UCMJ, during his 
court-martial. Appellant asserts that Article  120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, establish separate 
theories of liability, and that the Government robbed him 
of his due process right to fair notice by arguing that JW 
was incapable of consenting due to alcohol int oxication 
without charging Appellant with sexual assault under Ar-
ticle 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ. In Appellant’s view, because the 
Government charged him under Article  120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, (sexual assault without consent), he had no notice 
that he needed to defend himself from the Government’s 
allegation that JW was incapable of consenting. We con-
sider each of Appellant’s arguments in turn. 
A. Article 120(b)(2)(A) does not require 
“affirmative” evidence  
This Court has repeatedly held that the Government 
may meet its burden of proving an accused’s guilt beyond a 
reasonable doubt with circumstantial evidence. United 
States v. Long, 81 M.J. 362, 368 (C.A.A.F. 2021); see also 
King, 78 M.J.  at 221 (first citing United States v. Kearns, 
73 M.J. 177, 182 (C.A.A.F. 2014); then citing United States 
v. Young, 64 M.J. 404, 407 (C.A.A.F. 2007) ). Nevertheless, 
Appellant argues that this principle works differently in 
sexual assault cases, which—in Appellant’s view — require 
“at least a single fact related to affirmative non-consent in 
order to deem a conviction for sexual assault without con-
sent legally sufficient.”  Reply Brief of Ap pellant at 13, 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23 -0210 (C.A.A.F. Jan . 12, 
2024) (emphasis in original). 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
We disagree. The President has instructed that findings 
of guilt “may be based on direct or circumstantial evi-
dence,” without mention of any exception for certain of-
fenses. Rule for Court Martial (R.C.M.) 918(c). And in 
Long—a case involving rape and other sex offenses —we 
recognized that “the government is free to meet its burden 
of proof with circumstantial evidence.” 81 M.J. at 368 (al-
teration in original removed) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting King, 78 M.J. at 221). The President’s in-
structions and our case law are consistent with the Su-
preme Court’s guidance that circumstantial evidence “is in-
trinsically no different from testimonial evidence.” Holland 
v. United States, 348 U.S. 121, 140 (1954); see also Desert 
Palace, Inc. v. Costa , 539 U.S. 90, 100 (2003) (“we have 
never questioned the sufficiency of circumstantial evidence 
in support of a criminal conviction, even though proof be-
yond a reasonable doubt is required”). Accordingly, we re-
iterate once again that the absence of direct evidence of an 
element of an offense does not prevent a finding of guilty 
for that offense from being legally sufficient.  
B. Article 120(b)(2)(A) and Article 120(b)(3)(A) 
establish separate theories of liability2 
Appellant’s alternative argument requires us to exam-
ine Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, to determine whether the 
Government can prove sexual assault  “without the con-
sent” of the victim by establishing that the victim was in-
capable of consenting. This Court reviews questions of stat-
utory interpretation de novo. United States v. Lopez de 
Victoria, 66 M.J. 67, 73 (C.A.A.F. 2008). The first step in 
statutory interpretation cases “is to determine whether the 
language at issue has a plain and unambiguous meaning 
with regard to the particular dispute in the case.” United 
States v. McPherson, 73 M.J. 393, 395 (C.A.A.F. 2014)  (ci-
tation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[I]f 
 
2 All statutory references in this part of the opinion are to 
Article 120, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 920 (2018), unless otherwise in-
dicated. For readability purposes, we refer to “subsection 
(b)(2)(A)” and “subsection (b)(3)(A)” for Article  120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, respectively. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
the statutory language is unambiguous and the statutory 
scheme is coherent and consistent,” the inquiry is done. Id. 
“Whether the statutory language is ambiguous is deter-
mined ‘by reference to the language itself, the specific con-
text in which that language is used, and the broader con-
text of the statute as a whole.’  ” Id. (quoting Robinson v. 
Shell Oil Co., 519 U.S. 337, 341 (1997)). 
When we engage in this analysis, the Court  “ ‘typically 
seeks to harmonize independent provisions of a statute.’ ” 
United States v. Kelly , 77 M.J. 404, 407 (C.A.A.F. 2018) 
(quoting United States v. Christian , 63 M.J. 205, 208 
(C.A.A.F. 2006)). To this en d, this Court employs the sur-
plusage canon, which requires “that, if possible, every word 
and every provision is to be given effect and that no word 
should be ignored or needlessly be given an interpretation 
that causes it to duplicate another provision or to have no 
consequences.” United States v. Sager , 76 M.J. 158, 161 
(C.A.A.F. 2017). 
1. Text of Article 120(b), UCMJ 
Article 120(b), UCMJ, criminalizes sexual assault in the 
military and defines multiple ways in which the Govern-
ment may prove the offense. Article 120(b), UCMJ, pro-
vides in relevant part: 
(b) SEXUAL ASSAULT. —Any person subject to 
this chapter who—  
(1) commits a sexual act upon another person 
by—  
(A) threatening or placing that other per-
son in fear; 
(B) making a fraudulent representation 
that the sexual act serves a professional 
purpose; or 
(C) inducing a belief by any artifice, pre-
tense, or concealment that the person is 
another person; 
(2) commits a sexual act upon another 
person— 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
(A) without the consent of the other person; 
or 
(B) when the person knows or reasonably 
should know that the other person is 
asleep, unconscious, or otherwise unaware 
that the sexual act is occurring; or  
(3) commits a sexual act upon another person 
when the other person is incapable of consent-
ing to the sexual act due to— 
(A) impairment by any drug, intoxicant, or 
other similar substance, and that condition 
is known or reasonably should be known by 
the person; or 
(B) a mental disease or defect, or physical 
disability, and that condition is known or 
reasonably should be known by the person;  
is guilty of sexual assault and shall be punished 
as a court-martial may direct. 
The article defines “consent” as “a freely given agree-
ment to the conduct at issue by a competent person” and 
explicitly states that “[a]ll the surrounding circumstances 
are to be considered in determining whether a person gave 
consent.” Article 120(g)(7)(A), (C), UCMJ. The article sepa-
rately defines “incapable of consenting” as meaning that a 
person is “incapable of appraising the nature of the conduct 
at issue” or “physically incapable of declining participation 
in, or communicating unwillingness to engag e in, the sex-
ual act at issue.” Article 120(g)(8), UCMJ. 
In this case, the Government charged Appellant under 
Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, which criminalizes sexual as-
sault “without the consent” of a victim. The Government 
defends it s choice by arguing that the plain language of 
subsection (b)(2)(A) permits it to meet its burden of proof 
with evidence of JW’s lack of capacity to consent due to her 
level of intoxication. The Government dismisses Appel-
lant’s due process concerns, arguing that he was convicted 
of precisely the crime with which he was charged—sexual 
assault without consent —and that noth ing prevents 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Congress from enacting overlapping criminal statutes that 
provide the Government with multiple theories of liability. 
Our analysis begins, as it must, with the text of the stat-
ute. It is true, as the Government argues, that the language 
of subsection (b)(2)(A) does not expressly foreclose the Gov-
ernment from proving that JW did not consent by present-
ing evidence that she was incapable of consenting. But it is 
also true, as Appellant argues, that nothing in the lan-
guage of subsection  (b)(2)(A)—or in any other part of the 
article—forecloses Appellant’s interpretation that subsec-
tion (b)(2)(A) presumes that the victim was capable of con-
senting. However, when we look beyond the specific lan-
guage of subsection (b)(2)(A) and examine the “the specific 
context in which that language is used , and the broader 
context of the statute as a whole ,” we do not believe that 
subsection (b)(2)(A) can be read as broadly as the Govern-
ment suggests. McPherson, 73 M.J. at 395 (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (quoting Robinson, 519 U.S. at 341). 
Our analysis is guided by this Court’s decision in Sager, 
76 M.J. 158. There , the Court examined  the language of 
Article 120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ, which criminalized a sexual 
act upon another person “when the person knows or rea-
sonably should know that the other person is asleep, un-
conscious, or otherwise unaware that the sexual act is oc-
curring.” Id. at 161. The Court rejected the Government’s 
argument that the phrase “asleep, unconscious, or other-
wise unaware” created a single theory of criminal liability. 
Id. at 161-62. Noting Congress’s use of the disjunctive “or” 
and applying the “ordinary meaning” canon of statutory 
construction, the Court held that “asleep,” “unconscious,” 
and “otherwise aware” reflected separate theories of liabil-
ity. Id. (“In ordinary use the word ‘or’ . . . marks an alter-
native which generally corresponds to the word ‘either.’ ” 
(alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Earl T. Crawford, The Construction of  Statutes 
§ 188 (1940))). The Court further noted that the Govern-
ment’s theory would violate the canon against surplusage, 
by stripping the words “asleep,” “unconscious,” and “or” of 
any meaning. Id. at 162 ( “[T]he canon against surplusage 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
is strongest when an interpretation would render superflu-
ous another part of the same statutory scheme.”  (quoting 
Yates v. United States, 574 U.S. 528, 543 (2015))).  
The same logic applies to the Government’s argument 
in this case. Under the Government’s theory, every sexual 
act committed upon a victim who is incapable of consenting 
under subsection (b)(3)(A) would also qualify as a sexual 
assault under subsection (b)(2)(A) because the victim did 
not consent. The Supreme Court, however, has repeatedly 
instructed that courts must “give effect, if possible, to every 
word of a statute. ” See, e.g., Roberts v. Sea-Land Services, 
Inc., 566 U.S. 93, 111 (internal quotation mar ks omitted) 
(quoting Duncan v. Walker, 533 U.S. 167, 174 (2001)). The 
Government’s preferred approach would defy this guidance 
by rendering subsection (b)(2)(A) “practically devoid of sig-
nificance,” Leocal v. Ashcroft, 543 U.S. 1, 12 (2004), and rel-
egating subsection (b)(3)(A) to mere surplusage without 
any purpose or effect. 
Rendering subsection (b)(3)(A) as surplusage would be 
especially problematic because it would allow the Govern-
ment to circumvent the mens rea requirement that Con-
gress specifically added to the offense of sexual assault of a 
victim who is incapable of consenting. To achieve a convic-
tion under subsection (b)(3)(A), the Government must 
prove not only that the victim was incapable of consenting 
but also that the victim’s condition was known or reasona-
bly should have been known by the accused. However, be-
cause subsection (b)(2)(A) only requires that the sexual act 
be performed “without the consent” of the victim (regard-
less whether the accused knew or should have known of 
that condition) , if the Government can establish the ab-
sence of consent by  proving that the victim was incapable 
of consenting, then the Government can obtain an incapa-
ble-of-consent conviction under subsection (b)(2)(A) with-
out proving the accused’s mens rea beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Indeed, this is exactly what may have happened in 
Appellant’s case. The military judge may have convicted 
Appellant of sexual assault on the theory that JW was in-
capable of consenting without the Government proving 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
that Appellant knew or should have known that she was 
incapable. We agree with Appellant that this possibility 
raises serious due process concerns. 
To avoid these concerns, and consistent with the 
language and structure of Article 120, UCMJ, we hold that 
subsection (b)(2)(A) and subsection  (b)(3)(A) establish 
separate theories of liability . Subsection  (b)(2)(A) 
criminalizes the performance of a sexual act upon a victim 
who is capable of consenting but d oes not consent. 
Subsection (b)(3)(A) criminalizes the performance of a 
sexual act upon a victim who is incapable of consenting to 
the sexual act due to impairment by any drug, intoxicant, 
or other similar substance  when the victim’s condition is 
known or reasonably should be  known by the accused.  Of 
course, nothing prevents the Government from charging a 
defendant with both offenses under inconsistent factual 
theories and allowing the trier of fact to determine whether 
the victim was capable or incapable of consenting.  See 
United Staes v. Elespuru, 73 M.J. 326, 330 (C.A.A.F. 2014) 
(recognizing that the “ complexity of Article 120, 
UCMJ, . . . make[s] charging in the alternative an 
unexceptional and often prudent decision”). But what the 
Government cannot do is charge one offense under one 
factual theory and then argue a different offense and a 
different factual theory at trial. Doing so robs the 
defendant of his constitutional “right to know what offense 
and under what legal theory he will be tried and convicted.” 
United States v. Riggins , 75 M.J. 78, 83 (C.A.A.F. 2016)  
(citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted).  
2. Legal Sufficiency of Appellant’s Conviction 
To convict Appellant of sexual assault in violation of Ar-
ticle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, the Government was required to 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Appellant: (1) com-
mitted a sexual act upon JW, and (2) that Appellant did so 
“without the consent” of JW. Here, it is undisputed that 
Appellant committed a sexual act upon JW. And even 
though there is no direct evidence that Appellant engaged 
in sexual intercourse “without the consent” of JW, the Gov-
ernment presented significant  circumstantial evidence on 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
the point. 3 Nevertheless, we agree with Appellant that 
some of the Government’s arguments at trial raise signifi-
cant due process concerns about his conviction.4 
To prove the absence of consent, trial counsel: 
• Argued not only that JW would not have con-
sented but also that JW was incapable of con-
senting due to alcohol intoxication.  
• Presented the testimony of an expert witness 
who estimated that JW’s blood alcohol level was 
between 0.175 and 0.19 at the time of the sexual 
act and opined that JW would have had dimin-
ished mental capacity.  
• Pointed to the testimony of multiple witnesses, 
saying “[e]veryone who had any interaction with 
[JW] knew she was too intoxicated to function 
that night,” and that their testimony confirmed 
that JW “met the definition of an incompetent 
person before the accused took her to his room.” 
• Argued that the barracks CCTV footage showed 
that when JW went to Appellant’s room, she 
 
3 This evidence includes: (1) testimony that JW had no prior 
relationship with Appellant; (2) testimony that JW would never 
have sex while on her period; (3) testimony that JW would not 
have pushed a tampon so far inside of herself; (4) testimony that 
JW made a morning-after report to the CQ desk after she real-
ized something was wrong; (5) testimony that JW was upset; 
(6) testimony that Appellant initially denied that he had en-
gaged in any sexual acts with JW; and (7) testimony that JW 
locked herself in Appellant’s bathroom.  
4 In his supplement to his petition for review, Appellant 
asked this Court to decide whether his “conviction for sexual as-
sault without consent should be reversed?” Appellant argued 
both that his conviction was legally insufficient and that there 
had been a constructive amendment to the charged offense. This 
Court granted review only of the legal sufficiency issue. Men-
doza, 84 M.J. at 105 (order granting review). Accordingly, we 
consider any due process concerns only through the narrow lens 
of legal sufficiency. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
“was completely out of it. She’s stumbling. She’s 
walking into the walls, bumping into objects, and 
she has no idea what’s going on here.” 
• Pointed to Appellant’s own statements in which 
Appellant admitted that JW was “really drunk” 
and that “she wasn’t able to give consent.” 
The Government’s arguments  before this Court also 
make clear that the Government presented this evidence 
at trial to establish that JW was incapable of consenting 
and therefore there was an absence of consent. 5 But as we 
explained above, that is a different theory of criminal lia-
bility and a different offense than the one the Government 
charged.  
Under the actual charged offense, Article  120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, it is not clear how the evidence of JW’s intoxication 
factored into either the decision of the military judge or the 
opinion of the ACCA. With respect to the mili tary judge, 
the Government states: “Whether Ms. JW was completely 
incapacitated by alcohol or whether she was merely intox-
icated to a point that her resistance was significantly re-
duced was a question of fact properly before the military 
judge for consideration.”  But nothing in the recor d indi-
cates whether the military judge found that JW was capa-
ble of consenting but did not, or that JW was incapable of 
consenting and thus could not. Similarly, in upholding the 
factual sufficiency of Appellant’s conviction, the ACCA re-
lied on several factors, including “the victim’s high level of 
intoxication.” Mendoza, 2023 CCA LEXIS 198, at *8, 2023 
 
5 See Brief of Appellee at  8, United States v. Mendoza , No. 
23-0210 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023)  (“evidence that a victim could 
not consent, is also evidence that they did not consent”); id . at 
12 (“The service courts of criminal appeals (CCAA)  [sic] agree 
that the government may meet its burden of proving ‘ without 
consent’ by relying mainly on evidence of extreme intoxication”  
(footnote omitted)); id. at 20 (“the direct evidence of incapacita-
tion through intoxication, on its own, is overwhelming evidence 
that Ms. JW did not consent”); id. at 21 (“If someone is incapable 
of giving consent, clearly this is a factor in determining whether 
there was consent.”). 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
WL 3540415, at *3. The ACCA’s express reliance on the ev-
idence of JW’s intoxication —without any explanation of 
how or why that evidence factored into its analysis—raise s 
serious questions about the legal and factual sufficiency of 
Appellant’s conviction. 
Of course, we are mindful that the ACCA did not have 
the benefit of our decision holding that Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UMCJ, establish separate 
theories of liability. This likely explains the lack of clarity 
in the ACCA’s decision with respect to how it viewed and 
used the evidence of JW’s intoxication. And although this 
Court does not review the factual sufficiency of convictions 
when we review cases under Article  67, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 867 (2018), we “retain the authority to review factual suf-
ficiency determinations of the CCAs for the application of  
‘correct legal principles,’ but only as to matters of law.” 6 
United States v. Clark , 75 M.J. 298, 300 (C.A.A.F. 2016) 
(quoting United States v. Leak, 61 M.J. 234, 241 (C.A.A.F. 
2005)). Indeed, in the past we have remanded cases when 
there is an “open question” whether the CCA’s factual suf-
ficiency analysis applied correct legal principles. United 
States v. Thompson, 83 M.J. 1, 5 (C.A.A.F. 2022) (quoting 
United States v. Nerad, 69 M.J. 138, 147 (C.A.A.F. 2010)). 
In our view, the ACCA’s opinion presents an open ques-
tion whether it improperly considered the evidence of JW’s 
intoxication as proof of JW’s inability to consent and there-
fore proof of the absence of consent. To be clear, our hold-
ing—that subsection  (b)(2)(A) and subsection (b)(3)(A) cre-
ate separate theories of liability—does not bar the trier  of 
 
6 Congress amended Article  67(c), UCMJ, in 2021, but that 
amendment only applies to offenses that occurred on or after 
January 1, 2021. William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-283, 
§ 542(e)(2), 134 Stat. 3388, 3612-13. Because the alleged offense 
in this case occurred in July 2020, the amended article does not 
apply to this case. This opinion makes no comment on what 
changes, if any, that amendment had on this Court’s authority 
to review the factual sufficiency of offenses committed after Jan-
uary 1, 2021. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
fact from considering evidence of the victim’s intoxication  
when determining whether the victim consented. See Arti-
cle 120(g)(7)(C), UCMJ  (“All the surrounding circum-
stances are to be considered in determining whether a per-
son gave consent. ”). Nothing in the article bars t he 
Government from offering evidence of an alleged victim’s 
intoxication to prove the absence of consent .7 Conversely, 
nothing bars the defense from offering the same evidence 
to sow reasonable doubt. 8 But what the Government can-
not do is prove the absence of consent under Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, by merely establishing that the 
victim was too intoxicated to consent. 
In this case, the Government argued that the evidence 
established both that JW would not have consented to the 
sexual act and that she was incapable of consenting to the 
sexual act. The ACCA’s opinion affirming Appellant’s con-
viction did not specify whether the ACCA found that JW 
was capable of consenting, stating only that the evidence 
established that Appellant engaged in sexual intercourse 
with a victim whom he knew to be “highly intoxicated.”  
Mendoza, 2023 CCA LEXIS 198, at *10, 2023 WL 3540415, 
 
7 In this case, the Government argues that evidence of a vic-
tim’s intoxication may be used to show that alcohol was used “to 
reduce a victim’s resistance.” Brief of Appellee at 17 n.12, United 
States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023) (citation 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
8 See United States v. Mendoza, __ M.J. __, __ (20) (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (Sparks, J. concurring in part and dissenting in part  and 
in the judgment) (“Given the expert and lay testimony presented 
at trial, evidence of [the victim’s] intoxication provides more ba-
sis for reasonable doubt than it does circumstantial evidence 
that she did not consent.”) ; see also Christine Chambers Good-
man, Protecting the Party Girl: A New Approach for Evaluating 
Intoxicated Consent, 2009 B.Y.U. L. Rev. 57, 76 (2009) (recogniz-
ing “that men as well as women can become more aggressive af-
ter consuming alcohol” (citation omitted) ); Lori E. Shaw, Title 
IX, Sexual Assault, and the Issue of Effective Consent: Blurred 
Lines— When Should “Yes” Mean “No”?, 91 Ind. L.J. 1363, 1372 
(2016) (noting that alcohol can lead to escalatory sexual contact 
and an ultimate feeling that something went “terribly wrong”).  
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
at *3. Recognizing the significance of our holding with re-
spect to Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, and the prominent 
role intoxication evidence played in Appellant’s trial, we 
believe that the ACCA should reconsider the factual and 
legal sufficiency of Appellant’s conviction  in light of this 
opinion. Remanding to the ACCA will also give the parties 
a full and fair opportunity to be heard on the legal and fac-
tual sufficiency of Appellant’s conviction under Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ. 
We therefore set aside the ACCA’s decision and remand 
the case for a new  review under  Article 66, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 866 (2018) . We express no view  on whether the 
evidence is factually or legally sufficient to support Appel-
lant’s conviction for a violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ, and instead leave that question  for the ACCA to 
decide.  
III. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is set aside. The record of trial is returned to 
the Judge Advocate General of the Army for remand to the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals for a new 
factual and legal sufficiency  review under Article 66, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (2018). 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting in 
part and in the judgment.  
I join part II(B)(1) of the majority opinion because I 
agree with the majority that Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, 
and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, create separate theories of 
criminal liability. 10 U.S.C. § 920 (2018). The majority 
acknowledges, correctly in my opinion, that “[t]he Govern-
ment’s approach—which conflated two different and incon-
sistent theories of criminal liability—raises significant due 
process concerns.” United States v. Mendoza, __ M.J. __, __ 
(3) (C.A.A.F. 2024). And I am in complete agreeme nt with 
the majority that:  
what the Government cannot do is charge one of-
fense under one factual theory and then argue a 
different offense and a different factual theory at 
trial. Doing so robs the defendant of his constitu-
tional “right to know what offense and under what 
legal theory he will be tried and convicted.” 
Id. at __ (13) (quoting United States v. Riggins, 75 M.J. 78, 
83 (C.A.A.F. 2016)). The majority even goes so far as to ex-
plain that in this case “[t]he military judge may have con-
victed Appellant of sexual assault on the theory that JW 
was incapable of consenting without the Government prov-
ing that Appellant knew or should have known that she 
was incapable.” Id. at __ (12-13). Again, I agree. 
It is in deciding where we go from this point that the 
majority and I disagree. I nstead of finding  that the evi-
dence is legally insufficient or that Government  violated 
Appellant’s due process right to fair notice by arguing an 
uncharged factual and legal theory of liability  at trial and 
testing the error for prejudice , the majority instead con-
cludes that the appropriate remedy in this case is to re-
mand the case to the United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals (ACCA) for a new legal and factual sufficiency re-
view in which the ACCA can explain “how or why the evi-
dence of JW’s intoxication factored into its analysis.” Id. at 
__ (3). With this I cannot agree. 
First, I believe that the majority  misconstrues Appel-
lant’s argument when it claims that he “argues that the ev-
idence was legally insufficient because the Government 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
2 
 
relied solely on circumstantial evidence.” Id. at __ (6-7). Ap-
pellant does not argue that the Government can never 
prove lack of consent by circumstantial evidence. Rather, 
he argues that when the Government charges “without 
consent” the burden of proof rests upon the Government to 
present legally sufficient evidence that affirmatively points 
to a lack of consent vice evidence that points to a lack of  
capacity to consent— a separate factual and legal theory . 
Brief of Appellant at 19-20, United States v. Mendoza, No. 
23-0210 (C.A.A.F. Nov. 27, 2023) .1 In short, Appellant ar-
gues that the Government failed to present legally suffi-
cient evidence that the victim did not consen t, despite the 
evidence presented that she may have been incapable of 
consent. He further argues that to affirm his conviction us-
ing evidence of an uncharged factual and legal theory 
would violate his due process right to fair notice. I agree—
and I believe the majority does as well. 
Nevertheless, the majority concludes  that the correct 
result here is to remand this case to the ACCA for a new 
legal and factual sufficiency review in light of this opinion. 
Just how the ACCA’s review must change is not entirely 
clear. On the one hand, the majority  states, “[u]nder the 
actual charged offense, Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, it is not 
clear how the evidence of JW’s intoxication factored into 
either the decision of the military judge or the opinion of 
the ACCA.” Mendoza, __ M.J. at __ (15). However, the ma-
jority later explains that its holding “does not bar the trier 
of fact from considering evidence of the victim’s 
 
1 Similarly, in dissenting from the ACCA opinion in this case, 
Senior Judge Walker explained, “[t]he charged offense requires 
the government to affirmatively prove the victim did not consent 
and the government failed to satisfy its burden on this essential 
element.” United States v. Mendoza, No. ARMY 20210647, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 198, at *14, 2023 WL 3540415, at *5 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. May 8, 2023) (unpublished) (Walker, S.J., dissenting). Sen-
ior Judge Walker further explained, “[t]he government cannot 
rely exclusively on the victim’s lack of memory due to intoxica-
tion as a proxy for satisfying its burden to prove a lack of con-
sent, which is what occurred in this case.” Id. at *15, 2023 WL 
3540415, at *6.  
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
3 
 
intoxication when determining whether the victim con-
sented.” Id. at __ ( 16-17) (“All the surrounding circum-
stances are to be considered in determining whether a per-
son gave consent. ” (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Article 120(g)(7)(C) )). To that end, the majority 
does not appear concerned that the ACCA considered evi-
dence of JW’s intoxication, but only “whether it improperly 
considered the evidence of JW’s intoxication as proof of 
JW’s inability to consent and therefore proof of the absence 
of consent.” Id. at (16) (emphasis added). 
The majority’s focus on whether the ACCA properly con-
sidered evidence of JW’s intoxication in determining 
whether the G overnment presented sufficient evidence to 
convict Appellant of the charged crime ignore s the real is-
sue in this case—the Government’s violation of Appellant’s 
due process right to fair notice by charging Appellant with 
sexual assault without consent, but arguing at trial that he 
was guilty because JW was incapable of consent. This does 
not merely raise serious due process concerns. This is a vi-
olation of Appellant’s due process right to fair notice. No 
explanation from the ACCA about how it considered the 
evidence of JW’s intoxication will change the fact that Ap-
pellant’s due process rights were violated at trial, long be-
fore this case reached the ACCA. 
For the reasons explained below, I believe that the only 
options in this case are for this Court to find the evidence 
legally insufficient or , if the evidence is legally sufficient,  
to find that the Government violated Appellant’s due pro-
cess right to fair notice. Both routes require reversal. Nei-
ther leads to a second legal and factual sufficiency review 
by the ACCA. After reviewing the record in this case, I find 
the evidence is legally insufficient to affirm Appellant’s 
conviction and would dismiss this case with prejudice. I 
therefore respectfully dissent.  
I. Background 
Given the nature of legal sufficiency review and the low 
bar to uphold a conviction, I believe it is necessary to ex-
plain the facts in detail. I apologize for restating facts al-
ready addressed by the majority , but I believe it is  
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
4 
 
necessary to paint the complete picture of this case  before 
reviewing the legal question at issue. 
Appellant and JW were both stationed at Camp Casey, 
in South Korea. On the evening of July 11, 2020, JW went 
out to dinner with friends. She testified about what she re-
members from that night after getting back from dinner as 
follows: “I remember getting back to the barracks, there’s 
a whole bunch of people out front drinking and whatnot, 
and I remember seeing Sergeant [B] from S2, and he had a 
bottle of vodka. I remember drinking that and that’s the 
last thing I remember from that night.” 
She testified that her final memories from that evening 
were around 11:00 p.m.  The next thing she remembered 
was waking up to a knock on her barrack’s room door the 
following morning. 
It is undisputed that JW was intoxicated that evening. 
It is also undisputed that JW has no memory of having sex 
with Appellant and could not testify whether she consented 
to having sex with Appellant. Instead, her testimony con-
sisted of claims that she would not have consented to sex 
with Appellant under the circumstances, including her lack 
of a social relationship with Appellant and the fact that she 
was menstruating at the time.  
Video evidence presented at trial clearly shows Appel-
lant and JW entering Appellant’s room at approximately 
2:08 a.m. on July 12, 2020. Before entering the room, JW  
appeared to be intoxicated, but seemed aware of what was 
happening and was able to walk on her own. As they ap-
proached Appellant’s room, Appellant touched JW’s crotch. 
This touching constituted the basis for the abusive sexual 
contact specification of which Appellant was found not 
guilty.  
Appellant and JW remained in the room for slightly 
more than one hour, leaving the room at 3: 11 a.m. At that 
point, JW was leaning on Appellant as they walked back to 
her room. While JW was not walking on her own, she was 
walking with Appellant’s assistance and not simply being 
carried by Appellant, who is smaller in stature than JW. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
5 
 
JW awoke the following morning to a knock on her door. 
She answered the door and was greeted by Appellant, who 
returned her shoes to her. According to JW, she did not rec-
ognize Appellant and had no prior social interaction with 
him. She went back to sleep but awoke again to Appellant 
knocking. This time he asked if she was sure she was okay. 
It was at this point that JW realized she was no longer 
wearing her underwear from the previous night, despite 
still wearing her pants from the previous night.2 She went 
to the bathroom and discovered that her tampon had been 
pushed all the way inside her body. JW began to panic and 
eventually went to the hospital and underwent a sexual as-
sault forensic examination, which included obtaining DNA 
swabs from her vagina. According to her testimony at trial, 
JW “filed a report just to figure out what had happened.” 
The DNA test confirmed that she and Appellant engaged 
in sexual intercourse. 
A. Appellant’s Confession 
Appellant was interviewed by Army Criminal Investi-
gation Division Special Agent (SA) Dereck Williams . SA 
Williams first spoke to Appellant when he was canvassing 
the barracks. During this informal interview in the parking 
lot, Appellant told SA Williams that JW  had been in his 
room the prior night. After later identifying Appellant as a 
suspect, SA Williams formally interrogated Appellant in a 
recorded interview. 
During the interview Appellant admitted that JW was 
extremely intoxicated, but he initially denied having sex-
ual relations with her. After being confronted with the 
 
2 JW admitted at trial that the sports bra and underwear she 
had been wearing the previous night were located on the floor of 
her room. JW’s testimony also suggests that she had been wear-
ing a pad rather than a tampon on the night of the assault, be-
cause she describes the photo showing her underwear as “that is 
a photo of the underwear I was wearing with the pad I had been 
wearing.” JW also admitted that she could not recall when she 
put her tampon in, claiming “it would have been the day prior,” 
which suggests it happened during the period of time for which 
she has no memory. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
6 
 
CCTV footage of them entering his room, Appellant admit-
ted that they had sex, but claimed it was consensual.  He 
then admitted that he knew she was too intoxicated to con-
sent and made a written confession. In his written confes-
sion, Appellant explained that he and JW  began to flirt 
while they were drinking in the day room: 
She leaned in and was whispering in my ear and 
kissing my neck and I pulled away initially how-
ever, became overwhelmed with emotion to give in 
and ignore all the signs and my own words [warn-
ing SGT RC that she was intoxicated]. I invited 
her down to my room and she followed in the pro-
cess [I] groped her groin and thigh in the hallway. 
When we came into the room she initially sat on 
the bed and I the couch after a bit of conversation 
I got up to get a beer and we kissed, while kissing 
I asked her “is this ok ay?” she replied “show me 
what you got.” We both began to remove clothing 
individually and I proceeded to lie down on the 
bed, she proceeded to give me oral sex and then I 
asked her to lie on her back. I then asked her to 
get ontop [sic] of me, then I asked her to once 
again lie on her back. . . . She then went into the 
bathroom and closed the door and turned the 
shower on while she went to throw up. She did not 
throw up and [I] knocked on the door asking if she 
was ok twice both time [sic] she said she was  ok. 
She opened the door the second time and fell back 
onto the toilet and I had to help her up, she then 
fell back again and I then helped her up out of the 
bathroom and onto my sink. 
In response to specific questions from SA Williams, Appel-
lant admitted that JW was “[o]verly intoxicated,” that she 
was not capable of giving consent when they had sex, and 
that he knew “it was wrong to conduct sex acts on SPC [JW] 
when she was incapable of giving consent.” 
B. The Charge 
The Government charged Appellant with committing a 
sexual act upon JW, by penetrating her vulva with his pe-
nis, without her consent, in violation of Article 120(b)(2)(A), 
UCMJ. Appellant was not charged with sexual assault 
while the victim was incapable of consenting due to 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
7 
 
impairment by an intoxicant, in violation of Article 
120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ.3 
C. Trial 
At trial, the Government argued that the evidence 
would show that Appellant committed the charged sexual 
acts without JW’s consent. JW testified that she did not re-
member having sex with Appellant , but that she would 
never have had sex while on her period, nor would she have 
had sex with her tampon in.  
The Government presented expert testimony from Dr. 
RW, an expert in forensic biology with an emphasis on the 
effects of alcohol on behavior . Dr. RW testified that a 
“blackout” from drinking can involve either partial or total 
memory loss for a portion of the drinking episode. He ex-
plained that blackouts typically occur at a blood alcohol 
content (B.A.C.) of .14 of higher, with total memory loss 
typically occurring at .2 or higher. Dr. RW estimated the 
victim’s B.A.C. on the night in question was between .175 
and .19.  
Additionally, Dr. RW testified that individuals in a 
state of blackout can still engage in voluntary behavior. Dr. 
RW explained that after a blackout individuals attempt to 
piece together what happened during that period of time:  
And oftentimes they’re doing that based on their 
own personal values. So oftentimes it’s, you know, 
I typically do this, but, you know, so that must be 
what happened kind of situation. So that’s how a 
person often tries to put together the pieces of the 
memory. And then oftentimes they may find out 
from another person, when finding out what ex-
actly happened during that memory, that it might 
not be what they expected because of alcohol. 
Dr. RW also explained that “as the blood alcohol level in-
creases, a person may become more reckless, acts in 
 
3 The Government also charged Appellant with one specifi-
cation of abusive sexual contact  without consent, in violation of 
Article 120(d), UCMJ, for touching JW’s groin without her con-
sent. Appellant was found not guilty of that specification. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
8 
 
sexually provocative ways or aggressive, and it also im-
pairs a person’s reaction time, comprehension, and motor 
movements.”  
Dr. RW viewed the CCTV footage in this case and com-
mented upon JW’s demeanor before and after she entered 
Appellant’s room: 
So in reviewing the CCTV footage, I noticed 
there’s a significant difference when [JW] left her 
room, I guess it was at about 1:47 and started to 
walk with—to [Appellant’s] actual room. She was 
much more—she didn’t appear to have a solid gait. 
So she had an uneven gait. She seemed a little bit 
staggery, but she was in stark contrast to what 
you saw once she left  [Appellant’s room], where 
she appeared to be much more sedated, where she 
was hanging on him and kind of being dragged 
along a little bit more. So that was just a star k 
difference between the two. And with that, it just 
made me think, you know, it’s very much like the 
biphasic effects of alcohol . . . we call it the bipha-
sic effects because you actually see a rise in the 
B.A.C., and during that rise, that’s usually called 
the ascending limb, that’s more stimulating. 
That’s the more outgoing, the more talkative. And 
each person’s slope can be different depending on 
what they’re drinking or their weight. A lot of dif-
ferent factors. 
And then once a person stops drinking, there’s 
about 30 to 45 minutes where the alcohol is being 
absorbed just to a person to reach their peak. 
That’s their peak B.A.C. And then at that point, 
the body starts to, you know —really the liver, 
starts to process and get rid of all that alcohol in 
the system. And that’s when you start to see some 
of those withdrawal. Essentially, your body’s go-
ing into alcohol withdrawal, the sedating effects. 
So you see a lot more of the person nodding off. A 
person really, real ly just looking sedated com-
pared to what they were like when they were ac-
tually consuming alcohol. 
Finally, Dr. RW testified  that JW had Benadryl in her 
system, which could explain her  steep decline from the 
point of entering Appellant’s room to the time she left, if 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
9 
 
she took it during the time she was in her own room around 
1:45 a.m. 
D. Government’s Closing Argument 
During closing argument trial counsel argued, “ [w]ith 
regard to consent, as you heard, [the victim] would not con-
sent. She could not.  She did not consent.”  (Emphasis 
added.) Trial counsel also argued, the victim “testified that 
she would not consent under those circumstances.” As trial 
counsel continued, he seemed to conflate blacking out with 
an inability to consent, claiming, JW “could not consent un-
der the circumstances. As she testified, she blacked out be-
fore 0145, while she was still outside, before Specialist [L]  
went to retrieve her.” 
When he discussed the legal definition of consent, trial 
counsel focused on the definition of “competent person” and 
all the evidence the military judge should consider to con-
clude that JW was not competent to consent to the sexual 
acts in question. “In other words,” he concluded, “every eye-
witness confirmed that Specialist [JW] was [sic] clearly—
met the definition of an incompetent person before the ac-
cused took her to his room. And most importantly is that 
the accused knew it too.” 
For all intents and purposes, the Government’s argu-
ment at trial was that JW did not consent to the charged 
sexual acts because she was not competent to consent given 
her state of intoxication. The Government never argued, 
nor did JW testify, that JW ever gave any indication to Ap-
pellant that her participation in the sexual acts was not 
voluntary. Rather, the Government’s sole theory of the case 
was that JW “could not consent under the circumstances.” 
II. Discussion 
A. Standard of Review 
This Court reviews questions of legal sufficiency de 
novo. United States v. King , 78 M.J. 218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 
2019). “ ‘The test for legal sufficiency is whether, after 
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the pros-
ecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
10 
 
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable 
doubt.’ ”4 United States v. Gutierrez , 73 M.J. 172, 175 
(C.A.A.F. 2014) (quoting United States v. Bennitt, 72 M.J. 
266, 268 (C.A.A.F. 2013) ). “This legal sufficiency assess-
ment draw[s] every reasonable inference from the evidence 
of record in favor of the prosecution.” King, 78 M.J. at 221 
(alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Robinson , 77 M.J. 294, 298 
(C.A.A.F. 2018)). As such, “[t]he standard for legal suffi-
ciency involves a very low threshold to sustain a convic-
tion.” Id. (quoting United States v. Navrestad, 66 M.J. 262, 
269 (C.A.A.F. 2008) (Effron, C.J., joined by Stucky, J., dis-
senting)). “The criterion thus impinges upon ‘jury’ discre-
tion only to the extent necessary to guarantee the funda-
mental protection of due process of law.” Jackson v. 
Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979). 
 In order to meet its low burden of establishing legal 
sufficiency in this case, the Government relies on evidence 
that JW was incapable of consenting to prove that she did 
not consent. As the majority opinion acknowledges, “there 
is no direct evidence that Appellant engaged in sexual in-
tercourse ‘without the consent’ of JW.” Mendoza, __ M.J. at 
__ ( 13-14). Nonetheless , the Government interprets the 
theories of sexual assault without consent and sexual as-
sault while the victim is incapable of consent under Article 
 
4 The majority claims that this case “departs from the usual 
‘reasonable trier of fact’ analysis because Appellant challenges 
the legal sufficiency of his sexual assault conviction on two unu-
sual grounds.” Mendoza, __ M.J. at __ (6). However, the majority 
fails to explain what different standard we must now use. I dis-
agree on this point and note that Appellant’s arguments are not 
so unusual. Appellant simply argues that the evidence used by 
the Government in this case is not legally relevant  because it 
supports an uncharged theory of liability and is therefore insuf-
ficient to support a finding of guilt y. The fact that we must de-
termine whether Appellant is correct that the Government can-
not use evidence of an uncharged legal theory to prove a charged 
legal theory does not change the ultimate question of whether 
the Government did, in fact, present legally sufficient evidence 
for a rational  trier of fact to find every element of the charge 
beyond a reasonable doubt. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
11 
 
120 as overlapping. Like the majority, I reject this inter-
pretation for a number of reasons. 
First, the Government’s argument that proof of incapac-
ity necessarily means proof of a lack of consent violates the 
statutory interpretation canon against  surplusage by ren-
dering all theories of sexual assault other than without 
consent superfluous. Second, contrary to the Government’s 
argument, the legal theories of lack of consent and incapac-
ity are legally contradictory rather than overlapping. And 
third, the Government violates a defendant’s due process 
right to fair notice when it convicts him using a legal theory 
that was not charged. 
B. The Government Argued at Trial That the Victim 
Was Incapable of Consenting 
In this case, Appellant argues that there is no evidence 
in the record that JW did not consent to the sexual activity. 
On the other hand, the Government argues that “there was 
ample direct evidence that [ JW] was incapable of consent 
and strong circumstantial evidence that [ JW] did not con-
sent.” Brief of Appellee at 11, United States v. Mendoza, 
No. 23 -0210 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023). However, as ex-
plained above, the Government’s argument to this Court 
that there is strong circumstantial evidence that JW  did 
not consent was never made at trial. Rather, the Govern-
ment’s entire argument at trial was that JW was incompe-
tent and therefore could not consent to sex.  
The Government now argues to this Court that “evi-
dence that a victim could not consent, is also evidence that 
[she] did not consent.” Id. at 8. Therefore, we must deter-
mine whether evidence of a victim’s incompetence neces-
sarily proves a lack of consent  in the context of Article 
120(b)(2)(A) before we can determine whether the Govern-
ment presented enough evidence to reach the low threshold 
of legal sufficiency for a charge of sexual assault without 
consent. For the reasons explained below, I believe that 
that evidence of a victim’s incompetence is not evidence of 
a lack of consent. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
12 
 
C. Canon Against Surplusage 
I agree with the majority  that the Government’s inter-
pretation of Article 120, UCMJ, violates the canon against 
surplusage. While I wish to avoid repeating the majority 
opinion’s analysis, I still find it necessary to examine the 
statutory scheme of Article 120, UCMJ, before moving on 
to the next portion of my opinion in order to be clear about 
what relevance, if any, evidence of JW’s intoxication has to 
proving a charge of without consent. 
 Congress has articulated multiple legal theories of sex-
ual assault. These can be broken down into three basic cat-
egories: (1) sexual assault when a victim is physically ca-
pable of consent but not legally capable of consent due to 
circumstances created by the accused; 5 (2) sexual assault 
when the victim is capable of consenting and does not con-
sent;6 and (3) sexual assault when the victim is physically 
incapable of consent and that condition is known or reason-
ably should be known by the accused.7 
 
5 Article 120(b)(1)(A), UCMJ—“ threatening or placing that 
other person in fear; ” Article 120(b)(1)(B), UCMJ—“ making a 
false representation that the sexual act serves a professional 
purpose;” or Article 120(b)(1)(C), UCMJ—“ inducing a belief by 
any artifice, pretense, or concealment that the person is another 
person.” 
6 Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ—“ without . . . consent.” 
7 Article 120(b)(2)(B), UCMJ —“ when the person knows or 
reasonably should know that the other person is asleep, uncon-
scious, or otherwise unaware”; Article 120(b)(3)— 
commits a sexual act upon another person when 
the other person is incapable of consenting to the 
sexual act due to— 
(A) impairment by any drug, intoxicant, or 
other similar substance, and that condition 
is known or reasonably should be known by 
the person; or  
(B) a mental disease or defect, or physical 
disability, and that condition is known or 
reasonably should be known by the person. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
13 
 
According to the Government’s interpretation of Article 
120, all theories of sexual assault committed when the vic-
tim is legally or physically incapable of consent could be 
charged under the single theory that the victim did not con-
sent. If, as the Government argues, evidence of an inability 
to consent is evidence of a lack of consent, the government 
could prove a lack of consent by proving that the victim was 
legally or physically incapable of consenting to the alleged 
conduct. Were this the case, there would be no need for the 
government to ever charge sexual assault when a victim is 
incapable of consent because it could simply prove a charge 
of sexual assault without consent using evidence of legal or 
physical incapacity.  
Because the Government’s interpretation would make 
every part of the statute articulating a theory of criminality 
except “without consent” unnecessary, the majority cor-
rectly rejects this interpretation.  
Furthermore, as the majority opinion points out, allow-
ing the government to charge sexual assault without con-
sent and to argue an incapacity theory would allow the gov-
ernment to avoid the obligation of proving beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the victim was actually incapable of 
consenting, and that the accused knew or reasonably 
should have known of the victim’s incapacity, which I will 
address in the next section. 
D. Lack of Consent and Incapacity Are Contradictory 
Theories of Criminality 
The majority and I agree that Articles 120(b)(2)(A) and 
120(b)(3)(A) present distinct factual and legal theories of 
sexual assault. However, as the majority points out, “noth-
ing prevents the Government from charging a defendant 
with both offenses under inconsistent factual theories and 
allowing the trier-of-fact to determine whether the victim 
was capable or incapable of consenting.” Mendoza, __ M.J. 
at __ (13) (citing United States v. Elespuru , 73 M.J. 326, 
330 (C.A.A.F. 2014)). Therefore , I find it necessary to ex-
amine the distinctions between these separate factual and 
legal theories of liability to determine the legal and logical 
relevance of the evidence presented in this case. As the 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
14 
 
majority points out, the majority’s holding “does not bar the 
trier of fact from considering evidence of the victim’s intox-
ication when determining whether the victim consented. ” 
Id. at __ (16-17) (citing Article 120(g)(7)(C), UCMJ). Given 
this permissible use of circumstantial evidence, we must 
examine whether direct evidence of  JW’s intoxication con-
stitutes logically and legally relevant circumstantial evi-
dence that JW did not, in fact, consent to the sexual activity 
in this case. 
To prove a charge of sexual assault without consent the 
government is required to prove that (1) the accused com-
mitted a sexual act upon the victim; and (2) the victim did 
not consent to the sexual act . Manual for Courts- Martial, 
United States pt. IV, para. 60.b.(2)(d) (2019 ed.) (MCM). In 
order to prove a charge  of sexual assault while the victim 
is incapable of consent the government must prove that (1) 
the accused committed a sexual act  upon the victim ; (2) 
while the victim is incapable of consenting; and (3) the ac-
cused knew or reasonably should have known the victim 
was incapable of consenting. MCM pt. IV, para. 60.b.(2)(e). 
According to Article 120(g)(7), UCMJ:  
 (A) The term “consent” means a freely given 
agreement to the conduct at issue by a competent 
person. An expression of lack of consent through 
words or conduct means there is no consent. Lack 
of verbal or physical resistance does not constitute 
consent. Submission resulting from the use of 
force, threat of force, or placing another person in 
fear also does not constitute consent. A current or 
previous dating or social or sexual relationship by 
itself or the manner of dress of the person involved 
with the accused in the conduct at issue does not 
constitute consent. 
 (B) A sleeping, unconscious, or incompetent 
person cannot consent. A person cannot consent to 
force causing or likely to cause death or grievous 
bodily harm or to being rendered unconscious. A 
person cannot consent while under threat or in 
fear or under the circumstances described in sub-
paragraph (B) or (C) or subsection (b)(1). 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
15 
 
(C) All the surrounding circumstances are to 
be considered in determining whether a person 
gave consent. 
Furthermore, the term “incapable of consenting” means the 
person is: 
(A) incapable of appraising the nature of the 
conduct at issue; or 
(B) physically incapable of declining participa-
tion in, or communicating unwillingness to engage 
in, the sexual act at issue. 
Article 120(g)(8), UCMJ. 
In his articulation of the elements of these offenses, the 
President has explained that legal incapacity  offenses re-
quire proof of the specific circumstances (e.g., placing the 
victim in fear) that result in the legal incapacity to consent. 
MCM pt. IV, para. 60.b.(2)(a)-(c). He has also explained 
that physical incapacity offenses require specific proof that 
the victim was incapable of consent. MCM  pt. IV, para.  
60.b.(2)(e)-(f). In contrast, a charge of sexual assault with-
out consent does not require the government to prove that 
the victim was capable of consenting. MCM  pt. IV, para.  
60.b.(2)(d). The Government acknowledges this in its brief 
when it admits “the government had no requirement to 
prove that the victim was competent; only that she did not, 
in fact, consent.” Brief of Appellee at 28, United States v. 
Mendoza, No. 23-0210 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023) (alterations 
in original removed) ( internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Motsenbocker, No. 201600285, 
2017 CCA LEXIS 539, *17 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. Aug 10, 
2017) (unpublished)). 
While it may at first blush appear logical to argue that 
proving the victim was incapable of consenting necessarily 
proves that the victim did not consent—or that evidence of 
JW’s intoxication constitutes circumstantial evidence that 
she did not consent— we need look no further than the ma-
jority’s explanation of the two offenses to reject this argu-
ment. “Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, criminalizes engaging 
in a sexual act with a person capable of consenting who did 
not consent, and Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, c riminalizes 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
16 
 
engaging in a sexual act with a person who is incapable of 
consenting . . .  .” Mendoza, __ M.J. at __ (3). If this is so, 
and I believe it is, then evidence establishing the victim’s 
incapacity necessarily disproves an allegation of sexual as-
sault without consent. Thus , a closer look reveals that 
these two theories of criminality are legally contradictory 
rather than overlapping.  Indeed, if Article s 120(b)(2)(A) 
and 120(b)(3)(A) constitute different and inconsistent the-
ories of liability, as the majority claims, they must be dif-
ferent in the proof required and not in name only  if the 
canon against surplusage is to mean anything.  
Any incapacity theory of sexual assault requires the 
government to prove beyond a reasonable doubt the vic-
tim’s legal or physical incapacity. When charged under an 
incapacity theory the accused could offer proof of the vic-
tim’s competence as a defense. For example, in Riggins, the 
appellant was able to disprove what the g overnment 
charged in the original sexual assault specifications “ by 
demonstrating that, at the time of the sexual activity, [the 
victim] was not in fear.” 75 M.J. at 82. On appeal, this 
Court explained that incapacity and lack of consent are dif-
ferent legal theories of liability because “ the fact that the 
Government was require d to prove a set of facts that re-
sulted in [the victim]’s legal inability to consent was not the 
equivalent of the Government bearing the affirmative re-
sponsibility to prove that [the victim]  did not, in fact, con-
sent.” Id. at 84. 
In contrast, as the Government acknowledges, when it 
charges sexual assault without consent it has no obligation 
to prove that the victim was competent. Unlike an incapac-
ity theory of criminality, evidence of the victim’s compe-
tency would offer no defense under a without consent the-
ory. In other words, a charge of sexual assault without 
consent is equivalent  to the government stipulating that 
the victim was competent to consent under the circum-
stances alleged. This is the root of the due process problem 
in this case. The Government charged the only theory of 
sexual assault for which proof of the victim’s competency to 
consent is not a defense, then argued at trial that the vic-
tim was incapable of consenting. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
17 
 
Consistent with the Government’s acknowledgment 
that a charge of sexual assault without consent does not 
require the Government to prove the victim’s competency, 
it seems apparent to me that the Government would be un-
able to charge both theories of sexual assault —without 
consent and incapacity—in the alternative  without neces-
sarily disproving one charge at trial in order to prove the 
other. This is precisely what Appellant is getting at when 
he argues that the government is required to present direct 
evidence of a lack of consent  in order to prove sexual as-
sault under Article 120(b)(2)(A). If the government seeks to 
meet its burden using circumstantial evidence, it is the 
government’s burden to demonstrate the logical relevance 
of such evidence to prove an element of the charge—e.g ., 
that evidence of intoxication makes it less likely that the 
victim would consent. 
The majority alludes to the long-standing practice of al-
lowing the government to plead in the alternative to accom-
modate any contingencies of proof. Mendoza, __ M.J. at __ 
(13) (citing Elespuru, 73 M.J. at 330).8 On this point, I 
would simply provide a cautionary note to military judges. 
Should they encounter such pleadings, at the close of the 
evidence they should make a careful determination as to 
which offense is supported by the evidence and which one 
may not be supported. Then only one of these contingent 
offenses should be sent to the trier of fact. After all, “[i]t is 
the Government’s responsibility to determine what offense 
to bring against an accused. Aware of the evidence in its 
possession, the Government is presumably cognizant of 
which offenses are supported by the evidence and which 
are not.” United States v. Morton, 69 M.J. 12, 16 (C.A.A.F. 
2010).  
Having explained the distinct and inconsistent nature 
of without consent and incapacity theories of liability, I 
 
8 In Elespuru, this Court evaluated the appellant’s argument 
that his convictions for abusive sexual contact and wrongful 
sexual contact were multiplicious, not whether conflicting 
theories of liability violate the due process right to fair notice. 73 
M.J. at 327.  
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
18 
 
now turn to the evidence in this case and examine whether 
the Government presented legally sufficient evidence of  
JW’s lack of consent. 
E. The Government Failed to Prove Sexual Assault 
Without Consent 
First, it has been well established that the Government 
argued at trial and on appeal that JW was legally incapable 
of consent on the night in question. If that is the case, the 
Government is legally incapable of proving Appellant’s 
guilt under Article 120 (b)(2)(A), UCMJ. However, despite 
the Government’s argument on this point, no court has 
found as a matter of law that JW was incapable of consent. 
Therefore, we must now examine whether the evidence 
presented at trial is sufficient to prove that JW did not, in 
fact, consent. 
It bears restating that there is no  direct evidence that 
JW did not consent to the sexual activity that took place. 
The Government argues, however, that there is “strong cir-
cumstantial evidence that [JW] did not consent.” Brief of 
Appellee at 11, United States v. Mendoza, No. 23 -0210 
(C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023). Similarly, the majority, despite 
not reaching the question of legal sufficiency, claims that 
there is “significant circumstantial evidence on this point.” 
Mendoza, __ M.J. at __ (13-14). According to the majority:  
This evidence includes: (1) testimony that JW had 
no prior relationship with Appellant ; (2) 
testimony that JW would never have sex while on 
her period; (3) testimony that JW would not have 
pushed a tampon so far inside of herself ; (4)  
testimony that JW made a morning-after report to 
the CQ desk after she realized something was 
wrong; (5) testimony that JW was upset; (6) 
testimony that Appellant initially  denied that he 
had engaged in any sexual acts with JW ; and (7) 
testimony that JW locked herself in Appel lant’s 
bathroom. 
Id. at __ (14 n.3).  
In making this assertion, the majority  neglects im-
portant facts and makes much of evidence that is subject to 
multiple explanations. For example, Appellant’s initial 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
19 
 
denial of engaging in sexual acts with JW could be inter-
preted as evidence of consciousness of guilt for engaging in 
sex with someone he believed was not capable of consent-
ing—as he explained in his confession  and the Government 
argued at trial—or  it could be interpreted as evidence that 
he did not want to confess to extramarital sexual conduct.  
But it is not enough for the G overnment to prove that Ap-
pellant had a guilty conscience, it must prove the specific 
elements of the crime for which Appellant feels guilty. 
Appellant did admit that he knew JW was incapable of 
consenting. But at no point during the interview was  Ap-
pellant provided with a legal definition of incapacity. While 
Appellant’s confession provides strong evidence that JW 
may have been too intoxicated to consent, it does not estab-
lish that she did not consent. Indeed, his confession de-
scribes JW as actively engaging in the sexual acts, rather 
than being unable to appreciate the nature of the conduct 
or unable to decline pa rticipation therein. See Article 
120(g)(7) (“ ‘incapable of consenting ’ means the person is  
(A) incapable of appraising the nature of the conduct at is-
sue; or (B) physically incapable of declining participation 
in, or communicating unwillingness to engage in, the sex-
ual act at issue”). 
Similarly, evidence that JW and Appellant lacked a 
prior relationship, testimony from JW that she would never 
have sex on her period and would never push a tampon so 
far inside herself, and evidence that JW seemed upset all 
ignore the overwhelming evidence that JW was intoxicated 
on the night in question and acting in ways uncharacteris-
tic of her normal behavior.  
Nor does JW’s immediate report provide any evidence 
that JW did not consent to the sexual acts in question. Ra-
ther than reporting a sexual assault, JW testified at trial 
that she “filed a report just to figure out what had hap-
pened.” It is precisely because of JW’s inability to testify 
that she was sexually assaulted that the Government must 
prove its case by circumstantial evidence. 
The Government argues that the JW’s intoxication is 
simply part of “all [the] surrounding circumstances [that] 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
20 
 
are to be considered in determining whether a person gave 
consent.” Brief of Appellee at 17, United States v. Mendoza, 
No. 23 -0210 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 26, 2023) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Article 120(g)(8)). To that end, the 
ACCA pointed to “the victim’s high level of intoxication” as 
evidence supporting a finding of guilty.  Mendoza, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 198, at *8, 2023 WL 3540415, at *3. However, 
this conclusion is at best questionable and at worst contra-
dicted by the expert testimony presented in this case. Spe-
cifically, the Government’s expert witness Dr. RW testified 
that “as the blood alcohol level increases, a person may be-
come more reckless, acts in sexually provocative ways or 
aggressive, and it also impairs a person’s reaction time, 
comprehension, and motor movements.” Dr. RW did not 
testify that an increased B.A.C. makes a person less likely 
to consent to sexual activity. 
Dr. RW also estimated that JW’s B.A.C. was between 
.175 to .19, which would result in her not acting like her 
“usual self.” Indeed, Sergeant RC testified that on the night 
in question JW “wasn’t acting like herself. Most of the en-
counters I’ve had with her she’s more of just kind of an in-
troverted, more to herself type person. This time she was 
more outgoing [and] started becoming flirtatious in a way.” 
Given the expert and lay testimony presented at trial, evi-
dence of JW’s intoxication provides more basis for reason-
able doubt than it does circumstantial evidence that she 
did not consent. 
While the Government points to testimony from JW  
that she would not have consented under these circum-
stances, the video evidence in this case shows she and Ap-
pellant entered his room together while they appear to be 
flirting, both intoxicated . In fact, the military judge —the 
sole fact-finder in this case— found Appellant not guilty of 
the charge of abusive sexual contact alleged to have oc-
curred just before they entered Appellant’s barracks room. 
The CCTV footage and Appellant’s admissions  leave no 
doubt that the touching took place, so we are left to con-
clude that the military judge did not believe JW did not 
consent to the touching in the hallway, nor that she was 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge SPARKS, concurring in part and dissenting 
in part and in the judgment 
 
21 
 
incapable of consenting as she entered Appellant’s room (as 
the Government argued at trial).  
Despite this finding by the military judge that neces-
sarily finds that JW consented to sexual contact moments 
before entering Appellant’s room, the Government would 
have us conclude that the evidence is sufficient for a ra-
tional trier of fact to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt 
that she did not  consent to sexual acts that took place at 
some point after entering the room. Given  JW’s lack of 
memory regarding whether or not she consented, the ex-
pert testimony from Dr. RW regarding the effects of alcohol 
and JW’s level of intoxication, and the substance of Appel-
lant’s confession, I cannot conclude that the evidence sup-
ports a finding that JW did not consent.  
In sum, after viewing the evidence in the light most fa-
vorable to the prosecution, I cannot conclude that any ra-
tional trier of fact could have found the essential elements 
of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. 
III. Conclusion   
Without consent and incapacity to consent are two sep-
arate theories of criminal liability. The Government made 
the decision to charge Appellant with sexual assault with-
out consent and therefore could not prove Appellant’s guilt 
by proving that JW was incapable of consent . The fact of 
the matter is the Government charged Appellant with the 
wrong offense and proceeded to trial with evidence that 
supported a different uncharged offense. A due process vi-
olation occurred at trial that a remand to the lower court 
simply cannot cure. Further, having reviewed the record in 
this case, I cannot conclude that a rationale trier of fact 
could be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that JW did 
not consent to the sexual acts that took place after she en-
tered Appellant’s room.  
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent  from the deci-
sion to remand and would dismiss Appellant’s conviction 
with prejudice. 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and dissenting in 
part. 
I concur with the Court ’s interpretation of  Arti-
cle 120(b)(2)(A), Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 
10 U.S.C. §  920(b)(2)(A) (2018). I disagree, however, with 
one aspect of the Court’s disposition of this appeal. Specif-
ically, while the Court remands the case for both a new le-
gal and factual sufficiency review, I would hold that the ev-
idence is legally sufficient and remand solely for a new 
factual sufficiency review. I therefore respectfully concur in 
part and dissent in part. 
I. Background 
In the supplement to his petition for review, Appellant  
asked this Court to decide “ [w]hether [his] conviction for 
sexual assault without consent should be reversed? ” He 
asserted that this Court should set aside the decision of the 
United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) 
because the evidence was legally insufficient. In the 
alternative, Appellant contend ed that allowing his 
conviction to stand based on the evidence admitted at trial 
would amount to a constructive amendment of the charged 
offense. 
This Court granted review of a modified version of the 
question that Appellant presented in his supplement, 
namely, “[w]hether Appellant’s conviction for sexual as-
sault without consent was legally sufficient.” United States 
v. Mendoza, 84 M.J. 105 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order granting 
review). The parties’ briefs, accordingly, focus on the legal 
sufficiency of the evidence of lack of consent under Article 
120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ. The Court, however, does not answer 
the granted question but instead remands the case so that 
the ACCA may perform both a new legal sufficiency review 
and a new factual sufficiency review. 
II. Legal Sufficiency 
Questions of legal sufficiency are reviewed de novo. 
United States v. Brown , 84 M.J. 124, 127 (C.A.A.F. 2024) 
(citing United States v. Wilson , 76 M.J. 4, 6 (C.A.A.F. 
2017)). Accordingly, this Court has the ability and author-
ity to decide whether the evidence is legally sufficient 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
2 
 
without any further review by the ACCA. I see no pruden-
tial reason not to do so in this case given that we specified 
the issue of legal sufficiency and  that the parties thor-
oughly briefed this issue. 
As the Court correctly explains, the bar for finding the 
evidence to be legally sufficient is “very low.” United States 
v. King, 78 M.J. 218, 221 (C.A.A.F. 2019)  (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (citation omitted). We must consider 
“whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most fa-
vorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could 
have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt.” United States v. Smith, 83 M.J. 350, 359 
(C.A.A.F. 2023) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quot-
ing United States v. Robinson, 77 M.J. 294, 297- 98 
(C.A.A.F. 2018)). 
The Court properly holds in this case that evidence that 
the victim was incapable of consenting because of intoxica-
tion generally cannot prove lack of consent in a case 
charged under Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ . This holding 
implicates the legal sufficiency of the evidence for finding 
Appellant guilty because, as one of the ACCA judges ob-
served, the “government’s primary evidence of lack of con-
sent in this case was the victim’s lack of memory due to in-
toxication and outward manifestation of intoxication .” 
United States v. Mendoza, No. ARMY 20210647, 2023 CCA 
LEXIS 198, at *12, 2023 WL 3540415, at *4 (A. Ct. Crim. 
App. May 8, 2023) (Walker, S.J., dissenting) (unpublished). 
But even if all of the intoxication evidence must be put 
aside, the record in this case still contains other evidence 
potentially relevant to the issue of consent. This Court may 
determine whether this other evidence is legally sufficient 
to sustain the finding that Appellant is guilty . United 
States v. Long, 81 M.J. 362, 364 (C.A.A.F. 2021) (assessing 
legal sufficiency in this manner). 
The other evidence in this case includes: (1) testimony 
that JW (the alleged victim) had no prior relationship with 
Appellant; (2) testimony that JW would never have sex 
while on her period; (3) testimony that JW would not have 
pushed a tampon so far inside of herself; (4) testimony that 
JW made a morning-after report to the Charge of Quarters 
(CQ) desk after she realized something was wrong ; (5) 
United States v. Mendoza, No. 23-0210/AR 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and dissenting in part 
3 
 
testimony that JW was upset; (6) testimony that Appellant 
initially denied that he had engaged in any sexual acts with 
JW; and (7) testimony that JW locked herself in Appellant’s 
bathroom. Based on this other evidence, I would hold that 
a rational trier of fact could have found that the element of 
lack of consent  under Article 120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ , was 
proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Accordingly, I would an-
swer the granted question in the affirmative , and I would 
not remand the case to the ACCA for further review of the 
legal sufficiency of the evidence. 
III. Factual Sufficiency 
While I would decide that the evidence was legally  
sufficient, I concur with the Court’s decision to remand the 
case for a new factual sufficiency  review. Although the 
granted question and the briefs in this appeal d o n ot 
address factual sufficiency, our new clarification of the 
relationship between Article  120(b)(2)(A), UCMJ, and 
Article 120(b)(3)(A), UCMJ, raises the question of whether 
the ACCA may have erred in its factual sufficiency 
analysis. Because this Court can not review questions of 
factual suffi ciency de novo , Appellant is entitled to have 
the ACCA perform a proper factual sufficiency review  in 
the first instance. 