This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
Brandon K. FLANNER, Staff Sergeant 
United States Marine Corps, Appellee 
 
No. 24-0093 
Crim. App. No. 202300134 
 
Argued May 7, 2024—Decided September 30, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Yong J. Lee (arraignment and motions) 
and Andrea C. Goode (motions) 
 
For Appellant: Colonel Joseph M. Jennings , USMC 
(argued); Major Tyler W. Blair, USMC, Major Mary 
Claire Finnen , USMC (on brief) ; Brian K. Keller, 
Esq. 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Commander Leah M. Fon-
tenot, JAGC, USN (argued). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge MAGGS and Judge HARDY joined. 
Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate dissenting 
opinion. Judge SPARKS filed a separate dissenting 
opinion. 
_______________ 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
This case raises the issue of whether Appellee had a 
right to appointed military defense counsel during a non-
custodial law enforcement interview with the Naval Crim-
inal Investigative Services (NCIS) he initiated before 
charges were preferred, after having invoked his right to 
have counsel present during a prior interview. The defense 
filed a pretrial motion to suppress Appellee’s statement to 
NCIS. The military judge granted the motion, and the Gov-
ernment appealed pursuant to Article 62, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice ( UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 862 (2018) . The 
United States Navy- Marine Corps Court of Criminal Ap-
peals (NMCCA) affirmed  the military judge’s ruling 
and denied the Government’s motions for panel and en 
banc reconsideration. The Judge Advocate General  of the 
Navy certified the following question to this Court: 
Did the military judge abuse her discretion when 
she suppressed Appellee’s non-custodial, pre-pre-
ferral, self-scheduled interview with law enforce-
ment in which Appellee waived the rights to coun-
sel and to remain silent? 
For the reasons stated below, we answer the certified 
question in the affirmative and reverse the decision of the 
NMCCA. 
I. Background 
Appellee, Staff Sergeant Flanner, is charged with one 
specification of larceny in violat ion of Article 121, UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 921 (2018), and one specification each of 
making a false claim and using a forged signature  in 
violation of Article 124, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 924 (2018). The 
NMCCA described the circumstances of  the charged 
offenses as follows: 
 In February 2020, Appellee was one of two 
contracting officers located in Kuwait who man-
aged all of the contracts for the United States Ma-
rine Corps [USMC] operating in that region. Be-
tween 14 February and 25 February 2020 
Appellee submitted four purchase vouchers, two 
on 18 February 2020 and two on 23 February 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
2020. On 16 May 2020 it was discovered these four 
purchase vouchers, representing more than 
$30,000 in government funds, were allegedly 
fraudulent. Appellee’s charges stem from this al-
leged theft of over $30,000 through the processing 
of fraudulent purchase voucher claims in Bahrain. 
United States v. Flanner, No. NMCCA 202300134, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 428, at *2, 2023 WL 6564919, at *1 (N-M. Ct. 
Crim. App. Oct. 10, 2023) (unpublished) (alteration in orig-
inal) (footnote omitted).  
On May 6, 2021, NCIS Special Agent (SA) SC attempted 
to interview Appellee. SA SC informed Appellee that he 
was suspected of  fraud, false official statements or false 
swearing, and forgery in violation of the UCMJ. After being 
advised of his rights, Appellee invoked his right to counsel, 
writing on a rights waiver form, “I would like to have a law-
yer present during questioning.” As a result, SA SC termi-
nated the interview. 
Appellee went to the Defense Services Office ( DSO) on 
two occasions seeking legal services related to his inter-
view. According to his trial defense counsel, in May of 2021, 
Appellee spoke with an attorney, and he returned to the 
DSO in June of 2021 to speak with an attorney, but he was 
not appointed military counsel. In September of 2021, Ap-
pellee asked his staff noncommissioned officer -in-charge 
(SNOIC) if he would receive military counsel for an inter-
view with NCIS. After conferring with the unit’s staff judge 
advocate (SJA), the SNOIC advised Appellee that counsel 
would be appointed to represent him only if charges were 
preferred.  The SNOIC relayed this advice to Appellee de-
spite the SJA’s admonition that the information was solely 
for the SNOIC’s awareness and his express direction to not 
share the information with Appellee as the SJA could not 
act as Appellee’s counsel. 
Based upon the SNOIC’s advice, Appellee—whose fam-
ily had moved away while he was on legal hold past his 
term of commitment awaiting resolution of this matter—
decided to schedule an interview with NCIS. He explained: 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
After learning that I could only be appointed coun-
sel if charges were preferred, I reached out to 
NCIS on 8 September 2021 to schedule an inter-
view. I reached out to NCIS because I believed 
that I could not do an interview with military 
counsel present. I only thought that I could do an 
interview with an attorney present if I hired a ci-
vilian attorney. 
SA SC documented Appellee’s request for an interview 
in a note that stated  in pertinent part, “Wants to come in 
for an interview [.] Was given incorrect info on lawyer by 
cmd[.] Explained preferral of charges = lawyer [.] No civ 
lawyer[.]” 
At the second interview in September of 2021, Appellee 
spoke with SA SC  and another special agent . SA SC con-
firmed Appellee’s desire to speak with NCIS despite his 
previous invocation of his right to have counsel present 
during the May 2021 interview; confirmed that Appellee 
understood that military defense counsel would be detailed 
only if charges were preferred; and confirmed that Appellee 
understood that he could have civilian counsel present  at 
his own expense if he so desired . Then, SA SC re -advised 
Appellee of his rights.  Appellee confirmed verbally and in 
writing that he understood and waived his rights to remain 
silent; to consult with an attorney prior to questioning; and 
to have retained or detailed counsel present during the in-
terview. He also confirmed that he understood he could ter-
minate the interview at any time for any reason.  During 
the interview, he denied any wrongdoing, but at one point 
when he was left alone  in the room, Appellee leaned back 
in his chair and said to himself, “Can’t believe I messed up.” 
Before trial, the defense  filed a motion to suppress the 
second interview. According to the “Defense Motion to Sup-
press Custodial Interrogation ,” Appellee was incorrectly 
advised by both his SNOIC and SA SC, and as a result, he 
did not understand that he had “an enumerated right” pur-
suant to the Fifth Amendment and Military Rule of Evi-
dence (M.R.E.) 305 to have counsel present  during the in-
terview upon request. Conceding that Appellee voluntarily 
waived his right to have counsel present for his interview, 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
the defense argued that the waiver was not valid because 
it was neither knowing nor intelligent where Appellee mis-
takenly “believed that he could only have a lawyer present 
if he hired a civilian lawyer or if charges were preferred 
against him.” 
The Government opposed the motion  in writing, argu-
ing that  Appellee was accurately advised, in accordance 
with Marine Corps policy, 1 that military defense counsel 
would not be detailed until charges were preferred and un-
derstood that he was under no obligation to speak to NCIS 
in the meantime. Moreover, the Government argued, Ap-
pellee voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived his 
right to counsel and spoke with NCIS in an attempt to “get 
his version of events in front of NCIS before the investiga-
tion proceeded any further.” Therefore, according to the 
Government, the waiver was valid  and the second inter-
view should not be suppressed.2 
 
1 The Government cited the Legal Support and Administra-
tion Manual (LSAM), see infra Part III.C., which requires detail-
ing of defense counsel after an accused has been placed in pre-
trial confinement, served notice of preferred charges, or notified 
of an administrative separation/board of inquiry package or ap-
pointment of an Article 32, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 832 (2018), inves-
tigating officer. The Government also cited a memorandum from 
the Chief Defense Counsel of the Marine Corps  which requires 
detailing of defense counsel for personnel not in confinement 
only after preferral of  charges or the appointment of an Article 
32, UCMJ, preliminary hearing officer. See CDC Policy Memo-
randum 3.1D para. 4.d.(1)(b) (Nov. 6, 2020). 
2 In his dissent, the Chief Judge asserts that trial counsel 
made a “clear-cut” concession that Appellee “rated counsel.” See 
Flanner, __ M.J. __, __ (3) (C.A.A.F. 2024) (Ohlson, C.J., dissent-
ing). Even if we were  bound by the Government’s concession 
with respect to a matter that was not litigated during the hear-
ing, which we are not, see United States v. Budka, 74 M.J. 219, 
220 (C.A.A.F. 2015)  (summary disposition) (“Neither the Court 
of Criminal Appeals, nor this Court, is bound by government 
concessions.” (citing cases)), we do not view trial counsel’s state-
ments to concede , clearly or otherwise,  that Appellee was sub-
jected to a custodial interrogation. Viewed in context, trial coun-
sel’s statements merely emphasized that Appellee understood he 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
After considering the parties’ arguments, the military 
judge made the following findings of fact: 
(1) “The actions of various actors in this case, to 
include the DSO, left the accused with an inaccu-
rate belief that he could not be appointed a lawyer 
until charges were preferred.” 
(2) “[T]he accused went forward with the inter-
view without a lawyer , based on that misunder-
standing.” 
(3) Appellee’s “actions showed that he truly de-
sired to have an attorney ”: first, he invoked his 
right to have counsel  present during his first in-
terview; second, “[h]e then made two separate at-
tempts to get an attorney by visiting the Defense 
Services Office, where he was turned away ;” and 
third, he “asked his chain of command a number 
of questions about how he could get an attorney.” 
 
did not have to submit to an interview without counsel. T rial 
counsel explained: 
 I understand why it would have been benefi-
cial for the accused to say, well, I want to give my 
story out in front of NCIS before charges are ever 
preferred. And I ’d like to have  some attorneys 
here to do that. He could have done that with a 
civilian attorney or he could have just not made 
any statement at all. 
Trial counsel  continued, “I get why he wanted  it, but that 
doesn’t mean he raided [sic] it or was entitled to it. ”After a re-
cess, trial counsel added: 
 [J]ust to clarify, that obviously the [Appellee] 
rated counsel, but as he demonstrated by his in-
voking it in the first interview, . . . he knowingly—
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived 
that right. He knew that if he invoked right to 
counsel, the interview would end because he had 
already did [sic] it once before. But he decided not 
to because he wanted to make a statement to 
NCIS.  
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
(4) Appellee’s efforts to get counsel “left him with 
the inaccurate belief, that he  could not get an at-
torney until charges were preferred.” 
(5) “[W]anting to do the interview in order to get 
the investigation moving, as he was passed [sic] 
his EAS and had already moved his family, he ac-
quiesced to an interview without having a lawyer 
present.” 
Based upon these findings, the military judge concluded 
that although the interview  was voluntary , Appellee’s 
waiver of the right to have counsel present during the in-
terview was neither knowing nor intelligent. Accordingly, 
she granted the motion to suppress. In making this ruling, 
the military judge did not cite any authority for her belief  
that Appellee had a right to have appointed military de-
fense counsel represent him at the second interview. 
The NMCCA affirmed this decision, concluding that the 
military judge’s findings of fact were not clearly erroneous 
and she did not abuse her discretion in determining  that 
Appellee’s waiver was not knowing or intelligent. Flanner, 
2023 CCA LEXIS 428, at *9, *13, 2023 WL 6564919, at *3, 
*5. The NMCCA rejected the Government’s argument, as-
serted for the first time on appeal,  that because Appellee 
voluntarily appeared for the second interview , it was non-
custodial and Appellee therefore had no right to counsel.  
Id. at *8-9, 2023 WL 6564919, at *3. Instead, the NMCCA 
assumed without deciding that Appellee had a Fifth 
Amendment right to counsel in the first interview which 
“reasonably carried over, through the intervening events,  
to the second interview.” Id. at *9 n.42, 2023 WL 6564919, 
at *4 n.42. 
Then, the NMCCA found no error in the military judge’s 
finding that Appellee had a mistaken belief he would be 
detailed counsel only after charges were preferred . Id. at 
*11, 2023 WL 6564919, at *4. Citing the Marine Corps de-
tailing policy the Government had identified in its opposi-
tion to the motion to suppress , the NMCCA reasoned that 
while military defense counsel must  be detailed once 
charges are p referred, military defense counsel may  be 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
detailed for a variety of reasons even before preferral; 
therefore, Appellee’s belief that he could not get detailed 
counsel until charges were preferred was inaccurate. Id. at 
*11-12, 2023 WL 6564919, at *4. 
Finally, the NMCCA held in light of the totality of the 
circumstances that the military judge did not err in con-
cluding that Appellee’s waiver of his right to counsel, while 
voluntary, was not knowing or intelligent. Id.  at *12- 13, 
2023 WL 6564919, at *5. The NMCCA explained: 
[T]he military judge considered the situation Ap-
pellee was faced with when making his decision to 
sign the rights waiver, including his desire to 
move the investigation forward since he was past 
the end of his active duty service and had already 
moved his family. She also properly considered 
the steps Appellee took prior to agreeing to the in-
terrogation, like visiting the DSO and talking to 
his chain of command in an effort to ex ercise his 
rights. The military judge also considered the evi-
dence presented ab out the advice Appellee was 
given regarding whether he could be detailed mil-
itary counsel and Appellee’s “ inaccurate belief 
that he could not get an attorney until charges 
were preferred.” Given this evidence, we find that 
the military judge, quite reasonably, found that 
Appellee’s waiver of his right to counsel was not 
made knowingly or intelligently because he did 
not have “full awareness of both the nature of the 
right being abandoned and the consequences of 
the decision to abandon it.”  Therefore, the mi li-
tary judge’s decision to suppress Appellee’s state-
ments to NCIS was well within the range of 
choices reasonably arising from the facts and the 
law. 
Id. at *12-13, 2023 WL 6564919, at *5 (footnotes omitted). 
II. Standard of Review 
In this Article 62, UCMJ, appeal, we directly review the 
military judge’s decision and consider the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the party that prevailed at trial—in 
this case, Appellee. United States v. Becker, 81 M.J. 483, 
488 (C.A.A.F. 2021). We review a military judge’s ruling on 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
a motion to suppress evidence for an abuse of discretion. 
United States v. Mott, 72 M.J. 319, 329 (C.A.A.F. 2013). 
“ ‘An abuse of discretion occurs when the trial court’s find-
ings of fact are clearly erroneous or if the court’s decision is 
influenced by an erroneous view of the law.’ ” Id. (quoting 
United States v. Freeman , 65 M.J. 451, 453 (C.A.A.F. 
2008)). We review de novo any legal conclusions supporting 
the suppression ruling, including the question of whether 
the accused was in custody for purposes of Miranda warn-
ings. United States v. Chatfield, 67 M.J. 432, 437 (C.A.A.F. 
2009) (citing Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436, 444 (1966)). 
III. Discussion 
The certified question asks  whether the military judge 
abused her discretion in suppressing Appellee’s second in-
terview. To answer this question, we must first consider 
Appellee’s assertions that he had a right to appointed mil-
itary defense counsel during the second interview pursuant 
to (A) the Fifth Amendment,  as implemented by M.R.E. 
305, (B) Article 31(b), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 831(b) (2018), and 
(C) Marine Corps policy. If we determine that he had such 
a right, we must then determine  whether he waived that 
right, and if there was no waiver, whether there was a vio-
lation of Appellee’s right to counsel. 
We conclude that none of these sources gives Appellee a 
right to appointed military defense counsel during a non-
custodial, pre -preferral, self- scheduled interview, and 
therefore, we need not determine whether Appellee waived 
such a right. Accordingly, we hold that the military judge 
abused her discretion in suppressing Appellee’s second in-
terview. 
A. Appellee Did Not Have a Fifth Amendment 
Right to Appointed Military Defense Counsel 
During the Second Interview 
The Fifth Amendment provides that no person “shall be 
compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against him-
self.” U.S. Const. amend. V. “The Supreme Court has inter-
preted the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrim-
ination to encompass two distinct rights: the right to 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
silence and the right to counsel specifically during pretrial 
questioning.” United States v. Seay , 60 M.J. 73, 77 
(C.A.A.F. 2004). 
In Miranda, the Supreme Court held that “if a person 
in custody is to be subjected to interrogation, he must first 
be informed in clear and unequivocal terms that he has the 
right to remain silent,” and “has the right to consult with a 
lawyer and to have the lawyer with him during interroga-
tion.” 384 U.S. at 467-68; see also United States v. Tempia, 
16 C.M.A. 629, 635, 37 C.M.R. 249, 255 (1967) (explaining 
that the Supreme Court’s decision in Miranda applies to 
the military justice system).  In accordance with Miranda, 
if a person in custody indicates that he wants an attorney, 
“the interrogation must cease until an attorney is present.” 
384 U.S. at 474. 
The Fifth Amendment right to counsel applies only dur-
ing custodial interrogations . Rhode Island v. Innis , 446 
U.S. 291, 300- 01 (1980) (“ Miranda safeguards come into 
play whenever a person in custody is subjected to either ex-
press questioning or its functional equivalent.” ( emphasis 
added)). “To be considered in custody for purposes of Mi-
randa, a reasonable person in [the accused]’s position must 
have believed he or she was restrained in a ‘formal arrest 
or restraint on freedom of movement of the degree associ-
ated with a formal arrest.’ ” Chatfield, 67 M.J. at 438 (quot-
ing California v. Beheler, 463 U.S. 1121, 1125 (1983) (per 
curiam)). In United States v. Mitchell, this Court explained 
that to determine whether an individual was subjected to 
a custodial interrogation, courts consider: 
(1) whether the person appeared for questioning 
voluntarily; (2) the location and atmosphere of the 
place in which questioning occurred . . . [;] (3) the 
length of the questioning . . . [;] [(4)] the number 
of law enforcement officers present at the scene[;] 
and [(5)] the degree of physical restraint placed 
upon the suspect. 
76 M.J. 413, 417 (C.A.A.F. 2017) (alterations in original) 
(citations omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Appellee’s motion to suppress was entitled, “Defense 
Motion to Suppress Custodial Interrogation.” Despite the 
title, the defense did not argue in the motion or during the 
motion hearing that the second interview was a custodial 
interrogation. To the contrary, the defense acknowledged 
that at the time of the second interview, Appellee “was not 
in continuous custody.” The military judge orally granted 
the motion to suppress without expressly ruling on 
whether the second interview was a custodial 
interrogation. 
Whether an individual is in custody is a question of law 
we review de novo. Chatfield, 67 M.J. at 437. Considering 
the factors set forth in Mitchell , we conclude that Appel-
lee’s second interview was not a custodial interrogation , 
and therefore, he had no Fifth Amendment right to counsel 
during the second interview.3 See United States v. Evans , 
75 M.J. 302,  305 (C.A.A.F. 2016) (explaining that the 
“[a]ppellant was not subjected to a custodial interrogation 
and therefore suffered no violation of his Fifth Amendment 
rights under Miranda”). We reach this conclusion for sev-
eral reasons. Appellee initiated the second interview to fur-
ther the investigation in the hope of reuniting with his 
 
3 For the same reasons, we conclude that M.R.E. 305(c)(2) did 
not guarantee Appellee counsel during the second interview be-
cause it was a noncustodial interview. M.R.E. 305(c)(2) imple-
ments the Fifth Amendment right to counsel, and provides: 
If a person suspected of an offense and subjected 
to custodial interrogation  requests counsel, any 
statement made in the interrogation after such 
request, or evidence derived from the 
interrogation after such request, is inadmissible 
against the accused unless counsel was present 
for the interrogation. 
(Emphasis added.) 
As with the Fifth Amendment right to counsel, if a person 
invokes their right to counsel  under M.R.E. 305(c)(2), then 
“questioning must cease until counsel is present.” M.R.E. 
305(c)(4). 
 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
family, and he voluntarily appeared at the scheduled time. 
See Chatfield, 67 M.J. at 438 (finding an interview to be 
noncustodial when an individual voluntarily went to a po-
lice station for questioning not under express orders from 
a superior). A lthough two NCIS agents conducted the in-
terview at an NCIS office and Appellee knew he was a sus-
pect, an interview does not become custodial “simply be-
cause the questioning takes place in the station house, or 
because the questioned person is one whom the police sus-
pect.” Oregon v. Mathiason, 429 U.S. 492, 495 (1977); see 
also Chatfield, 67 M.J. at 438 (explaining that “there is no 
per se rule that whenever a suspect appears at a police sta-
tion for questioning , the suspect is therefore in custody”).  
Additionally, Appellee joked and laughed with the agents 
over the course of about two and a half hours. See Beckwith 
v. United States, 425 U.S. 341, 342-48 (1976) (finding that 
an interview in a private residence that lasted for about 
three hours was not a custodial interrogation). He acknowl-
edged that he could stop the interview at any time, and 
when questioning concluded and Appellee had nothing 
more to say, he left. 
Under these circumstances, “the atmosphere of the in-
terview would have made it transparent to a reasonable 
person in [Appellee’s] position that he was not subject to 
‘formal arrest or restraint on freedom of movement of the 
degree associated with a formal arrest.’ ” Chatfield, 67 M.J. 
at 439 (quoting Beheler, 463 U.S. at 1125). Thus, the second 
interview “did not contain the ‘inherently compelling pres-
sures’ with which the Miranda Court was concerned.” Id. 
(quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 467). 
Before this Court, Appellee concedes that the second in-
terview was not a custodial interrogation but  argues that 
the military judge properly suppressed the second inter-
view because he did not knowingly and intelligently waive 
the right to counsel he had previously invoked during the 
first interview . We disagree with the implication that a 
Fifth Amendment right to counsel extends beyond the 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
bounds of a custodial interrogation .4 In Edwards v. Ari-
zona, the Supreme Court held that the  appellant did not 
waive his right to have counsel present by submitting to a 
second custodial interrogation one day after he had in-
voked that right at an initial custodial interrogation. 451 
U.S. 477, 482 (1981). In that case, police approached the 
appellant who was being held at the county jail and inter-
viewed him for the second time despite his initial invoca-
tion and his continuing insistence that he did not want to 
speak with anyone. Id. at 479. The Supreme Court held 
“that when an accused has invoked his right to have coun-
sel present during custodial  interrogation, a valid waiver 
of that right cannot be established by showing only that he 
responded to further police -initiated custodial interroga-
tion even if he has been advised of his rights.” Id.  at 484. 
However, the Supreme Court limited its holding to cases 
where the first custodial interview is followed by a second 
custodial interview, stating: 
Had Edwards initiated the [second] meeting . . .  
nothing in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments 
would prohibit the police from merely listening to 
his voluntary, volunteered statements and using 
them against him at the trial. The Fifth Amend-
ment right identified in  Miranda is the right to 
have counsel present at any custodial interroga-
tion. Absent such interrogation, there would have 
been no infringement of the right that Edwards 
invoked and there would be no occasion to deter-
mine whether there had been a valid waiver. 
Id. at 485-86.5 
 
4 Although we review the military judge’s ruling directly in 
an Article 62, UCMJ, appeal, we note that the NMCCA affirmed 
the military judge’s ruling, concluding that “Appellee’s invoca-
tion of his Fifth Amendment right to counsel in the initial inter-
rogation reasonably carried over, through the intervening 
events, to the second interview.” Flanner, 2023 CCA LEXIS 428, 
at *9 n.42, 2023 WL 6564919, at *4 n.42. We reject this conclu-
sion as inconsistent with prior precedent. See infra pp. 13-15. 
5 This Court’s predecessor reached a similar conclusion in 
Tempia. In Tempia, during a custodial interrogation the 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
In this case, e ven assuming the first interview was a 
custodial interrogation implicating the Fifth Amendment, 
NCIS scrupulously honored the law by terminating the in-
terview as soon as Appellee indicated that he wanted coun-
sel to be present during questioning. Four months later, 
Appellee contacted NCIS and scheduled the second inter-
view. Consistent with Edwards, we need not decide 
whether Appellee waived his  Fifth Amendment right to 
counsel in the second interview because we conclude that 
he had no such right in a noncustodial interview he initi-
ated months after his initial invocation. Id.; see also Innis, 
446 U.S at 298 n.2 (explaining that “[s]ince we conclude 
that the respondent was not ‘interr ogated’ for Miranda 
purposes, we do not reach the question whether the re-
spondent waived his right under Miranda to be free from 
interrogation until counsel was present”).6 
 
appellant asserted his right to counsel, the interview ended, and 
he was free to leave. 16 C.M.A. at 632, 37 C.M.R. at 252. Less 
than an hour later, the appellant was ordered to an OSI office, 
making the ensuing interview a custodial interrogation. Id. at 
632, 636, 37 C.M.R. at 252, 256. While at the OSI office, he was 
informed that he would not be appointed counsel to represent 
him for an investigation and then agreed to be interviewed. Id. 
at 632-33, 37 C.M.R. at 252-53. The military judge suppressed 
the interview because the appellant was improperly advised of 
his right to counsel under Miranda. Id. at 637, 37 C.M.R. at 257. 
Although the case before this Court is similar to Tempia in that 
there was an initial interview where the appellant invoked his 
right to counsel, it is distinguishable because the subsequent in-
terview in Tempia was custodial whereas the subsequent inter-
view in this case was not. 
6 Although not raised by Appellee, we note that neither the 
Sixth Amendment right to counsel nor its implementing rule 
provided Appellee with a right to counsel in the second inter-
view. “ ‘[I]t has been firmly established that a person’s Sixth . . . 
Amendment right to counsel attaches only at or after the time 
that adversary judicial proceedings have been initiated against 
him.’ ” United States v. Gouveia , 467 U.S. 180, 187-8 8 (1984) 
(quoting Kirby v. Illinois, 406 U.S. 682, 688 (1972)). In the mili-
tary, the Sixth Amendment right to counsel attaches upon pre-
ferral of charges. United States v. Harvey , 37 M.J. 140, 141 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
B. Appellee Did Not Have a Right to Appointed Military 
Defense Counsel Under Article 31(b), UCMJ, 
During the Second Interview 
On appeal, Appellee contends that his statutory rights 
under Article 31(b), UCMJ, are broader than his Miranda 
rights and afford him a right to appointed counsel notwith-
standing the noncustodial setting of his second interview.  
For the reasons explained below, we conclude, first, that 
the protections afforded by Article 31(b) , UCMJ, were ap-
plicable during Appellee’s second interview even though it 
was not a custodial interrogation; but  second, that Article 
31(b), UCMJ, did not guarantee a right to have appointed 
military defense counsel present during the interview. 
“Article 31(b), UCMJ, is a statutory precursor to Mi-
randa warnings that implements the Article 31(a), UCMJ, 
privilege against compulsory self-incrimination.” Evans, 75 
 
(C.A.A.F. 1993). Because no charges had been preferred at the 
time of Appellee’s second interview, he had no Sixth Amendment 
right to counsel during that interview. 
The Sixth Amendment right to counsel is implemented in 
M.R.E. 305(c)(3), which also applies only after charges have been 
preferred. M.R.E. 305(c)(3) states: 
If an accused against whom charges have been pre-
ferred is interrogated on matters concerning the 
preferred charges by anyone acting in a law en-
forcement capacity, or the agent of such a person, 
and the accused requests counsel, or if the accused 
has appointed or retained counsel, any statement 
made in the int errogation, or evidence derived 
from the interrogation , is inadmissible unless 
counsel was present for the interrogation. 
(Emphasis added.) If a person invokes their right to counsel un-
der M.R.E. 305(c)(3), then “questioning must cease until counsel 
is present.” M.R.E. 305(c)(4). 
 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
M.J. at 304-05 (footnote omitted) .7 Article 31(b), UCMJ, 
states: 
No person subject to this chapter may interrogate, 
or request any statement from , an accused or a 
person suspected of an offense without first in-
forming him of the nature of the accusation and 
advising him that he does not have to make any 
statement regarding the offense of which he is ac-
cused or suspected and that any statement made 
by him may be used  as evidence against him in a 
trial by court-martial. 
This Court recently observed that “ ‘[a] servicemember’s 
protection against compulsory self-incrimination is unpar-
alleled in the civilian sector’ because ‘[t]his fundamental 
right is protected by both the Fifth Amendment and Article 
31, UCMJ.’ ” United States v. Nelson , 82 M.J. 251, 255 
(C.A.A.F. 2022) (second alteration in original) (quoting  
United States v. Mapes, 59 M.J. 60, 65 (C.A.A.F. 2003) (em-
phasis added)). Thus, while the Fifth Amendment guaran-
tees that no person shall be compelled  to be a witness 
against himself  in a criminal case , Article 31(a), UCMJ, 
guarantees that no person subject to the UCMJ  shall 
 
7 Article 31(b), UCMJ, is reflected in M.R.E. 305(c)(1), which 
states: 
Pursuant to Article 31, a person subject to the 
code may not interrogate or request any state-
ment from an accused or a person suspected of an 
offense without first: 
 (A) informing the accused or suspect of the 
nature of the accusation;  
 (B) advising the accused or suspect that 
the accused or suspect has the right to remain 
silent; and  
 (C) advising the accuse d or suspect that 
any statement made may be used as evidence 
against the accused or suspect in a trial by 
court-martial. 
Like Article 31(b), M.R.E. 305(c)(1) does not require a warning 
about an accused’s or suspect’s right to counsel. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
“compel any person to incriminate himself or to answer any 
question the answer to which may tend to incriminate 
him.” 10 U.S.C. § 831(a) (2018). 
The purpose of the Article 31(b), UCMJ, warning re-
quirement is to provide “members of the armed forces with 
statutory assurance that the standard  military require-
ment for a full and complete response to a superior’s in-
quiry does not apply in a situation when the privilege 
against self-incrimination may be invoked.” United States 
v. Swift, 53 M.J. 439, 445 (C.A.A.F. 2000). To this end, this 
Court has held “that Article 31(b), UCMJ, rights are in cer-
tain respects more extensive than those provided under the 
Fifth Amendment.” Evans, 75 M.J. at 305. Specifically, Ar-
ticle 31(b), UCMJ, warnings must be given to anyone “sus-
pected of an offense” while Miranda warnings only need to 
be given to those subject to “custodial interrogation.” Swift, 
53 M.J. at  445 (internal quotation marks omitted) (cita-
tions omitted). 
In another respect, Article 31(b), UCMJ, warnings are 
narrower than Miranda warnings. Miranda requires a 
warning about the  rights to consult with counsel  and to 
have counsel present during questioning . Article 31(b), 
UCMJ, on the other hand, is silent as to a servicemember’s 
rights to counsel. United States v. Rogers, 47 M.J. 135, 136 
n.1 (C.A.A.F. 1997) (providing a chart of differences be-
tween Article 31(b), UCMJ, and Miranda warnings). 
As a servicemember subject to questioning by NCIS, 
Appellee was entitled to the protections afforded by Article 
31, UCMJ . However, those  protections do not include a 
right to counsel. Therefore, we reject Appellee’s assertion 
that he had a statutory right to counsel in the second 
interview.8 
 
8 We note that Article 27, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 827 (2018), re-
quires the detailing of counsel for an accused after charges have 
been referred to a general or special court -martial; it does not 
create a right to counsel before charges have been preferred. Ap-
pellee does not argue that he was entitled to appointed military 
defense counsel pursuant to Article 27, UCMJ. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
Additionally, we are unpersuaded by Appellee’s argu-
ment that this Court’s decision in Mott establishes a statu-
tory right to counsel in a noncustodial interrogation.  In 
Mott, this Court was faced with the question of whether an 
accused who could not , due to mental illness, understand 
his rights or the consequences of waiving them could vol-
untarily, knowingly, and intelligently waive his right to 
counsel in a custodial interrogation. 72 M.J. at 321. In out-
lining the contours of its waiver analysis, the Court noted 
that an accused’s statement during a custodial in terroga-
tion is inadmissible at trial unless the government can es-
tablish that the accused knowingly and voluntarily waived 
his Miranda rights. Id. at 330. In a footnote, the Court 
added: 
Consistent with our precedents, we note that in 
the military system the accused’s right to coun-
sel—and the requirement of knowing and volun-
tary waiver—are not limited to custodial interro-
gation. See United States v. Delarosa, 67 M.J. 318, 
320 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (“Military officials and civil-
ians acting on their behalf are required to provide 
rights warnings prior to interrogating a member 
of the armed forces if that servicemember is a sus-
pect, irrespective of custody. Article 31(b), UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. § 831(b) (2000); Military Rule of Evi-
dence (M.R.E. 305(b)(1), 305(c).”). 
Id. at 330 n.10. 
 This footnote is an incorrect statement of the law and 
was not required for the holding in Mott. While it is true  
that the Article 31(b), UCMJ, rights cited in the Mott foot-
note extend beyond custodial interrogations , as noted 
above there is no right to counsel in Article 31(b), UCMJ.  
Nor does Delarosa, the case relied on in Mott, support that 
conclusion. In Delarosa, we held only that the military 
judge did not err in denying a motion to suppress the ac-
cused’s confession where he never unambiguously invoked 
his Miranda right to remain silent and his confession was 
voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently given. 67 M.J. at 
326. Indeed, the Court explicitly acknowledged in Delarosa 
that “[t]he present appeal involves only . . . rights warnings 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
19 
 
under Miranda for persons in custody .” Id. at 320. There-
fore, the Court in Delarosa did not consider the accused’s 
statutory rights or the applicability of either statutory or 
constitutional rights in a noncustodial setting. 
Even if the Mott footnote was an accurate statement of 
the law, its comment on a servicemember’s statutory right 
to counsel was not relevant to the Miranda issue before the 
Court in Mott. Because the Mott footnote was not required 
for the holding in that case, it is dicta. “[D]icta involves the 
consideration of ‘abstract and hypothetical situations not 
before [the court].’ ” Bohannan v. Doe , 527 F . App’x 283, 
300 (5th Cir. 2013) (quoting Connecticut v. Doehr, 501 U.S. 
1, 30 (1991) (Rehnquist, C.J., concurring)); see also Obiter 
Dictum, Black’s Law Dictionary  (11th ed. 20 19) (defining 
“obiter dictum” as “[a] judicial comment made while 
delivering a judicial opinion, but one that is unnecessary to 
the decision in the case and therefore not precedential 
(although it may be considered persuasive)”). The Supreme 
Court has explained: 
 It is a maxim not to be disregarded, that gen-
eral expressions, in every opinion, are to be taken 
in connection with the case in which those expres-
sions are used. If they go beyond the case, they 
may be respected, but ought  not to control the 
judgment in a subsequent suit when the very 
point is presented for decision. 
Cohens v. Virginia , 19 U.S. 264, 399 (1821) (emphasis 
added). Thus, “we are not bound to follow our dicta in a 
prior case in which the point now at issue was not fully 
debated.” Central Va. Cmty. Coll. v. Katz, 546 U.S. 356, 363 
(2006); see, e.g., United States v. Griffin , No. NMCM 96 
01264, 1996 CCA LEXIS 458, at *4, 1996 WL 927624, at *2 
(N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Sept. 30, 1996) (unpublished) 
(declining to rely on dicta to find legal error); United States 
v. Dimberio, 52 M.J. 550, 559 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. 1999) 
(rejecting appellant’s reliance on a case that was factually 
inapposite and itself relied on dicta); United States v. 
Alexander, 29 C.M.R. 616, 617 (A.C.M.R. 1960) (rejecting 
appellant’s reliance on “completely erroneous” dicta). 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
20 
 
Applying that principle in this case, we conclude that the 
Mott footnote and Delarosa were not binding on the 
military judge and are not binding on this Court’s  
determination whether Appellee had a statutory right to 
counsel because the Mott footnote is an incorrect statement 
of the law and neither opinion squarely addressed the 
question at issue here: whether an accused has a statutory 
right to counsel in a noncustodial setting when no charges 
have been preferred. 
C. Appellee Did Not Have a Right to Appointed Military 
Defense Counsel Under Marine Corps Policy 
During the Second Interview 
As explained above, Appellee did not have a right to ap-
pointed counsel for a noncustodial interview he initiated 
prior to preferral of charges ; however, the Chief Defense 
Counsel of the Marine Corps had discretionary authority to 
direct the appointment of counsel pursuant to Marine 
Corps policy. Under the LSAM: 
The responsible detailing authority shall de-
tail a defense counsel in writing to a particular 
case as soon as practicable. Absent good cause, the 
detailing authority shall detail a defense counsel 
within: 
A. Ten days of being notified via e -mail, 
fax, or other written means by corrections per-
sonnel, command representatives, the mili-
tary justice section, or some other government 
official that an accused has been placed in pre-
trial confinement or arrest under R.C.M. 305. 
B. Five days of being served notice of pre-
ferred charges. 
C. Five days of being served notice of the 
appointment of an Article 32, UCMJ, Investi-
gating Officer. 
D. Five days of being served an adminis-
trative separation/board of inquiry package. 
E. As otherwise required by law or 
regulation. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
21 
 
Dep’t of the Navy, Marine Corps Order 5800.16-V3, Legal 
Support and Administration Manual para. 011004 (Feb. 
20, 2018). 
At the time of Appellee’s second interview, Appellee was 
not in pretrial confinement or arrest; no charges had been 
preferred; an Article 32, UCMJ, investigating officer had 
not been appointed; and no administrative separa-
tion/board of inquiry package had been served. Therefore, 
the detailing authority was under no obligation to detail 
defense counsel to Appellee under provisions (A) through 
(D) of para. 011004. 
Appellee has not identified any other law or regulation 
that guaranteed him counsel under provision (E) of para.  
011004. In addition to the mandatory detailing authorities 
listed in the LSAM, the detailing authority has discretion-
ary authority pursuant to CDC Policy Memorandum 3.1D  
to detail military defense counsel when “determined neces-
sary” in a variety of instances, to include to “servicemem-
bers pending investigation . . . by any law enforcement 
agency, when the detailing authority reasonably believes 
that such an investigation may result in court -martial, 
non-judicial punishment, or adverse  administrative ac-
tion.” CDC Policy Memorandum 3.1D para. 3.a.(4). Counsel 
may also be detailed “in any other situation which, in the 
judgement [sic] of the CDC, meets the spirit and intent of 
[the LSAM], meets other applicable laws and regulations, 
and best serves the interests of justice.” Id. para. 3.a.(8). 
These policy provisions permit but do not require detail-
ing of counsel. Although Appellee could have received mil-
itary counsel pursuant to these policy  provisions, the de-
tailing authority was not obligated to appoint  military 
defense counsel prior to preferral of charges and did not 
exercise the discretionary power to do so even after Appel-
lee twice visited the DSO seeking legal services . Because 
we conclude that no violation of the Marine Corps policy 
occurred, we do not address the separate issue of wheth er 
it would have been an abuse of discretion for the military 
judge to suppress Appell ee’s statements as a remedy for 
such a policy violation. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
22 
 
D. The Military Judge Abused Her Discretion 
Having answered the preliminary questions, we now 
turn to the certified question: whether the military judge 
abused her discretion in suppressing  Appellee’s second 
interview. For the reasons given below, we conclude that 
she did. 
Under M.R.E. 304(a), “an involuntary statement from 
the accused, or any evidence derived therefrom, is inadmis-
sible at trial  except as provided in subdivision  (e).”9 “ ‘In-
voluntary statement’ means a statement obtained in viola-
tion of the self -incrimination privilege or Due Process 
Clause of the Fifth Amendment to the United States Con-
stitution, Article 31, or through the use of coercion, unlaw-
ful influence, or unlawful inducement.” M.R.E. 304(a)(1)(A) 
(2019 ed.). 
The military judge ruled that Appellee’s second NCIS 
interview should be suppressed because Appellee did not 
give a valid waiver of his pretrial right to counsel. Accord-
ing to the military judge, “[t]he actions of various actors in 
this case, to include the DSO, left the accused with an in-
accurate belief that he could not be appointed a lawyer un-
til charges were preferred.” Thus, according to the military 
judge, “the [second] interview, although voluntary, was not 
based on a knowing and intelligent understanding of the 
right that he abandoned when he acquiesced to proceed 
without having an attorney present.” 
We conclude that the military judge’s ruling to suppress 
Appellee’s second interview is an abuse of discretion be-
cause it was “influenced by an erroneous view of the law.” 
Mott, 72 M.J. at 329 (internal quotation marks omitted) (ci-
tations omitted). The military judge erred in two respects. 
 
9 The exceptions are “(1) to impeach by contradiction the in-
court testimony of the accused; or (2) in a later prosecution 
against the accused for perjury, false swearing, or the making of 
a false official statement.” M.R.E. 304(e)(1) -(2) (2019 ed.). Nei-
ther of these exceptions is at issue in the case before this Court. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
23 
 
First, the military judge erred in assuming without de-
ciding that Appellee had a right to appointed military de-
fense counsel during the second interview. As discussed 
above, neither the Constitution, Article 31, UCMJ, nor Ma-
rine Corps policy guaranteed Appellee appointed military 
defense counsel for a noncustodial interview prior to pre-
ferral of charges.10 And even if Appellee had a pretrial right 
to appointed military defense counsel in the first interview, 
it did not carry over to the second interview initiated four 
months later by Appellee, where he was re- advised and 
acknowledged he understood  his rights to remain silent 
and to have counsel present during the second interview. 
Second, the military judge erred in concluding that Ap-
pellee was mistaken in believing he could not be appointed 
military defense counsel until charges were preferred. Ap-
pellee had no constitutional or statutory right to appointed 
counsel at the time of the second interview. Under Marine 
Corps policy, he could have been appointed counsel for the 
second interview, subject to the discretion of the detailing 
authority. However, he had twice sought legal services  
from the DSO and twice, he left without having secured ap-
pointed counsel. Under the circumstances, he was accu-
rately advised by the SNOIC and SA CS that he would not 
receive detailed military defense counsel until charges 
were preferred. See Article 27, UCMJ; Harvey, 37 M.J. at 
141 (explaining that the Sixth Amendment right to counsel 
attaches upon preferral of charges). Thus, Appellee’s belief 
that he would only get appointed counsel if charges were 
preferred was proper and the military judge abused her 
discretion in finding otherwise. 
“[S]ervicemembers [do not] enjoy due process protec-
tions above and beyond the panoply of rights provided to 
them by the plain text of the Constitution, the UCMJ, and 
 
10 To the extent the military judge relied on dicta in this 
Court’s opinion in Mott to find a right to counsel in a noncusto-
dial interview , this too was an abuse of discretion, where the 
dicta is itself an incorrect statement of the law unsupported by 
the cited authorities. See supra pp. 18-20. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
24 
 
the MCM.” United States v. Vazquez , 72 M.J. 13, 19 
(C.A.A.F. 2013). Having concluded Appellee had no right to 
appointed military defense counsel during the second in-
terview, we need not answer whether any such right was 
waived. We hold that the military judge abused her discre-
tion by granting the motion to suppress. 
IV. Conclusion 
We answer the certified question in the affirmative. The 
decision of the United States Navy -Marine Corps Court of 
Criminal Appeals is reversed.  The case is returned to the 
Judge Advocate General of the Navy for remand to the mil-
itary judge  for further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion. 
 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting.
It is a truism, of course, that military judges abuse 
their discretion when they misapprehend and misapply 
the law. And as the majority opinion correctly notes, the 
military judge in this case did both. Specifically, the mili-
tary judge mistakenly concluded that Appellee had a right 
to appointed military counsel during noncustodial, pre-pre-
ferral questioning, and she consequently granted a defense 
motion to suppress  Appellee’s statement to law enforce-
ment officers. However, the military judge’s misstep is only 
one facet of the entire story  here. The broader reality is 
that this Court bears responsibility for sowing seeds of le-
gal confusion about whe ther a servicemember has a right 
to appointed military  counsel during noncustodial ques-
tioning. Indeed, as will be explained in further detail below, 
the language this Court employed in United States v. Mott, 
72 M.J. 319, 330 n. 10 (C.A.A.F. 2013), was so misleading 
that it caused not only this military judge but also a service 
court of criminal appeals in an unrelated case to reach the 
wrong conclusion about what the  law actually requires. 
Moreover, during motions proceedings before the military 
judge, it was G overnment counsel who repeatedly cited 
Mott in his written filings and then wrongly proclaimed  
during the motions hearing that Appellee had indeed been 
entitled to appointed military counsel during questioning.  
These peculiar circumstances raise important ques-
tions. Namely, s hould this Court just  simply declare that 
the military judge’s ruling was outside the range of reason-
able choices because she got the law wrong, and then pro-
nounce that she therefore abused her discretion? Or should 
this Court instead openly acknowledge the role we  have 
played in muddling the law , decline to find that the mili-
tary judge abused her discretion because the law was un-
settled by the language we used in Mott, and then use this 
case to unequivocally state the correct view of the law going 
forward? I concede that it is a close  call. Ultimately, how-
ever, I conclude that adherence to the tenets of the oft-em-
ployed “abuse of discretion” standard requires us to hold  
that the military judge in this case did not  abuse her dis-
cretion because of the confusion we  created regarding the 
applicable law. Thus, I would hold in favor of Appellee in 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
2 
 
this case— Staff Sergeant Flanner—a nd affirm the decision 
of the United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal 
Appeals. Because the majority holds to the contrary , I re-
spectfully dissent.  
One important point must be made clear at the outset 
of this opinion. Namely, under applicable laws and regula-
tions, a servicemember does not have a right to appointed 
military counsel when being questioned during a pre- pre-
ferral, noncustodial interview. Full stop.1 There is no day-
light between my position on this issue and that of the ma-
jority. But as indicated above, I believe this case is about 
far more than just this basic legal principle.  And it all be-
gins with a fateful footnote. 
In the Mott opinion, this Court stated as follows:  
Consistent with our precedents, we note that in 
the military system the accused ’s right to coun-
sel—and the requirement of knowing and volun-
tary waiver—are not limited to custodial interro-
gation. See United States v. Delarosa, 67 M.J. 318, 
320 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (“Military officials and civil-
ians acting on their behalf are required to provide 
rights warnings prior to interrogating a member 
of the armed forces if that servicemember is a sus-
pect, irrespective of custody. Article 31 (b), [Uni-
form Code of Military Justice (UCMJ)], 10 U.S.C. 
§ 831(b) (2000); Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 
305(b)(1), 305(c).”). 
72 M.J. at 330 n.10. As can be seen, this passage stakes out 
the position that a servicemember has a right to military 
counsel even in noncustodial situations. Moreover, in mak-
ing this point , th e Mott Court invoked our own 
 
1 The Chief Defense Counsel of the Marine Corps (CDC) has 
issued a policy memorandum for detailing  military defense 
counsel. This memorandum provides the  discretionary 
“authority to detail defense counsel”  pre-preferral if the 
“circumstances [are] determined necessary ,” including if a 
servicemember is “pending investigation  . . . by any law 
enforcement agency, when the detailing authority reasonably 
believes that such an investigation may result in court-martial.” 
CDC Policy Memorandum 3.1D para. 3.a.(4) (Nov. 6, 2020). But 
this authority to detail military counsel does not translate into 
a right to military counsel. 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
3 
 
“precedents.” And yet the only precedent that is specifically 
cited—United States v. Delarosa—does not stand for the 
proposition that this Court claimed.2 Indeed, no precedent 
of this Court has stated that, without more, a servicemem-
ber has a right to military counsel during a noncustodial 
interrogation.  
Nevertheless, the damage was done. Indeed, t he fact 
that in Mott this Court managed to bollix up the law is am-
ply demonstrated by the case of United States v. Davis . 
There, the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
pointed directly to the language in Mott when determining 
that “the distinction between custodial and non -custodial 
interrogation in the military context appears irrelevant” 
because “[the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces 
has] extend[ed] counsel rights . . . to accused who are only 
subjected to mere non -custodial interrogation.” United 
States v. Davis , No . ARMY 20160069, 2018 CCA LEXIS 
417, at *11, 2018 WL 3996488, at *4 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 
16, 2018) (unpublished). If our Mott decision caused a ser-
vice court of criminal appeals to conclude upon reflection 
and consideration that we had extended counsel rights to 
noncustodial interrogations, how can we now claim in good 
faith that this military judge, who was operating under the 
significant time pressures imposed by a trial docket, should 
have known better?  
This misunderstanding of the law also extended to the 
Government counsel in this case. During arguments on the 
defense motion to suppress Appellee’s statement, it was the 
trial counsel who told the military judge: “[O]bviously the 
accused rated counsel.”3 Although the Government’s con-
cession is not binding on this Court, this clear-cut 
 
2 Delarosa discussed the “rights warnings” of “a person in 
custody” and held that the appellant waived his Miranda rights. 
67 M.J. 318, 320, 325 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (emphasis added). 
3 In the Marine Corps, the phrase “rated counsel” is 
synonymous with the right of a servicemember to have 
appointed military counsel. See Merriam Webster’s Online 
Dictionary, https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/rated 
(last visited Sept. 16, 2024) (defining “rated” as “to have a right 
to”). 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
4 
 
statement demonstrates that not only the military judge 
but also the trial counsel misunderstood the applicable law. 
Moreover, I note that the Government adopted this errone-
ous position after repeatedly citing to Mott  in its motions 
filings. Further, this was not an uninformed or inadvertent 
remark by trial counsel. Instead, it occurred after a recess 
in which trial counsel acknowledged that he had “had an 
opportunity to talk to  . . . supervisory counsel” about this 
point. Thus, the military judge’s ruling that there was a 
right to appointed counsel for Appellee’s pre-preferral, non-
custodial interrogation must be examined in the context of 
trial counsel’s erroneous concession , and that erroneous 
concession certainly appears to have been tainted by our 
flawed language in Mott. 
On appeal, t he Government understandably questions 
whether this Court can definitively know whether the mil-
itary judge relied on the Mott footnote in reaching her de-
cision in this case. Indeed, the parties at trial did not spe-
cifically cite this footnote, and the military judge did not 
cite any case law in her oral ruling . However, as stated 
above, the parties frequently cited to  the Mott opinion in 
their filings, so presumably they knew what Mott said—
including the infamous footnote. Also, as Appellee’s counsel 
noted at oral argument  before this Court , “the military 
judge was clearly relying on Mott” when “she signaled the 
test this Court established in United States v. Mott” as the 
basis for determining whether there was a waiver of coun-
sel rights. Oral Argument at 31:12-31:28, United States v. 
Flanner (C.A.A.F. May 7, 2024) (No. 24-0093). Therefore, it 
requires no stretch of the imagination to conclude that the 
Mott footnote was part of the military judge’s legal calculus 
when she found Appellee, who was not in custody, held “an 
inaccurate belief” that he was not entitled to appointed mil-
itary counsel “until charges were preferred.” 
As the majority opinion correctly observes, it is im-
portant to acknowledge that the Mott footnote is rife with 
weaknesses. To start, it is dicta  because the appellant in 
Mott was already in custody during his questioning. See 72 
M.J. at 322. Next, the authorities cited  by this Court to 
support th e notion that there is a noncustodial right to 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
5 
 
appointed counsel—Delarosa, 4 Article 31(b), 5 and M.R.E. 
305(b)(1), (c) (2008 ed.)6—do not, in fact, support that prop-
osition. 72 M.J. at 330 n.10. And finally, absent Mott, all of 
the relevant legal authorities make it clear that there is no 
right to appointed counsel during pre-preferral, noncusto-
dial interviews. See United States v. Flanner, __ M.J. __, __ 
(13-15, 17-22) (C.A.A.F. 2024) (citing authorities); see also 
United States v. Mitchell, 76 M.J. 413, 417 (C.A.A.F. 2017); 
M.R.E. 305(d),  (e)(3) (2019 ed.) . But despite these weak-
nesses, the Mott footnote still says what it says, and it no-
tably refers to unnamed “precedents,” suggesting that this 
Court was merely summarizing well- settled military law. 
One can hardly blame a military judge for accepting at face 
value a legal proposition that  this Court has baldly pro-
claimed in a published opinion. Even the Government at 
oral argument admirably conceded that the Mott footnote 
“puts judges in a difficult position.” Oral Argument at 
14:17-14:22.  
Because this Court’s footnote in Mott states that  a 
servicemember’s “right to counsel . . . [is] not limited to 
custodial interrogation [s],” 72 M.J. at 330 n. 10, and 
because the trial counsel in this case went along with this 
misunderstanding of the law  as applied to this case, I 
cannot conclude in good faith that the military judge’s  
ruling was “outside the range of choices reasonably arising 
from the applicable facts and the law.” United States v. 
Shields, 83 M.J. 226, 230 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (citation omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) . Therefore, in light of 
this Court’s muddling of the law, I do not believe it can be 
said that the military judge abused her discretion. Because 
the majority reaches a contrary conclusion, I respectfully 
dissent. 
 
4 As discussed above, Delarosa discussed rights warnings for 
servicemembers in custody. 
5 Article 31(b) concerns warnings to a suspect about the right 
to remain silent. By its plain terms, this provision “does not 
confer a right to assistance of counsel.” United States v. Lincoln, 
42 M.J. 315, 321 (C.A.A.F. 1995). 
6 These M.R.E. provisions merely implement Article 31(b) . 
See M.R.E. 305(c) (2008 ed.). 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting. 
I join the Chief Judge in dissenting from the majority’s 
conclusion that the military judge abused her discretion by 
considering United States v. Mott , 72 M.J. 319, 330 n.10 
(C.A.A.F. 2013). However, beyond that, I am compelled to 
express my disagreement with the majority opinion. The 
majority’s focus on Appellee’s claim to have had a right to 
counsel during a noncustodial law enforcement interview 
misses the point of what happened in this case and, in my 
view, sidesteps the real issue at stake. The central question 
here is whether Appellee fully understood the scope of the 
right to counsel he invoked at the first interview before de-
ciding to proceed with questioning at the second interview.  
I. Background 
When the Naval Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) 
first attempted to interrogate Appellee, Special Agent (SA) 
SC advised him of his rights prior to the interview, includ-
ing his right to counsel. Appellee indicated on the written 
rights form that he “would like to have a lawyer present 
during questioning,” so SA SC properly ended the inter-
view. After the truncated interview, Appellee visited the 
base Defense Service Office (DSO) twice in the hope of 
speaking to an attorney. The record does not further illu-
minate who Appellee spoke to at the DSO, what  he told 
them, or what information he received. There is no evi-
dence in the record that Appellee ever spoke to a lawyer at 
the DSO.1  
After approximately four months passed without Appel-
lee receiving any updates on the investigation, he 
 
1 In its background section, the majority states that 
“[a]ccording to his trial defense counsel, in May of 2021, Appellee 
spoke with an attorney.” United States v. Flanner, __ M.J. __, __ 
(3) (C.A.A.F. 2024). In their written motion to suppress, trial de-
fense counsel stated that Appellee spoke to an attorney at the 
DSO. However, counsel cited Appellee’s declaration, which was 
provided as Enclosure 2 to the motion. In that declaration, Ap-
pellee only stated that he went to the DSO to seek legal services, 
not that he ever actually spoke to an attorney.  The military 
judge found only that Appellee “made two separate attempts to 
get an attorney by visiting the Defense Services Office, where he 
was turned away.” 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
2 
 
consulted his staff noncommissioned officer -in-charge 
(SNOIC) about whether he would get appointed military 
counsel at an NCIS interview. The SNOIC spoke with the 
command staff judge advocate (SJA) and told Appellee that 
he “would only receive counsel if charges were preferred.” 
In a witness interview, the SNOIC  recalled that the SJA 
told him there was not much the Marine Corps Legal Ser-
vices Support Section could do for Appellee “because he 
wasn’t legally charged for something.” When interviewed, 
the SJA clarified twice that he made sure to let the SNOIC 
know that the information could not be passed to Appellee 
as legal advice because the SJA was  not his attorney. 
Again, there is no indication Appellee spoke to a lawyer 
himself.  
Appellee interpreted the second -hand advice he re-
ceived from the SNOIC  to mean that he “could not do an 
interview with military counsel present.” Wanting to move 
forward with the case, Appellee then decided to contact the 
NCIS case agent and requested an interview without coun-
sel present. On September 15, 2021, four months after 
NCIS had initiated the first interview, Appellee went in for 
an interview with SA SC. SA SC asked Appellee if he 
wanted to speak with her because, when he came in previ-
ously, he had requested a lawyer. Appellee told SA SC that 
his command had explained his right to counsel to him and 
he now understood he could not be appointed a lawyer until 
charges were preferred. SA SC then reviewed a rights ad-
visement form with Appellee and Appellee signed it. 
The standard a cknowledgement and c leansing waiver 
of rights signed by Appellee contained two lines about the 
right to counsel. It informed him that:  
I have the right to consult with a lawyer prior to 
any questioning. This lawyer may be a civilian 
lawyer retained by me at no cost to the United 
States, a military lawyer appointed to act as my 
counsel at no cost to me, or both; 
 . . . I have the right to have my retained civil-
ian lawyer and/or appointed military lawyer pre-
sent during this interview.  
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
3 
 
However, despite these rights and despite his best efforts, 
there is no indication Appellee ever consulted directly with 
an attorney. 
Charges were not preferred until November 18, 2022, 
over eighteen months after Appellee’s initial interview 
with NCIS. Appellee finally had access to an attorney when 
defense counsel was detailed to him in early December 
2022. 
The military judge granted defense counsel’s motion to 
suppress based on her determination that Appellee had 
been given “an inaccurate belief that he could not be ap-
pointed a lawyer until charges were preferred.” She deter-
mined that Appellee “made two sepa rate attempts to get 
an attorney by visiting the Defense Services Office, where 
he was turned away” and “asked his chain of command a 
number of questions about how he could get an attorney.” 
The lower court found that these findings of fact were not 
clearly erroneous. United States v. Flanner, No. NMCCA 
202300134, 2023 CCA LEXIS 428, at *9, 2023 WL 6564919, 
at *3 (N -M. Ct. Crim. App. Oct. 10, 2023)  (unpublished). 
The military judge concluded that Appellee “went forward 
with the interview without a lawyer present,” even though 
“[h]is actions showed that he truly desired to have an at-
torney,” and that “the interview, although voluntary, was 
not based on a knowing and intelligent understanding of 
the right that he abandoned when he acquiesced to proceed 
without having an attorney present.” 
II. Analysis  
“In an Article 62, UCMJ, appeal, this Court reviews the 
military judge’s decision directly and reviews the evidence 
in the light most favorable to the party which prevailed at 
trial,” which in this case is Appellee. United  States v. 
Becker, 81 M.J. 483, 488 (C.A.A.F 2021) (quoting United 
States v. Pugh, 77 M.J. 1, 3 (C.A.A.F. 2017)). “On matters 
of fact with respect to appeals under Article 62, UCMJ, we 
are bound by the military judge’s factual determinations 
unless they are unsupported by the record or cle arly erro-
neous.” Pugh, 77 M.J. at 3 (citing United States v. Gore, 60 
M.J. 178, 185 (C.A.A.F. 2004)). We review a military 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
4 
 
judge’s decision to suppress evidence for an abuse of discre-
tion. Becker, 81 M.J. at 488 (citing United States v. Bowen, 
76 M.J. 83, 87 (C.A.A. F. 2017)). If the military judge does 
not put her findings and analysis on the record, she will be 
accorded less deference.  United States v. Finch , 79 M.J. 
389, 397 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (quoting United States v. Flesher, 
73 M.J. 303, 312 (C.A.A.F. 2014)). Here, the military judge 
did not make written findings and co nclusions or directly 
cite any relevant law, including the Fifth or Sixth Amend-
ments. However, she did articulate the factual basis and 
reasoning behind her decision to suppress the interview 
and she did assess whether Appellee’s waiver met the 
proper legal standard of knowing and intelligent. There-
fore, I believe we owe her some deference.  
The Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitu-
tion guarantees that no suspect “shall be compelled in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself.” U.S. Const. 
amend. V. “[T]he right to have counsel present at the [cus-
todial] interrogation is indispensable to the protection of 
the Fifth Amendment privilege.” Miranda v. Arizona, 384 
U.S. 436, 469 (1966). “[A]n individual held for interrogation 
must be clearly informed that he has the right to consult 
with a lawyer and to have the lawyer with him duri ng in-
terrogation under the system for protecting privilege  we 
delineate today. . . .  [T]his warning is an absolute prereq-
uisite to interrogation.” Id. at 471.  
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 305 protects a sus-
pect’s Fifth Amendment right to counsel. M.R.E. 305(d) 
states that when a person subject to custodial interrogation 
requests an attorney, military counsel must be provided at 
no expense to the person and  must be present before the 
interrogation can proceed.  
Marine Corps policy grants the Chief Defense Counsel 
discretionary authority to detail defense counsel as deter-
mined necessary “to servicemembers pending investigation 
. . . by any law enforcement agency, when detailing author-
ity reasonably believes that such an investigation may re-
sult in court -martial, nonjudicial punishment, or adverse 
administrative action.” CDC Policy  Memorandum 3.1D 
para. 3.a.(4) (Nov. 6, 2020). The Marine Corp s Legal 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
5 
 
Support and Administration Manual does not include a 
time line for detailing defense counsel for servicemembers 
pending investigation. It does note a time  line for those 
against whom charges have been preferred. Dep’t of the 
Navy, Marine Corps Order 5800.16-V3, Legal Support and 
Administration Manual para. 011004 (Feb. 20, 2018). How-
ever, the fact that there is no formal detailing procedure 
prior to preferral of charges does not negate an accused’s 
right to consult counsel or have counsel present before an 
interrogation can proceed.  Here, Appellee was advised of 
and invoked his right to consult with counsel and to have 
counsel present before deciding to proceed with further 
questioning.  
A determination of whether any waiver of counsel was 
knowing and intelligent depends upon “the particular facts 
and circumstances surrounding that case.” Edwards v. Ar-
izona, 451 U.S. 477, 482 (1981) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting Johnson v. Zerbst , 304 U.S. 458, 464 
(1938)). The accused must have “full awareness of both the 
nature of the right being abandoned and the consequences 
of the decision to abandon it.” Berghuis v. Thompkins, 560 
U.S. 370, 382-83 (2010) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(citation omitted). “The government must show waiver by 
a preponderance of the evidence.” Mott, 72 M.J. at 330 (cit-
ing Berghuis, 560 U.S. at 384). I am not convinced that, 
under the circumstances of this case, the Government has 
met this burden.  
The Supreme Court has established that an accused 
does not have a Fifth Amendment right to counsel when he 
initiates communication with law enforcement. Edwards , 
451 U.S. at 485. I agree with the majority that  Appellee’s 
second interview was self-initiated and noncustodial. How-
ever, we cannot divorce Appellee’s choice to contact NCIS 
of his own accord from the multiple attempts to consult 
with an attorney that preceded it. Appellee was under the 
mistaken belief that he could only receive or consult with 
military counsel once charges were preferred. This infor-
mation contradicts M.R.E 305(d) and its provision that mil-
itary counsel must be provided, if requested, for a custodial 
interrogation. And it contradicts Appellee’s right, outlined 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
6 
 
in the rights advisement utilized by NCIS, to consult with 
an attorney prior to such an interview. Appellee did sign a 
rights form prior to the second interview with law enforce-
ment that indicated he understood he was entitled to ap-
pointed counsel during an interview with law enforcement 
and that he waived that right. But it is difficult to conclude 
this waiver was knowing and intelligent. The record indi-
cates that neither the DSO nor the SJA communicated to 
Appellee that he had the right to consult with counsel prior 
to a custodial interview with NCIS. As noted earlier, there 
is no evidence that Appellee ever spoke to a lawyer and the 
SJA’s information communicated through the SNOIC that 
the DSO could not help him was just wrong. It was simply 
not true that he could not talk to a military defense attor-
ney until after charges have been preferred, even if that is 
when the formal detailing procedure customarily occurs.2  
We view Appellee’s waiver of his right to counsel 
against “the particular facts and circumstances surround-
ing that case,” including the misleading information he re-
ceived from his command and the DSO. Edwards, 451 U.S. 
at 482 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omit-
ted). Even though Appellee had no right to counsel when 
he initiated an interview with NCIS, a proper understand-
ing of his overall rights most likely would have influenced 
his decision to go to them on his own. It is hard to argue 
that he made a fully informed decision on how to proceed. 
Appellee claimed that he “reached out [to law enforcement] 
because [he] believed that [he] could not do an interview 
with military counsel present.” He “only thought that [he] 
could do an interview with an attorney present if [he] hired 
 
2 I remain skeptical that a Marine staff sergeant presenting 
himself to a judge advocate at the DSO, explaining to that law-
yer that he was under investigation for fraud against the United 
States and forgery and that the NCIS had recently interviewed 
him, wo uld have simply been turned away. If Appellee was 
turned away after consulting counsel, I would expect some evi-
dence to be entered into the record indicating why and by whom 
such a determination was made. The Government had the bur-
den to show that Appellee consulted with counsel and they have 
not done so.  
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
7 
 
a civilian attorney.” It is clear that he did not properly un-
derstand the scope of his right to counsel. Given this mis-
taken belief, Appellee did not possess the necessary “full 
awareness of both the nature of the right being abandoned 
and the consequences  of the decision to abandon it” to 
knowingly and intelligently waive the right. Berghuis, 560 
U.S. 382- 83 (internal quotation marks omitted) (citation 
omitted). 
This might be a different case if Appellee’s mistaken be-
lief had been of his own making. It also might be a different 
case if the record showed that he in fact consulted counsel, 
was told that the DSO was not going to provide counsel at 
any subsequent meet ings with investigators and that it 
might not be in his best interest to meet with them without 
counsel present, and, armed with this advice, he still de-
cided to initiate contact with NCIS for a second interview. 
But, based on the record before us, this is  not what hap-
pened. The majority’s decision to assume a critical fact not 
in evidence, namely, that Appellee actually spoke with a 
lawyer, is inconsistent with our mandate to review the ev-
idence “in the light most favorable to the party which pre-
vailed at trial.” Pugh, 77 M.J. at 3. 
In addition, as pointed out by the Chief Judge in his dis-
sent, we must acknowledge this Court’s footnote in  Mott 
that, “[c]onsistent with our precedents, we note that in the 
military justice system the accused’s right to counsel—and 
the requirement of knowing and voluntary waiver—are not 
limited to  custodial interrogation.” 72 M.J. at 330 n.10.  
This footnote implies that a servicemember’s right to coun-
sel extends to noncustodial interview situations such as 
Appellee’s voluntary decision to speak with NCIS. The foot-
note cites United States v. Delarosa,  67 M.J. 318, 320 
(C.A.A.F. 2009),  and its statement that law enforcement 
“are required to provide rights warnings prior to interro-
gating a member of the armed forces if that servicemember 
is a suspect, irrespective of custody.” I agree with the ma-
jority opinion that this is an inaccurate statement of the 
law. There is no indication that Delarosa, which involved a 
suspect facing custodial interrogation, intended to confer a 
right to counsel beyond the circumstances at issue in that 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
8 
 
case and beyond what is guaranteed by the Fifth and Sixth 
Amendments and M.R.E. 305. Id. at 322. The footnote in  
Mott, if interpreted literally, would create a major , and I 
believe, unintended expansion of our case law surrounding 
the right to counsel.3 However, even if this Court now clar-
ifies that the footnote is inaccurate and not binding, at the 
time the military judge made her ruling it was part of the 
existing case law. In assessing the military judge’s deci-
sion, we must take into account our own m uddled version 
of the law rather than simply casting it aside as something 
the military judge would and should have known was inap-
plicable dicta.  
The certified issue this Court has been asked to address 
includes both the question of Appellee’s right to counsel at 
a noncustodial interview and his right to silence at such an 
interview. The majority rightly concludes that “the protec-
tions afforded by Article 31(b), UCMJ, were applicable dur-
ing Appellee’s second interview.” Flanner,  __ M.J. at  __ 
(15). It seems obvious to me that Appellee’s mistaken belief 
about the scope of his right to consult with counsel and to 
have counsel present influenced his decision to initiate con-
tact for the second interview and to waive his right to re-
main silent at that interview. The military judge properly 
assessed the facts and circumstances surrounding Appel-
lee’s decision to waive his right to counsel. Given his 
 
3 For instance, in United States v. Davis , the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals recently cited the Mott footnote 
and stated that:  
[T]he distinction between custodial and non-cus-
todial interrogation in the military context ap-
pears irrelevant. Our superior court extends coun-
sel rights . . . to accused who are only subject to 
mere non-custodial interrogation.  
. . . Even with the explicit words in Mil. R. Evid. 
305(e)(3)(A) requiring ‘custodial interrogation’ . . . 
we nevertheless apply CAAF’s precedent.  
No. ARMY 20160069, 2018 CCA LEXIS 417,  at *11, 2018 WL 
3996488, at *4 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 16, 2018) (unpublished).  
 
United States v. Flanner, No. 24-0093/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
 
9 
 
mistaken understanding of the scope of that right and the 
Court’s inconsistency regarding the applicable law, review-
ing the evidence in the light most favorable to Appellee, the 
military judge did not abuse her discretion in determining 
that Appellee’s waiver was not knowing and intelligent. 
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.  