This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
DeShaun L. WELLS, Airman 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0219 
Crim. App. No. 40222 
 
Argued March 6, 2024—Decided September 24, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Charles E. Wiedie (arraignment), Willie 
J. Babor (warrant application), and Matthew N. McCall.  
 
For Appellant: Captain Samantha M. Castanien  
(argued); Megan P. Marinos, Esq. (on brief); Major 
Kasey W. Hawkins.  
 
For Appellee: Captain Tyler L. Washburn  (argued); 
Colonel Matt hew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
James P. Ferrell , and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief).  
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge MAGGS and Judge JOHNSON  
joined. Judge HARDY filed a dissenting opinion, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Contrary to his pleas,  Appellant was convicted at a 
general court -martial by  a panel of officer and enlisted 
members of assault consummated by a battery, obstructing 
justice, and extramarital sexual conduct , in violation of 
Articles 128, 131b , and 134, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 928, 931 b, 934 (2018). The 
members sentenced Appellant to a bad -conduct discharge, 
255 days of confinement,  two months of restriction to the 
limits of Royal Air Force Lakenheath, United Kingdom, 
two months of hard labor without confinement, forfeiture 
of all pay and allowances, and reduction to grade E -1. The 
convening authority disapproved the adjudged restriction 
and hard labor without confinement, but otherwise took no 
other action on the sentence. The United States Air Force 
Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the findings and 
sentence. United States v. Wells, No. ACM 40222, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 222, at *30, 2023 WL 3597239, at *11 (A.F. Ct. 
Crim. App. May 23, 2023) (unpublished). 
We granted review of the following issue: 
Is Appellant’s conviction for a Clause 2, Article 
134, UCMJ, offense legally insufficient as to the 
terminal element? 
United States v. Wells, 84 M.J. 113 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order 
granting review). 
As will be discussed below, we hold that Appellant’s 
conviction is legally sufficient. 
I. Background 
The lower court summarized the relevant background 
as follows: 
 In November 2019— while he was married —
Appellant met a British national, BF, through the 
electronic dating application Tinder. BF testified 
that Appellant first told her that he was divorced, 
but a week later said he was actually in the 
process of getting divorced. Appellan t and BF 
entered a dating relationship, to include sexual 
intercourse, which lasted several months. BF 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
spent weekends at Appellant ’s home and they 
discussed marriage and having children together. 
BF testified that during the relationship 
Appellant also met BF’s parents. In January 2020, 
BF discovered Appellant was not actually in the 
process of divorcing his spouse. BF contacted the 
Appellant’s command's public affairs office via 
email and reported, inter alia, that Appellant lied 
to her about being divorced. During cross -
examination, BF stated her sexual relationship 
with Appellant did not make her think less of the 
Service. 
 At trial, and in response to circuit trial 
counsel’s questions, BF testified about an 
intimate video of her and Appellant: 
Q.  [D]id you ever come to learn about videos 
that he may have still had in his possession 
after your relationship was over? 
A.   Yes. 
Q.   Can you talk to us a little bit about that? 
A.   It was towards the end of last year. I was 
having loads of Brandon[, U K,] people 
request me on Instagram, local girls from 
the area, and I ’m not originally from the 
area, so it was a bit concerning to me. So I 
ended up messaging one of them and I was 
like, do I know you because I was 
concerned that something was going 
around about me. She had explained that 
she had also dated [Appellant]. She  had 
told me that he had been sharing intimate 
videos of me and pictures of me with 
people. That’s how I came to light on the 
videos that were being shared. 
 BF identified the person she messaged 
regarding the video as LW. LW, who also had 
engaged in a romantic relationship with 
Appellant, met with BF in person. LW described 
to BF a video that included BF and “mentioned a 
bathtub.” BF testified she “knew exactl y what 
time that was because there was only one time we 
had had sex in the bath.” LW also testified and 
explained Appellant showed her the video and 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
that afterwards she contacted BF. Later, BF and 
LW went to Appellant ’s home to confront him. 
Appellant was not home; however, Appellant's 
wife was present and they addressed the video 
with her instead. The video of Appellant and BF 
engaging in sexual conduct was also uploaded to a 
publicly accessible pornographic website an d 
viewed at least 817 times. 
Wells, 2023 CCA LEXIS 222, at *8- 10, 2023 WL 3597239, 
at *3-5 (alterations in original) (footnotes omitted).  
II. Analysis  
Article 134, UCMJ, creates three different types of 
crimes, commonly referred to as Clause s 1, 2, and 3 
offenses. Manual for Courts-Martial, United States pt. IV, 
para. 91.c.(1) (2019 ed.) (MCM). Clause 1 offenses involve 
disorders and neglects to the prejudice of good order and 
discipline in the armed forces. Id. Clause 2 offenses involve 
conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed 
forces. Id. Clause 3 offenses involve noncapital crimes or 
offenses which violate federal law, including law made 
applicable through the Federal Assimilative Crimes Act. 
Id.  
For Appellant to be found guilty of the offense of 
extramarital sexual conduct, charged under Clause 2,  the 
Government was required to prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt that Appellant: (1) wrongfully engaged in 
extramarital conduct with BF; (2) Appellant knew at the 
time that he was married to someone else; and (3) under 
the circumstances, the conduct was of a nature to bring 
discredit upon the armed forces. MCM pt. IV, para. 99.b. 
We granted review to consider whether the evidence was 
legally sufficient to establish the third element. 
Appellant argues that his conviction is legally 
insufficient because the only direct evidence at trial on 
Clause 2 demonstrated that the service was not discredited 
by his extramarital sexual conduct. We perform a de novo 
review of legal sufficiency issues. United States v. Richard, 
82 M.J. 473, 476 (C.A.A.F. 2022). Legal sufficiency is 
evaluated by determining whether, after viewing the 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any 
rational factfinder could have found the essential elements 
of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. Id.  
It is well established that conviction of a criminal 
offense under the Constitution requires proof of every 
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. Sullivan 
v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 278 (1993); In re Winship, 397 
U.S. 358, 361-64 (1970); United States v. Neal, 68 M.J. 289, 
298 (C.A.A.F. 2010). The use of conclusive presumptions to 
establish the elements of an offense is unconstitutional 
because such presumptions conflict with the presumption 
of innocence and invade the province of the trier of fact. 
Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 523 (1979). 
According to Appellant, United States v. Phillips , 70 
M.J. 161 (C.A.A.F. 2011), cannot be relied upon to 
determine the legal sufficiency of the Clause 2 offense in 
his case because nothing in the record, other than the fact 
of the activity itself in that case , was required to find the 
conduct service discrediting. Thus, echoing the Phillips  
dissent, he argues that the terminal element in Phillips  
was conclusively presumed from the charged conduct itself. 
In Phillips, the accused was caught in possession of child 
pornography during a search of his room by law 
enforcement looking for evidence pertaining to an 
unrelated larceny offense.  Id. at 163- 64 There was no 
testimony that the accused’s conduct was service 
discrediting or that anyone other than the agents searching 
his room were even aware of his conduct. Id.  at 164. This 
Court explained that the government is required to prove 
every element of an offense beyond a reasonable doubt and 
that it is improper to find the commission o f an offense to 
be conclusively service discrediting. Id.  at 165. We , 
however, rejected the notion that a conviction under a 
service discrediting theory requires proof of the public’s 
knowledge of an accused’s conduct. Id. Instead, this Court 
concluded: “The focus of clause 2 is on the ‘nature’ of the 
conduct, whether the accused’s conduct would tend to bring 
discredit on the armed forces if known by the public.” Id. at 
165-66. We further  explained that the government need 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
not prove anyone was aware of an accused’s conduct or “to 
specifically articulate how the conduct is service 
discrediting.” Id. at 166.  Instead, the government must 
“introduce sufficient evidence of the accused ’s allegedly 
service discrediting conduct to support a conviction.” Id . 
We also emphasized that “[w]hether conduct is of a ‘nature’ 
to bring discredit upon the armed forces is a question that 
depends on the facts and circumstances of the conduct.” Id. 
Ultimately, we concluded a rational trier of fact could have 
found the accused’s possession of child pornography to be 
service discrediting “had the public known of it.” Id. 
Even though Appellant asserts BF’s testimony at trial 
revealed that her personal opinion of the armed forces was 
untarnished, we are not persuaded that the Government 
failed to prove the terminal element. Here, there was 
sufficient evidence for the trier of fact to determine beyond 
a reasonable doubt that Appellant’s conduct under the 
facts and circumstances would tend to bring the service 
into disrepute if it were known. The evidence supports a 
finding that Appellant’s sexual relationship with BF was 
neither private nor discreet and therefore tended to bring 
the service into disrepute. In fact, the evidence established 
Appellant showed a video of his extramarital sexual 
conduct to others and made it available to the general 
public to view on a website. As the video depicts Appellant 
engaging in intimate sexual acts with BF, it is strong 
evidence of the “open or notorious nature” of the 
extramarital conduct. BF’s opinion does not operate to 
contradict or minimize the service  discrediting nature of 
Appellant’s conduct
— her opinion merely reflects the 
opinion of one person. Considering our deferential review 
under the legal sufficiency standard, we conclude a rational 
trier of fact could have found Appellant’s conduct service 
discrediting. 
To buttress his insufficiency claim, Appellant contends 
that we should overturn Phillips because it was wrongly 
decided. According to Appellant, Clause 2, on its face , is 
unconstitutional because it permits conviction for per se 
service discrediting conduct and therefore cannot be used 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
as the basis to uphold the vitality of Phillips as a precedent. 
Although we believe that Parker v. Levy , 417 U.S. 733  
(1974), established conclusively the constitutionality of 
Article 134, UCMJ, we will address this aspect of 
Appellant’s argument. 
When asked to overrule one of our precedents, we 
analyze the matter under the doctrine of stare decisis. 
United States v. Blanks, 77 M.J. 239, 241- 42 (C.A.A.F. 
2018). Stare decisis is the doctrine of precedent, under 
which a court must follow earlier judicial decisions when 
the same points arise again. United States v. Andrews, 77 
M.J. 393, 399 (C.A.A.F. 2018). “[A]dherence to precedent is 
the preferred course because it promotes the evenhanded, 
predictable, and consistent development of legal principles, 
fosters reliance on judicial decisions, and contributes to the 
actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process.” Id . 
(alteration in original) (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting Blanks, 77 M.J. at 242). 
Applying stare decisis is not an inexorable command, 
and we are not bound by precedent when there is a 
significant change in circumstances after the adoption of a 
legal rule, or an error in legal analysis. Id . In evaluating 
the application of stare decisis, we consider: “whether the 
prior decision is unworkable or poorly reasoned; any 
intervening events; the reasonable expectations of 
servicemembers; and the risk of undermining public 
confidence in the law.” Id . (citation omitted) (internal 
quotation marks omitted).  
For offenses under Article 134, UCMJ , the President 
has explained: “ ‘Discredit’ means to injure the reputation 
of. This clause of Article 134 makes punishable conduct 
which has a tendency to bring the service into disrepute or 
which tends to lower it in public esteem .” MCM pt. IV, 
para. 91.c.(3). The President further iterated  service 
discrediting conduct in the context of extramarital conduct: 
Extramarital conduct may be Service discrediting, 
even though the conduct is only indirectly or 
remotely prejudicial to good order and discipline. 
“Discredit” means to injure the reputation of the 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
armed forces and includes extramarital conduct 
that has a tendency, because of its open or 
notorious nature, to bring the Service into 
disrepute, make it subject to public ridicule, or 
lower it in public esteem. While extramarital 
conduct that is private and discreet in nature may 
not be service discrediting by this standard, under 
the circumstances, it may be determined to be 
conduct prejudicial to good order and discipline. 
MCM pt. IV, para. 99.c.(1). This Court has stated that 
“[p]residential narrowing of the ‘general’ article through 
examples of how it may be violated is part of why Article 
134, UCMJ,” is not considered unconstitutionally void for 
vagueness. United States v. Jones, 68 M.J. 465, 472 
(C.A.A.F. 2010) (citing Levy, 417 U.S. at 753-56). Further, 
it is this narrowing of the breadth of Article 134 through 
these presidential enumerations that provides 
servicemembers with fair notice of what conduct is subject 
to criminal sanction und er the statute.  Until the United 
States Supreme Court decides otherwise, Article 134, 
UCMJ, in its entirety, remains constitutional on its face. 
Appellant’s main contention as to why Phillips should 
be discarded as controlling precedent is that it sanctions 
per se service  discrediting conduct , and as a result, the  
Government is unconstitutionally relieved of its burden to 
prove all elements of the charged offense beyond a 
reasonable doubt . Yet, Phillips  expressly stated that so -
called “conclusive presumptions” are impermissible. 70 
M.J. at 165.  Simply put, Phillips  did not  expressly or 
impliedly sanction such a presumption.  
The instant case directly refutes Appellant’s contention 
that the terminal element alone is sufficient to convict for 
Clause 2. Here, t he members were told they had to 
determine beyond a reasonable doubt that  Appellant’s 
conduct was service discrediting. They were told that in  
making the determination, they must “consider all the 
facts and circumstances  offered on the issue.” They were 
properly instructed on criteria to use in  making their 
determination. No reasonable panel that followed  these 
instructions could have made a “per se” determination that 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
the mere fact of  Appellant’s extramarital sexual conduct 
was automatically service discrediting. 
Given that Phillips  expressly condemns conclusive 
presumptions and reaffirms that the Government must 
prove not only the offense itself, but also the nature of that 
offense beyond a reasonable doubt, the decision in Phillips 
is not unworkable or poorly reasoned. We have also 
considered the other factors affecting our application of 
stare decisis and conclude that they do not aid Appellant’s 
argument. Consistent with our precedent, we reiterate that 
whether any given conduct violates C lause 2 is a question 
for the trier of fact to determine, based upon all the facts 
and circumstances; it cannot be conclusively presumed 
from any particular course of conduct. 
III. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Air Force  Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, with whom Chief Judge OHLSON joins, 
dissenting. 
Earlier this term , but after we granted review in this 
case, the Judge Advocate General of the Air Force certified 
United States v. Rocha to this Court for review. 83 M.J. 275 
(C.A.A.F. 2023) (certificate for review). In that case, the ap-
pellant was convicted of violating Clause 2 of Article 134, 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 
(2018), for engaging in indecent acts with a childlike sex 
doll—conduct that a panel of members sitting as a general 
court-martial found to be of a nature to bring discredit 
upon the armed forces. United States v. Rocha, 84 M.J. 346, 
347-48 (C.A.A.F. 2024). Although in this case  Appellant 
urges this Court to overturn its prior decision in United 
States v. Phillips, 70 M.J. 161 (C.A.A.F. 2011) , Rocha—an 
Article 134, Clause 2, case in which the g overnment pre-
sented no evidence or argument in direct support of the ter-
minal element —already provided the Court with the op-
portunity to reconsider its decision in Phillips . The Court 
declined to do so, and  Phillips remains good law. It there-
fore remains the case that for convictions under Clause 2, 
Article 134, UCMJ, proof of the charged conduct itself “may 
be sufficient for a rational trier of fact to conclude beyond 
a reasonable doubt that, under all the circumstances, it 
was of a nature to bring discredit upon  the armed forces.” 
Id. at 163. Nevertheless, I disagree with the majority’s con-
clusion that in this case a rational trier of fact could have 
found Appellant’s actions service discrediting beyond a rea-
sonable doubt based on his conduct alone. 
Common sense dictates that the military does not con-
sider every act of extramarital sexual conduct  by service-
members to violate Clause 2 of Article  134, UCMJ; and 
that conclusion is confirmed by the President’s guidance in 
the Manual for Courts-Martial, United States ( Manual or 
MCM). The President expressly acknowledges that not all 
extramarital conduct is service discrediting and lists nine 
factors for commanders to consider when determining 
whether such conduct is criminal under Article  134, 
UCMJ. MCM pt. IV, para. 99.c.(1)(a)-(i) (2019 ed.). Yet the 
Government in this case made no attempt to persuade the 
panel that Appellant’s extramarital conduct satisfied any 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
2 
 
of these factors or was otherwise service discrediting.  To 
the contrary, the only  evidence presented to the panel  di-
rectly with respect to the  terminal element was the testi-
mony of the coactor who stated that she did not hold Appel-
lant’s misconduct against the armed forces. Confronted 
with this record, I cannot say that the Government met its 
burden of proving each element of Article 134, UCMJ, be-
yond a reasonable doubt. I therefore respectfully dissent.  
I. United States v. Phillips 
In Phillips, the Court held that in Article 134, Clause 2, 
cases, proof of the charged conduct “ may” be sufficient to 
prove the terminal element. 70 M.J. at 163. The Court em-
phasized the word “ may,” underscoring the fact that in 
some cases, additional evidence would be necessary to 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the charged conduct 
was of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces.  
Additionally, the Court stated that “whether any given con-
duct violates [Clause 2] is a question for the trier of fact to 
determine, based upon all the facts and circumstances; it 
cannot be conclusively presumed from any particular 
course of action.” Id. at 165. Thus, in applying Phillips the 
Court must look at the underlying circumstances of the 
charged conduct —in this case, extramarital sexual con-
duct—to determine whether the service discrediting ele-
ment has been proven beyond a reasonable doubt. 
Outside of the military, extramarital sexual conduct be-
tween adults is generally not a criminal act . And even 
within the military, the President has instructed that such 
conduct only violates Article 134, UCMJ, when the accused 
“wrongfully” engages in it. MCM pt. IV, para. 99.b.(1). Of 
course, the accused’s conduct must also satisfy the termi-
nal element by  being either prejudicial to good order and 
discipline, service discrediting, or both. MCM pt. IV, para. 
99.b.(3). In the Manual , the President provides a lengthy 
description of extramarital conduct that satisfies these re-
quirements. MCM pt. IV, para. 99.c.(1). 
The President explains that service discrediting adul-
tery “includes extramarital conduct that has a tendency, 
because of its open or notorious nature, to bring the Service 
into disrepute, make it subject to public ridicule, or lower 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
3 
 
it in public esteem.” Id. The President also notes, however, 
that “extramarital conduct that is private and discreet in 
nature may not be service discrediting by this standard.” 
Id. To assist commanders in determining whether specific 
extramarital conduct violates Article 134, UCMJ, the Pres-
ident has provided an extensive, but nonexhaustive, list of 
factors that commanders should consider when determin-
ing whether extramarital conduct violates Article  134, 
UCMJ.
1  
 
 1 The factors include: 
 (a) The accused’s marital status, military 
rank, grade, or position; 
 (b) The co -actor’s marital status, military 
rank, grade, and position, or relationship to the 
armed forces; 
 (c) The military status of the accused’s spouse 
or the spouse of the co-actor, or their relationship 
to the armed forces; 
 (d) The impact, if any, of the extramarital con-
duct on the ability of the accused, the co -actor, or 
the spouse of either to perform their duties in sup-
port of the armed forces 
 (e) The misuse, if any, of Government time and 
resources to facilitate the commission of the con-
duct; 
 (f) Whether the conduct persisted despite 
counseling or orders to desist; the flagrancy of the 
conduct, such as whether any notoriety ensued; 
and whether the extramarital conduct was accom-
panied by other violations of the UCMJ; 
 (g) The negative impact on the units or organ-
izations of the accused, the co-actor or the spouse 
of either of them, such as a detrimental effect on 
unit or organization morale, teamwork, and effi-
ciency; 
 (h) Whether the accused’s or co -actor’s mar-
riage was pending legal dissolution, which is de-
fined as an action with a view towards divorce pro-
ceedings, such as the filing of a petition for 
divorce; and 
 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
4 
 
Accordingly, w hether a servicemember ’s extramarital 
conduct constitutes a crime under Article  134, UCMJ, de-
pends on the specific nature and circumstances of the 
charged conduct. Some extramarital conduct violates Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ;  other extramarital conduct does not. Be-
cause this is a fact-specific, multifactored, case-by-case de-
termination, the Government must carry some burden of 
proving, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Appellant’s extra-
marital conduct was of a nature to bring discredit upon the 
armed forces.
2 See Phillips, 70 M.J. at 164 (“ It is estab-
lished that conviction of a criminal offense under the Con-
stitution requires proof of every element of the offense be-
yond a reasonable doubt. ”); In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 
361-64 (1970). I turn, therefore, to the evidence the Gov-
ernment presented to the panel to determine whether the 
Government met its burden in this case.  
II. The Legal Sufficiency of Appellant’s 
Conviction Under Article 134, UCMJ 
Before this Court, the Government argued that various 
factors—including that Appellant shared the video of the 
victim online and lied to the victim about being married—
made Appellant’s behavior in conducting the affair “duplic-
itous, crass, flagrant, and exploitive.” I take no issue with 
 
 (i) Whether the extramarital conduct involves 
an ongoing or recent relationship or is remote in 
time.  
MCM pt. IV, para. 99.c.(1)(a)-(i). 
2 It is worth noting that the President’s guidance in the Man-
ual also makes clear that the Government’s burden to prove the 
terminal element will be different for other offenses under Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ. For example, the Manual  recognizes only two 
circumstances that will prevent the possession of child pornog-
raphy from being criminal: (1) when the accused is “not aware 
that the images were of minors, or what appeared to be minors, 
engaged in sexually explicit conduct,” and (2) w hen the facts 
demonstrate that the accused “unintentionally and inadvert-
ently acquired” the child pornography. MCM pt. IV, para. 
95.c.(5), (12). This difference likely reflects the fact that child 
pornography “harms and debases the most defenseless of our cit-
izens,” United States v. Williams, 553 U.S. 285, 307 (2008), and 
that its possession violates both federal law and the law of all 
fifty states and the District of Columbia. 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
5 
 
this characterization of Appellant’s conduct . But the fact 
that the Government is making this point for the first time 
now—years after Appellant’s court -martial—only high-
lights and emphasizes the deficiency of the Government’s 
argument at trial. 
A. Evidence Presented at Trial 
During Appellant’s court -martial, the Government 
largely ignored the terminal element of the  Article 134 of-
fense. Outside of evidence that Appellant had an extramar-
ital affair, the Government presented no evidence on how 
Appellant’s conduct was of a nature to discredit the armed 
forces. The Government never argued that the extramari-
tal conduct was “open or notorious” or that it was otherwise 
service discrediting under the nine factors enumerated by 
the President in the Manual. 
Unlike the Government, trial defense counsel did not 
neglect the terminal element of the Article 134 offense. 
During the defense’s cross-examination of BF, the follow-
ing exchange occurred:  
[Trial Defense Counsel:] Given that relation-
ship, you do not think any less of the United 
States Air Force? 
[BF:] What, for having a relationship with 
him? 
[Trial Defense Counsel:] Right. 
[BF:] What do you mean? 
[Trial Defense Counsel: ] Does it make you —
you do not think any less of the United States Air 
Force, at large, based on your relationship with 
Airman Wells. 
[BF:] Just the relationship, minus if—  
[Trial Defense Counsel:] Yes 
[BF:] —he’s accused of everything. 
[Trial Defense Counsel:] Your consensual sex-
ual relationship with Airman Wells, you don’t 
hold that against—  
[BF:] If he was a single man then I wouldn’t—
it’s not their responsibility to stop someone 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
6 
 
cheating, but it is to stop them from running 
around getting girls pregnant and beating them. 
[Trial Defense Counsel :] To be clear, as it re-
lates to your consensual sexual relationship—  
[BF:] Yeah. 
[Trial Defense Counsel :] — you do not hold it 
against—  
[BF:] No. 
[Trial Defense Counsel:] [T]he U.S. Air Force. 
[BF:] No. 
(Emphasis added.) Thus, the only evidence in the record 
that directly addressed whether Appellant’s extramarital 
conduct was service discrediting  was contrary evidence—
BF, the victim of Appellant’s actions, did not hold Appel-
lant’s conduct against the Air Force.  
In its closing argument, the Government acknowledged 
this testimony, stating “[t]hankfully, [BF] is not willing to 
impute [Appellant’s] conduct onto the Air Force at 
large. . . . She is mature enough to at least say . . . . I’m not 
going to hold [Appellant’s conduct] against the Air Force.” 
But even though the only evidence of the terminal element 
on the record was contrary evidence, the Government still 
did not argue why Appellant’s conduct—when considered 
in light of the President’s guidance in the Manual —was 
nonetheless service discrediting. The Government did not 
claim that Appellant’s adultery was “open or notorious” or 
explain why the President’s nine factors supported a find-
ing of guilt . Instead, the Government merely expressed 
gratitude that Appellant’s conduct did not actually injure 
the military’s reputation, but reminded the panel that the 
military’s reputation could have been injured. In the Gov-
ernment’s view, this is all the law requires under Phillips. 
I am not willing to extend this Court’s holding in Phillips 
that far. 
B. “Open or Notorious” Conduct 
In concluding that Appellant’s conviction was legally 
sufficient, the majority relies on the evidence that “Appel-
lant showed a video of his extramarital sexual conduct to 
others and made it available to the general public to view 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
7 
 
on a website.”  United States v. Wells, __ M.J. _ _, __ ( 6) 
(C.A.A.F. 2024). The majority concludes that because the 
“video depicts Appellant engaging in intimate sexual acts 
with BF, it is strong evidence of the ‘open or notorious na-
ture’ of the extramarital conduct.” Id. 
My problem with this approach is twofold. First,  I do 
not believe that the uploaded video establishes the “open 
or notorious” nature of Appellant’s conduct as the majority 
suggests. The record indicates that when Appellant posted 
the video online, both his and BF’s identities were anony-
mous. Neither Appellant nor BF was identifiable in the 
video, and the video provides no indication that Appellant 
had any connection to the United States military. Thus, 
while Appellant’s extramarital sexual conduct was not 
purely private, its level of openness and notoriety was more 
trivial than the majority implies. 
Second, and more importantly, the Government never 
argued at trial that the uploaded video established that Ap-
pellant’s extramarital conduct was open or notorious, and 
it made no attempt to  otherwise connect the video to the 
terminal element of the Article 134 offense. Instead, trial 
counsel focused on whether BF was actually the person in 
the video and whether she consented to Appellant record-
ing her. But those arguments addressed the charge for un-
lawful recording or broadcasting under Article  120c, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  920c (2018), for which Appellant was 
found not guilty. The Government never argued  to the 
panel that the video made Appellant’s extramarital con-
duct known to others, bringing disrepute and public ridi-
cule upon the military. See MCM pt. IV, para. 99.c.(1) (ex-
plaining why open and notorious extramarital conduct is 
service discrediting). 
C. Appellant’s Due Process Rights 
To now accept the Government’s “open or notorious” ar-
gument—or any of the other arguments the Government 
presents now on appeal —raises fundamental questions of 
fairness and due process. Because  the Government never 
argued at trial that Appellant’s extramarital conduct was 
service discrediting because it was committed in an open or 
notorious manner, Appellant was never given any notice of 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
8 
 
the theory under which the Government now claims he was 
found guilty. Appellant therefore never had the oppor-
tunity at trial to introduce contrary evidence or to rebut the 
theory that his extramarital conduct was open or notorious. 
When pressed on this point at oral argument, Government 
counsel stated that “[ the defense] could have attacked 
whether it was open and notorious . . . and if they failed to 
do so unconvincingly for a factfinder, that’s how the justice 
system works.” Oral A rgument at 38:40 -39:20, United 
States v. Wells (C.A.A.F. Mar. 6, 2024) (No. 23- 0219). Un-
der the Government’s view, it has no obligation to present 
any evidence or argument with respect to the terminal ele-
ment in any Clause 2, Article 134, case, but the accused has 
the burden to affirmatively refute every possible theory  for 
why his extramarital conduct was service discrediting. I 
disagree with the Government that this is “how the justice 
system works.” 
As the Court reaffirmed in Phillips , “conviction of a 
criminal offense under the Constitution requires proof of 
every element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt.”  
70 M.J. at 164 (citing Sullivan v. Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 
278 (1993); In re Winship, 397 U.S. at  361-64)). And the 
terminal element in a Clause 2, Article 134, case is an ele-
ment of the offense which “must be proved beyond a rea-
sonable doubt like any other element. ” Id. at 165. The Su-
preme Court has made clear that the Constitution 
prohibits the government from shifting this burden to the 
accused. Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S. 510, 523- 24 
(1979). 
In this case, Appellant was convicted of violating Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ, by engaging in extramarital conduct  that 
was of a nature to discredit the armed forces . The Pre si-
dent’s guidance in the Manual instructs that such conduct 
may violate Article 134, UCMJ, in some circumstances but 
does not do so in other circumstances. The Government 
largely ignored the terminal element, neither arguing that 
Appellant’s extramarital acts were conducted in an open or 
notorious manner or that they satisfied any of the other 
nine factors enumerated by the President for identifying 
violations of Article  134, UCMJ. As a result, the only evi-
dence in the record directly related to the terminal element 
United States v. Wells, No. 23-0219/AF 
Judge HARDY, dissenting 
9 
 
was the coactor’s testimony that Appellant’s misconduct 
did not harm her views about the armed forces. 
As I mentioned above, in its briefs and at oral argument 
before this Court the Government offered reasonable theo-
ries why Appellant’s extramarital conduct was service dis-
crediting. But this is neither the time  nor the place  for 
those arguments to be presented  and litigated in the first 
instance. Due process requires a criminal defendant to be 
presented with a “meaningful opportunity” to defend him-
self. Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 314 (1979) . Appel-
lant was denied that opportunity in this case. For that rea-
son, I do not believe that Appellant’s conviction for 
violating Article 134, UCMJ, was legally sufficient, and I 
respectfully dissent. 
III. Conclusion 
For the foregoing reasons, I would reverse the decision 
of the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
as to Appellant’s conviction under C lause 2, Article  134, 
UCMJ.  