This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
  
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Rodney D. HARVEY, Hospital Corpsman First Class  
United States Navy, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0239 
Crim. App. No. 202200040 
 
Argued April 17, 2024—Decided September 6, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Ann K. Minami (arraignment) 
and Matthew R. Brower (trial)  
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Christopher B. Dempsey , 
JAGC, USN (argued). 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Commander James P. Wu 
Zhu, JAGC, USN (argued); Colonel Joseph M. Jen-
nings, USMC, Lieutenant Colonel James A. Burkart, 
USMC, and Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Amicus Curiae i n Support of Neither Party: James 
A. Young, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
  
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court-martial with officer and enlisted mem-
bers found Appellant guilty, contrary to his plea, of one 
specification of indecent exposure in violation of Article 
120c, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 920c (2018). The United States Navy-Marine Corps Court 
of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) affirmed, holding inter alia 
that the evidence was factually sufficient. United States v. 
Harvey, 83 M.J. 685, 693-94 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2023). In 
so doing, the NMCCA applied the recently amended stand-
ards for factual sufficiency review in  Article 66( d)(1)(B), 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866(d)(1)(B) (Supp. III 2019-2022).
1 Id. 
at 693. We granted review to decide  whether the NMCCA 
correctly applied these new standards. United States v. 
Harvey, 84 M.J. 262  (C.A.A.F. 2024)  (order granting re-
view). For reasons that we explain below, we set aside the 
NMCCA’s decision and remand the case for a new factual 
sufficiency review in accordance with this opinion. 
I. Background 
The specification at issue in this case alleg ed that Ap-
pellant, “[o]n active duty, did, at or near Bremerton, Wash-
ington, on or about 28 April 2021, intentionally expose his 
genitalia in an indecent manner, to wit: exposing his penis 
to C.E. in a public parking lot.” At trial, the principal evi-
dence against Appellant came from C.E. She testified that 
after interacting with Appellant in a gym  that they both 
frequented, she went to her car in the gym’s parking lot, 
and that while she was inside the car, Appellant exposed 
himself by putting his erect penis  on one of the car’s win-
dowsills. A security camera showed that Appellant and 
C.E. were in the parking lot around the time of the alleged 
incident. No relevant DNA evidence was found  on C.E.’s 
car. The court-martial found Appellant guilty of indecent 
exposure and not guilty of two other charges. 
 
 1 Congress amended Article 66(d), UCMJ, in the William M. 
(Mac) Thornberry National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2021, Pub. L. No. 116-283, § 542, 134 Stat. 3388, 3611. 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
On appeal, the NMCCA held that the evidence was fac-
tually sufficient to support the finding of guilt y under the 
new standards set out in Article 66( d)(1)(B), UCMJ. Har-
vey, 83 M.J. at 693. Appellant seeks review in this Court, 
arguing that the NMCCA misconstrued and therefore mis-
applied the amended Article 66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ. Appellant 
then asks this Court to reverse the NMCCA’s decision and 
to return the case for further analysis under a correct un-
derstanding of the amended statute. 
II. Standards of Review 
This Court may review whether a Court of Criminal Ap-
peals (CCA) applied “correct legal principles ” to a factual 
sufficiency review. United States v. Thompson, 83 M.J. 1, 4 
(C.A.A.F. 2022) ( quoting United States v. Clark , 75 M.J. 
298, 300 (C.A.A.F. 2016)). This Court reviews  de novo  a 
CCA’s interpretation of a statute. United States v. Kohlbek, 
78 M.J. 326, 330-31 (C.A.A.F. 2019). And “when the record 
reveals that a CCA misunderstood the law, this Court re-
mands for another factual sufficiency review under correct 
legal principles.” Thompson, 83 M.J. at 4. 
III. Analysis 
Prior to its recent amendment, Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ, 
authorized the CCAs to conduct factual sufficiency review 
by providing: 
In any case before the Court of Criminal Appeals 
under subsection (b), the Court may act only with 
respect to the findings and sentence as entered 
into the record under section 860c of this title (ar-
ticle 60c). The Court may affirm only such find-
ings of gu ilty, and the sentence or such part or 
amount of the sentence, as the Court finds correct 
in law and fact and determines, on the basis of the 
entire record, should be approved. In considering 
the record, the Court may weigh the evidence, 
judge the credibility of witnesses, and determine 
controverted questions of fact, recognizing that 
the trial court saw and heard the witnesses. 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
10 U.S.C. § 866(d) (1) (2018). Authority to conduct factual 
sufficiency review now appears in amended Article 
66(d)(1)(B), UCMJ, which provides: 
 (B) Factual Sufficiency Review.—(i) In an ap-
peal of a finding of guilty under subsection (b), the 
Court may consider whether the finding is correct 
in fact upon request of the accused if the accused 
makes a specific showing of a deficiency in proof. 
 (ii) After an accused has made such a showing, 
the Court may weigh the evidence and determine 
controverted questions of fact subject to—  
(I) appropriate deference to the fact that 
the trial court saw and heard the witnesses 
and other evidence; and 
(II) appropriate deference to findings of 
fact entered into the record by the military 
judge. 
 (iii) If, as a result of the review conducted un-
der clause (ii), the Court is clearly convinced that 
the finding of guilty was against the weight of the 
evidence, the Court may dismiss, set aside, or 
modify the finding, or affirm a lesser finding. 
10 U.S.C. § 866(d)(1)(B) (Supp. III 20 19-2022). The 
NMCCA’s opinion and the briefs filed in this case address 
the meaning of several key parts of this new provision. 
A. The Trigger for Review in Article 66(d)(1)(B)(i), UCMJ 
This Court held in numerous cases that the former Ar-
ticle 66(d)(1), UCMJ, required CCAs to conduct a de novo 
review of the factual sufficiency of the evidence in every 
case. See, e.g ., Thompson, 83 M.J. at 4; United States v. 
Pease, 75 M.J. 180, 184 (C.A.A.F. 2016) ; United States v. 
Washington, 57 M.J. 394, 399 (C.A.A.F. 2002). In this case, 
however, the NMCCA concluded that the words “upon re-
quest of the accused if the accused makes a specific show-
ing of a deficiency in proof ” in amended Article 
66(d)(1)(B)(i), UCMJ, have eliminated a CCA’s “duty, and 
power, to review a conviction for factual sufficiency absent 
an appellant (1) asserting an assignment of error, and (2) 
showing a specific deficiency in proof. ” Harvey, 83 M.J. at 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
691. We agree with the NMCCA’s conclusion on this point. 
If the two express trigger conditions (i.e., an assertion of an 
error and a showing of a deficiency) are not met, then noth-
ing in amended Article 66, UCMJ, either requires or allows 
a CCA to review the factual sufficiency of the evidence. Ac-
cordingly, our decisions in Thompson, Pease, Washington, 
and other cases holding that a factual sufficiency review is 
always required have been superseded by this amended 
statute. 
The briefs filed in this case have also addressed two re-
lated questions  about the trigger for review in Article 
66(d)(1)(B)(i), UCMJ. The first is sue, discussed at length 
by the parties and amicus curiae, is  whether a CCA has 
discretion not to conduct a factual sufficiency review even 
if the  trigger conditions  are met . However, b ecause the 
NMCCA actually conducted a factual sufficiency review of 
the evidence in this case, we need not decide this issue in 
this appeal. The second issue concerns the meaning of the 
phrase “specific showing of a deficiency in proof” in Article 
66(d)(1)(B)(i), UCMJ . T he NMCCA and the parties have 
advanced notably different views on this question.  Again, 
however, we need not address this issue here  because the 
NMCCA and both parties agree that Appellant met his bur-
den to make a specific showing of a deficiency in  proof in 
this case. 
B. Standard of Review Under 
Article 66(d)(1)(B)(ii), UCMJ 
The former Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ, required a CCA, in 
conducting a factual sufficiency review, to “weigh the evi-
dence . . . recognizing that the trial court saw and heard 
the witnesses.” 10 U.S.C. § 866(d)(1) (2018). In Washing-
ton, th e Court clarified that “[s]uch a review involves a 
fresh, impartial look at the evidence, giving no deference to 
the decision of the trial court on factual sufficiency beyond 
the admonition in Article 66(c), UCMJ, to take into account 
the fact that the trial court saw and heard the witne sses.” 
57 M.J. at 399.  
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
Amended Article 66( d)(1)(B)(ii), UCMJ, now directs a 
CCA to “ weigh the evidence and determine controverted 
questions of fact.” This power is subject, in part, to Article 
66(d)(1)(B)(ii)(I), UCMJ, which requir es “appropriate def-
erence to the fact that the trial court saw and heard the 
witnesses and other evidence.” The amended language dif-
fers from the prior version  in at least two significant re-
spects. First, the amended article replaces the word “recog-
nizing” with the words “subject to . . . appropriate deference 
to the fact .” Second, the amended article refers to “wit-
nesses and other evidence” while the prior version referred 
only to “witnesses.” 
The NMCCA and the parties disagree about the impact 
of these statutory changes. The NMCCA concluded that 
these changes impose a “higher standard” than the former 
version’s de novo requirement, but this change in review 
“does not mean that this Court can no longer make any 
credibility determinations of witnesses.” 83 M.J. at 692. In 
contrast, t he Government  asserts that the amendment 
eliminated de novo review and create d a new standard in 
which a CCA can no longer judge the credibility of 
witnesses but instead must defer to the trial factfinder 
with respect to all evidence.  Appellant contends that the 
standard of “review remains de novo  with a requirement 
for ‘appropriate deference ’ to the factfinder’s evidentiary 
findings.” 
Having considered all these view s, we construe the re-
quirement of “appropriate deference” when a CCA 
“weigh[s] the evidence and determine[s] controverted ques-
tions of fact” to imply that the degree of deference will de-
pend on the nature of the evidence at issue. We reach this 
conclusion because  Article 66( d)(1)(B)(ii)(I), UCMJ , now 
addresses not just the testimony of witnesses but also all 
other evidence. For example, a CCA might determine that 
the appropriate deference required for a court-martial’s as-
sessment of the testimony of a fact witness, whose credibil-
ity was at issue, is high because the CCA judges could not 
see the witness testify. In contrast, when the CCA can as-
sess documents, videos, and other objective evidence just 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
as well as the court-martial, the CCA might determine that 
the appropriate deference required is low.  The statute af-
fords the CCA discretion to determine  what level of defer-
ence is appropriate , and we will review a CCA’s decision 
only for an abuse of discretion.2 
C. Action Under Article 66(d)(1)(B)(iii), UCMJ 
Amended Article 66(d)(1)(B)(iii), UCMJ, states the next 
step for the CCA : “If, as a result of the review conducted 
under clause (ii), the Court is clearly convinced that the 
finding of guilty was against the weight of the evidence, the 
Court may dismiss, set aside, or modify the finding, or af-
firm a lesser finding.” We refer to the first half of this pro-
vision (i.e., “[i]f, as a result of the review conducted under 
clause (ii), the Court is clearly convinced that the finding 
of guilty was against the weight of the evidence ”) as the 
“predicate clause” because it states the condition under 
which a CCA may take an action with respect to the find-
ings. We refer to the second half of this provision (i.e., “the 
Court may dismiss, set aside, or modify the finding, or af-
firm a lesser finding”) as the “action-authorizing clause” be-
cause it lists the actions that a CCA may take if the predi-
cate is satisfied. 
The predicate clause uses the phrase “against the 
weight of the evidence.” Appellant notes that Black’s Law 
Dictionary defines th is ph rase to mean “ not sufficiently 
supported by the evidence in the record. ” Against the 
Weight of the Evidence, Black’s Law Dictionary  (11th ed. 
2019). Thus, Appellant asserts that a CCA is authorized to 
act (i.e., dismiss, set aside, modify, or affirm a lesser find-
ing) if “the finding of guilty was ‘not sufficiently supported 
by the evidence ’ presented at trial (i.e., not supported be-
yond a reasonable doubt) .” The Government, in contrast,  
asserts that “weight of the evidence” refers to a quantum 
 
2 We note that Article 66(d)(1)(B)(ii)(II), UCMJ, also requires 
that the CCAs give “appropriate deference to findings of fact en-
tered into the record by the military judge.” Appellant asserts 
that this provision is not at issue in this case and does not rely 
on it. Accordingly, we express no opinion on its meaning. 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
of proof . In its view, “weight of the evidence” is to be 
“equated with a preponderance of the evidence—a far lower 
burden of proof than is required for conviction beyond a 
reasonable doubt.” Accordingly, the Government’s view is 
that a CCA can act with respect to the finding (i.e., dismiss, 
set aside, modify, or affirm a lesser finding) only if the CCA 
concludes that the finding of guilt y is not supported by a 
preponderance of the evidence. 
We generally agree with the position of Appellant . We 
do not read the phrase “weight of the evidence” as an alter-
ation of the necessary quantum of proof to sustain a finding 
of guilty because the amended statute does not explicitly 
alter the quantum of proof required. In our view, the quan-
tum of proof necessary to sustain a finding of guilty during 
a factual sufficiency  review is “proof beyond a reasonable 
doubt,” the same as the quantum of proof necessary to find 
an accused guilty at trial. We reach this conclusion by read-
ing the predicate clause in subsection (B)(iii) in the light of 
our interpretation of subsection (B)(ii). Our reasoning is as 
follows: Factual sufficiency review occurs only after a 
court-martial has already weighed the evidence at trial and 
found that the appellant was guilty beyond a reasonable 
doubt. Subsection (B)(ii) directs the CCA to conduct a new 
weighing of the evidence, giving appropriate deference  to 
the court-martial. Because the CCA does not have to give 
complete deference to the court -martial, as discussed 
above, the CCA, during a factual sufficiency review  in a 
particular case, might weigh the evidence differently from 
how the court-martial weighed the evidence . Accordingly, 
when the predicate clause in subsection (B)(iii) refers to the 
“weight of the evidence,” we understand it to mean the 
weight of the evidence as the CCA has just weighed it under 
subsection (B)(ii). The phrase, so read, says nothing about, 
and therefore does not alter , the quantum of proof neces-
sary to sustain a finding of guilty. 
We now turn to the meaning of the words “clearly con-
vinced” in the predicate clause. Appellant argues that this 
phrase, like “weight of the evidence,” does not change the 
necessary quantum of proof. For example, the words do not 
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
substitute a “clear and convincing evidence” standard for 
the proof beyond a reasonable doubt standard. Instead, Ap-
pellant asserts that the phrase refers to a “state of confi-
dence.” The Government does not provide a clear alterna-
tive argument. We agree with Appellant. Accordingly, for a 
CCA to be “clearly convinced that the finding of guilty was 
against the weight of the evidence,” two requirements must 
be met. First,  the CCA must decide that the evidence, as 
the CCA has weighed it, does not prove that the a ppellant 
is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. Second, the CCA must 
be clearly convinced of the correctness of this decision.  
In reaching this conclusion, we have departed from the 
NMCCA’s understanding of Article 66(d)(1)(B)(iii), UCMJ. 
The NMCCA determined that this provision creates “a re-
buttable presumption that in reviewing a conviction, a 
court of criminal appeals presumes that an appellant is, in 
fact, guilty.” 83 M.J. at 693. This view is not consistent with 
our interpretation above. 
Finally, if the predicate clause of sub section (B)(iii) is 
satisfied, then the action-authorizing clause states that the 
CCA “may dismiss, set aside, or modify the finding, or af-
firm a lesser finding. ” The parties here do not dispute the 
meaning of these terms and, therefore, we express no opin-
ion about them. 
IV. Prejudice 
The Government argues that minor interpretive differ-
ences are not enough to cause prejudice to Appella nt and 
that we therefore should still affirm the NMCCA. However, 
we decide that it is  proper to remand the case to the 
NMCCA so that it may  apply the amended statute as we 
have interpreted it. In so doing, we express no opinion on 
whether the NM CCA should or should not find the evi-
dence in this case to be factually sufficient. Thus, we do not 
reach the question of prejudice. 
V. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Navy -Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals is set aside. The record of trial  
United States v. Harvey, No. 23-0239/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
is returned to the Judge Advocate General of the Navy for 
remand to the Navy- Marine Corps Court of Criminal Ap-
peals for a new factual sufficiency review, consistent with 
this opinion, under Article 66, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (Supp. III 2019-2022). 