This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jaheemee J. WILLIAMS, Private First Class 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0015 
Crim. App. No. 20230048 
 
Argued May 7, 2024—Decided September 5, 2024 
 
Military Judge: Trevor I. Barna 
 
For Appellant: Captain Kevin T. Todorow  (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten , Lieutenant Colonel Au-
tumn R. Porter, and Major Robert W. Rodriguez (on 
brief). 
 
For Appellee: Captain Vy T. Nguyen (argued); Colo-
nel Christopher B. Burgess and Major Chase C. 
Cleveland (on brief); Major Kalin P. Schlueter. 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge JOHNSON joined.  
 
_______________ 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A military judge sitting as a special court -martial con-
victed Appellant, consistent with his pleas, of one specifi-
cation of domestic violence (violation of a protective order 
with intent to intimidate) in violation of Article 128b, Uni-
form Code of Military Justice ( UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §  928b 
(2018). During Appellant’s providence inquiry, the military 
judge advised Appellant that his guilty plea would not trig-
ger the Lautenberg Amendment —a federal statute re-
stricting the Second Amendment rights of anyone con-
victed of misdemeanor  crimes of domestic violence.
1 That 
same day, the military judge signed the Statement of Trial 
Results (STR), which indicated that Appellant’s conviction 
did trigger the Lautenberg Amendment.  In promulgating 
the Judgment of the Court (which incorporated the STR) , 
the military judge  corrected the Lautenberg Amendment 
annotation on the STR to state that Appellant’s conviction 
did not trigger the Lautenberg Amendment. Appellant sub-
mitted his case to the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals (ACCA) on the merits, without identifying any 
assignments of error. Although the ACCA summarily 
 
1 The Lautenberg Amendment provides that: 
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person—  
. . . .  
(9) who has been convicted of a misde-
meanor crime of domestic violence,  
to ship or transport in interstate or foreign com-
merce, or possess in or affecting commerce, any 
firearm or ammunition; or to receive any firearm 
or ammunition which has been shipped or trans-
ported in interstate or foreign commerce.  
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9) (2018). A misdemeanor crime of domestic 
violence is a crime that “[1] is a misdemeanor under Federal, 
State, Tribal, or local law; and [2] has, as an element, the use or 
attempted use of physical force, or the threatened use of a deadly 
weapon, committed by a cu rrent or former spouse .” 18 U.S.C. 
§ 921(a)(33)(A)(i)-(ii) (2018). 
 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
affirmed the findings and sentence, it noted in a footnote  
that the military judge’s original annotation on the STR 
was correct and vacated the military judge’s amendment to 
the STR. As a result, the Judgment of the Court now indi-
cates that Appellant’s conviction did  trigger the Lauten-
berg Amendment.  
We granted review of two issues: one concerning our ju-
risdiction to review the ACCA’s modification of the Judg-
ment of the Court and another concerning whether Appel-
lant’s conviction triggered the Lautenberg Amendment. 
United States v. Williams , 84 M.J. 270, 2 70-71 (C.A.A.F. 
2024) (order granting review). For the reasons set forth be-
low, we hold  that this Court has jurisdiction under Arti-
cle 67(a)(3), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  867(a)(3) (2018), to review 
the ACCA’s modification of the STR. After review, we con-
clude that the ACCA’s modification was an ultra vires act 
that exceeded the scope of its  authority under Article  66, 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866 (2018). Accordingly, we vacate the 
ACCA’s modification of the STR without reaching the mer-
its of the Lautenberg Amendment issue. 
I. Background 
A. Statement of Trial Results 
Congress has mandated that military judges “of a gen-
eral or special court -martial shall enter into the record of 
trial a document titled ‘Statement of Trial Results.’ ” Arti-
cle 60(a)(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  860(a)(1) (2018). By stat-
ute, the STR must record three categories of information : 
(1) “each plea and findings;” (2) “the sentence, if any;” and 
(3) “such other information as the President may prescribe 
by regulation.” Article 60(a)(1) (A)-(C), UCMJ.  
The President has implemented Article  60, UCMJ, via 
Rule for Courts-Martial (R.C.M.) 1101(a). The rule requires 
that, “after final adjournment of a general or special court-
martial, the military judge shall sign and include in the 
record of trial a Statement of Trial Results.” 
R.C.M. 1101(a). According to the President, the STR must 
include: (1) the findings;  (2) the sentence;  (3) the forum;  
(4) any limitation on punishment due to a plea agreement; 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
(5) information regarding suspension of the sentence; and 
(6) other information. R.C.M. 1101(a)(1) -(6). With respect 
to the catchall “other information” category, the STR must 
include “[a]ny additional information directed by the mili-
tary judge or required under regulations prescribed by the 
Secretary concerned.” R.C.M. 1101(a)(6). 
To comply with the requirements of  R.C.M. 1101(a), 
each service generally uses a standard STR form. Although 
the details vary from service to service, the forms usually 
include administrative information about the court- mar-
tialed servicemember  as well as sections covering the 
“Findings” and “Total Sentence Adjudged.” As relevant to 
this case, the Army STR form include s a “Notifications” 
section, which asks the military judge to make certain legal 
determinations about the soldier’s conviction. 
The STR is the responsibility of  the trial counsel. See 
R.C.M. 502(d)(4) Discussion (describing the trial counsel’s 
post-trial duties). It is standard practice for the trial coun-
sel, or another member of the base legal office, to input the 
required information  into the  form. Then, the military 
judge confirms the correctness of the information and signs 
the STR. Once the form is complete, t rial counsel must 
promptly provide a copy of the signed STR to the individu-
als listed in R.C.M. 1101(d). 
B. Facts 
Following multiple domestic violence incidents between 
Appellant and his wife, Appellant’s commander issued a  
military protective order (MPO) against Appellant . The 
MPO required that Appellant refrain from contacting his 
wife and son . Appellant violated the MPO by texting and 
calling his wife and threatening to take their son.  
Appellant agreed to plead guilty to one specification of 
domestic violence in violation of Article 128b, UCMJ. Dur-
ing the providence inquiry, the military judge addressed 
the possible consequences of Appellant ’s guilty plea, in-
cluding the potential application of the Lautenberg Amend-
ment and Department of Defense Instruction 6400.06, DoD 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Coordinated Community Response to Domestic Abuse In-
volving DoD Military and Certain Affiliated Personnel 
(Dec. 15, 2021) [hereinafter DoDI 6400.06]—a Defense De-
partment specific regulation that resembles the Lauten-
berg Amendment and prescribes policies to prevent and re-
spond to domestic violence.  The military judge advised 
Appellant that while the DoDI may apply, the Lautenberg 
Amendment would not. Ultimately, the military judge ac-
cepted Appellant’s guilty plea and adjudged a bad-conduct 
discharge, as required by the plea agreement. 
The following events then took place: 
• The military judge signed the STR on the same 
day that Appellant pleaded guilty. Under the 
header “Notifications,” Block 32 of the form 
asked if Appellant had “been convicted of a mis-
demeanor crime of domestic violence (18 U.S.C. 
§ 922(g)(9))?” The STR annotation stated: “Yes.”  
• A few weeks later, the military judge promul-
gated the Judgment of the Court. The military 
judge incorporated the STR into the judgment by 
reference. Additionally, the military judge modi-
fied Block 32 of the STR to read “No,” that is, Ap-
pellant’s conviction was not a misdemeanor crime 
of domestic violence,  and it did not trigger the 
Lautenberg Amendment. 
• Appellant submitted his case to the ACCA with-
out identifying any specific assignments of error.  
• The ACCA summarily affirmed the findings and 
sentence. In a footnote, the ACCA concluded that 
the original annotation in Block 32 on the STR 
was correct; that is, Appellant’s conviction was a 
misdemeanor crime of domestic violence that 
triggered the Lautenberg Amendment. The 
ACCA therefore vacated  the military judge’s 
modification to the STR.
 
Appellant petitioned this Court for review of the 
ACCA’s decision, and we granted review of two issues: 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
I. Whether the United States Court of Appeals for 
the Armed Forces has jurisdiction to review the 
modification to the judgment of the court made by 
the Army court in changing Block 32 (Has the ac-
cused been convicted of a misdemeanor crime of 
domestic violence (18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9)?)) from 
“No” as entered by the military judge in the Judg-
ment of the Court back to the original “Yes” in the 
Statement of Trial Results. 
II. Whether the Army court erred by asserting 
that Appellant has a qualifying conviction under 
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(9). 
Williams, 84 M.J. at 270-71 (order granting review). 
II. Standards of Review 
This Court has a n independent obligation to satisfy it-
self of its own jurisdiction. M.W. v. United States, 83 M.J. 
361, 363 (C.A.A.F. 2023). We review question s of jurisdic-
tion de novo. United States v. Kuemmerle, 67 M.J. 141, 143 
(C.A.A.F. 2009).  We also review de novo whether a CCA 
acted outside the scope of its Article  66 authority. United 
States v. Nerad, 69 M.J. 139, 141-42 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (citing 
United States v. Lopez de Victoria, 66 M.J. 67, 73 (C.A.A.F. 
2008)). 
III. Discussion 
Before we can reach the Lautenberg Amendment issue, 
there are threshold questions that must be addressed. 
First, we must determine whether we have jurisdiction to 
review the ACCA’s decision below. Then, if we have juris-
diction, we must determine whether the ACCA had the au-
thority to take the challenged action.  
A. CAAF Jurisdiction 
The first question presented asks whether this Court 
has jurisdiction to review the ACCA’s action vacating the 
military judge’s amendment to the STR. The answer to this 
question has two separate but related parts: first whether 
we have jurisdiction over Appellant’s case, and second 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
whether we have the authority to act upon the ACCA’s de-
cision vacating the military judge’s action.2 
The answer to the first question is straightforward. 
This Court’s primary source of jurisdiction is Article 67(a), 
UCMJ, which grants us jurisdiction to review three catego-
ries of cases.  M.W., 83 M.J. at 364.  First, under Arti-
cle 67(a)(1), UCMJ, we must review “all cases in which the 
sentence, as affirmed by a Court of Criminal Appeals, ex-
tends to death.” Second, Article 67(a)(2), UCMJ, requires 
us to review “all cases reviewed by a Court of Criminal Ap-
peals which the Judge Advocate General . . . orders sent to 
the Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces for review.” And 
third, Article 67(a)(3), UCMJ, gives us jurisdiction over “all 
cases reviewed by a Court of Criminal Appeals in which, 
upon petition of the accused and on good cause shown, the 
Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces has granted a re-
view.” Notably, in all three categories of cases, because we 
can only review cases reviewed by the CCA below, our  Ar-
ticle 67 jurisdiction is predicated on the CCA below also 
having jurisdiction. United States v. Arness, 74 M.J. 441, 
443 (C.A.A.F. 2015). 
As both parties agree, this case falls squarely within Ar-
ticle 67(a)(3), UCMJ. The ACCA had jurisdiction to review 
Appellant’s case under Article 66(b)(3), UCMJ, because Ap-
pellant was sentenced to a bad -conduct discharge. The 
ACCA did, in fact, review Appellant’s case. And this Court 
found good cause to grant Appellant’s petition for review. 
Accordingly, we are satisfied that we have jurisdiction. 
The second question is more difficult. The Government 
argues that this Court has authority to act under Arti-
cle 67(c)(1)(A), UCMJ,
3 because—under the unique facts of 
 
2 Our authority to act in a given case where we have juris-
diction is sometimes referred to as our “s cope of r eview.” See 
C.A.A.F. R. 5 (as amended through Mar. 9, 2023) (addressing 
this Court’s scope of review).  
3 Article 67(c)(1)(A), UCMJ, authorizes this Court to act upon 
“the findings and sentence set forth in the entry of judgment, as 
 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
this case—the military judge made the applicability of the 
Lautenberg Amendment an issue that affected the know-
ing nature of Appellant’s plea. In the Government’s view, 
the military judge’s actions made Block 32 of the STR part 
of the findings affirmed by the ACCA, and thus within our 
authority to act. For the reasons explained more fully be-
low, we disagree that Block  32 of the STR was part of the 
findings. And although the military judge advised Appel-
lant during the providence inquiry that his guilty plea 
would not trigger the Lautenberg Amendment, Appellant 
has not challenged the providence of his guilty plea or 
raised any similar objection. Accordingly, we find no au-
thority to act in Article 67(c)(1)(A), UCMJ. 
Appellant argues that we have authority to correct or 
vacate the ACCA’s action under Article 67(c)(1)(B), UCMJ, 
which states that this Court may act with respect to “a de-
cision, judgment, or order by a military judge, as affirmed 
or set aside as incorrect in law by the Court of Criminal 
Appeals.” We agree with Appellant that— at a minimum—
we can vacate the ACCA’s action under this provision. Per 
Article 60c(a)(1)(A), UCMJ, the STR is part of the trial 
court’s “judgment.” And by modifying the STR, the ACCA 
“set aside as incorrect in law” the judgment of the military 
judge. Therefore, under Article  67(c)(1)(B), UCMJ, this 
Court has authority to vacate the ACCA’s modification of 
the STR if we conclude that the ACCA lacked the authority 
to engage in such action. 
B. The ACCA’s Authority to Act 
The ACCA, like the other service Courts of Criminal Ap-
peals, is an Article  I court. United States v. Kelly , 77 M.J. 
404, 406 (C.A.A.F. 2018). As such, its authority stems en-
tirely from statute. United States v. Jacobsen , 77 M.J. 81, 
85 (C.A.A.F. 2017). In this case, Appellant argues that the 
ACCA erred when it modified Block 32 of the STR. But be-
fore we can review whether that modification was correct 
 
affirmed or set aside as incorrect in law by the Court of Criminal 
Appeals.” 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
as a matter of law, we must first determine whether the 
ACCA’s action exceeded its statutorily prescribed authority 
under Article 66(d), UCMJ . Although the parties did not 
thoroughly brief this question, it was raised at oral argu-
ment. And it is well established that once our jurisdiction 
attaches, we may act “on any issue concerning a matter of 
law which materially affects the rights of the parties.” 
C.A.A.F. R. 5 (Mar. 2023)  (as amended through Mar. 9, 
2023) (addressing this Court’s scope of review). Determin-
ing the scope of the ACCA’s statutory authority under Ar-
ticle 66, UCMJ,  is a matter of law. Nerad , 69 M.J. at 
141-42. And we assume without deciding that if the ACCA 
exceeded its authority by altering Block 32 of Appellant’s 
STR when it had no authority to do so, Appellant’s rights 
would be materially affected.  
The parties initially argue that Article 66(d)(1)(A), 
UCMJ, gives the ACCA authority to modify Block 32 of Ap-
pellant’s STR. Under Article 66(d)(1)(A), UCMJ, “the Court 
of Criminal Appeals  . . . may act only with respect to the 
findings and sentence as entered into the record under sec-
tion 860c of this title (article 60c).” (Emphasis added.)  
“Findings” and “sentence” are terms of art defined by 
the President in the R.C.M. The findings include : “(A) a 
summary of each charge and specification; (B) the plea (s) 
of the accused; and (C) the finding or other disposition of 
each charge and specification.”  R.C.M. 1101(a)(1)(A)-(C). 
The sentence is the punishment adjudged by the  court-
martial when an accused i s found guilty. R.C.M. 1003(a). 
Authorized punishments under the rule include repri-
mand, forfeiture of pay or allowances, fines , reduction in 
pay grade, restriction to specified limits, hard labor with-
out confinement, confinement, punitive separation, and 
death. R.C.M. 1003(b)(1)-(9). The sentence also includes 
other information such as:  
 (A) the confinement and fine for each specifi-
cation, if any;  
 (B) whether any term of confinement is to run 
consecutively or concurrently with any other 
term(s) of confinement; [and]  
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
 (C) the total amount of any fine(s) and the to-
tal amount of any confinement, after accounting 
for any credit and any terms of confinement that 
are to run consecutively or concurrently.  
R.C.M. 1101(a)(2)(A)-(C). Importantly, this Court has rec-
ognized that an accused’s sentence does not include collat-
eral consequences of the accused’s conviction, such as sex 
offender registration. See United States v. Palacios Cueto , 
82 M.J. 323, 327 (C.A.A.F. 2022) (“ ‘[s]ex offender registra-
tion requirement is a collateral consequence of the convic-
tion alone, not the sentence ’ ” (quoting United States v. 
Talkington, 73 M.J. 212, 213 (C.A.A.F. 2014)  (alterations 
in original))).  
Consistent with these definitions  and our case law, we 
hold that Block 32 of the STR is not part of the findings or 
sentence and, therefore, the ACCA lacks the authority to 
act upon it. The question asked in Block 32 is not a finding 
because it is not  a summary of the charges/specifications  
leveled against Appellant , a plea of Appellant , or the dis-
position of a charge. Nor is the question asked in Block 32 
part of the substantive sentence that the Court could have 
adjudged, or the sentencing information covered by R.C.M. 
1101(a)(2)(A)-(C). In our view, the Block 32 inquiry repre-
sents “other information”—outside of the findings and sen-
tence—that the President has authorized to be included in 
the STR. See R.C.M. 1101(a)(6) (authorizing the inclusion 
in the STR of “[a]ny additional information directed by the 
military judge or required under regulations prescribed by 
the Secretary concerned”). While that information must be 
included in the entry of judgment , it is separate  from the 
“findings” and “sentence” that the service courts may act 
upon under Article 66(d)(1), UCMJ. 
The parties next argue that the ACCA could have acted 
under its Article 66(d)(2) error-correction authority. Under 
that provision, “a [CCA] may provide appropriate relief if 
the accused demonstrates error or excessive delay in the 
processing of the court-martial after the judgment was en-
tered into the record under section 860c of this title (article 
United States v. Williams, No. 24-0015/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
60c).” Article  66(d)(2), UCMJ. We disagree that Arti-
cle 66(d)(2), UCMJ, applies here for several reasons. 
First, Article 66(d)(2), UCMJ, only authorizes a CCA to 
provide relief when there has been an  “error or excessive 
delay in the processing of the court -martial.” Here, there 
was no error in processing. Although Block 32 of the STR 
did not originally reflect the guidance that the military 
judge provided Appellant during the providence inquiry , 
the military judge modified the STR in promulgating the 
Judgment of the Court and corrected Block 32 to accurately 
reflect his guidance to Appellant. Second, even if there was 
an error, Article 66(d)(2), UCMJ, places the burden on the 
accused to raise the issue before the CCA. But in this case, 
after the military judge corrected the STR in the Judgment 
of the Court, Appellant believed that there was no error to 
be corrected. So, of course, Appellant did not raise the issue 
to the CCA and consequently did not trigger the CCA’s cor-
rection authority under Article  66(d)(2), UCMJ . Finally, 
even assuming that there was an error and that Appellant 
properly raised the issue, Article 66(d)(2), UCMJ, only ap-
plies to errors taking place “after the judgment was entered 
into the record.” In this case, any error took place prior to 
the entry of judgment. 
In our view, neither Article 66(d)(1)(A), UCMJ, nor Ar-
ticle 66(d)(2), UCMJ, granted the ACCA authority to mod-
ify the Lautenberg Amendment a nnotation in Block 32 of 
the STR. The ACCA’s modification was an ultra vires  act 
that exceeded its statutorily defined authority to act with 
respect to the findings and sentence . Accordingly, we va-
cate the modification made by the ACCA and decline to an-
swer the granted  question concerning the applicability of 
the Lautenberg Amendment because that question is now 
moot. 
IV. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed as to the findings and sentence but 
vacated with respect to the modification to Block 32 of the 
Statement of Trial Results.  