This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Tryvon M. JONES, Private First Class 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0188 
Crim. App. No. 20210503 
 
Argued January 17, 2024—Decided August 28, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Steven C. Henricks (arraignment) 
and Jacqueline L. Emanuel (trial) 
 
For Appellant: Captain Tumentugs D. Armstrong 
(argued); Colonel Philip M. Staten and Major Mitch-
ell D. Herniak (on brief); Lieutenant Colonel Dale C. 
McFeatters. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Patrick S. Barr (argued); 
Colonel Christopher B. Burgess, Lieutenant Colonel 
Matthew T. Grady, and Major Kalin P. Schlueter (on 
brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS , 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
On September 15, 2021, a military judge sitting  alone 
as a general court -martial convicted Private First Class 
(PFC) Tryvon M. Jones (Appellant), contrary to his pleas, 
of one specification of sexual assault of a child  (Specifica-
tion 1 of Charge I), two specifications of sexual abuse of a 
child (Specifications 2 and 3 of Charge I), and one specifi-
cation of aggravated assault  (the Specification of Charge 
II), in violation of Articles 120b and 128, Uniform Code of 
Military Justice  (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 920b , 928 (2018 ). 
The military judge sentenced Appellant to reduction to the 
grade of E -1, confin ement for thirteen  years and eight  
months, and a dishonorable discharge. The convening au-
thority took no action. On April 4, 2023, the United States 
Army Court of Criminal Appeals (ACCA) summarily af-
firmed the findings and sentence. United States v. Jones, 
No. ARMY 20210503, 2023 CCA LEXIS 175, at *1  (A. Ct. 
Crim. App. Apr. 4, 2023) (per curiam). 
We granted review of the following issue: 
Whether the military judge committed prejudicial 
error by admitting Appellant’s post incident 
browser history as res gestae evidence. 
United States v. Jones, 83 M.J. 466 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order 
granting review). 
The parties disagree about whether Appellant’s post-in-
cident browser history was admitted as res gestae evidence 
or under some other theory, 1 and they disagree about 
whether the admission of the evidence was in error. Appel-
lant contends that the military judge abused her discretion 
by admitting as res gestae what was essentially evidence 
of crimes, wrongs, or other acts, without following the re-
quirements of Military Rules of Evidence (M.R.E.) 403 and 
 
1 The parties’ disagreement may be attributable to the fact 
that the military judge expressed skepticism over both the Gov-
ernment’s argument and the defense’s response, but in overrul-
ing the defense objection, the military judge did not state the 
legal basis for the admission of the evidence on the record. 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
404(b). The Government counters that the military judge 
did not err at all because the evidence was properly admit-
ted not as res gestae but as consciousness of guilt. 
We need not resolve these disputes because even if we  
assume (without deciding) that the military judge abused 
her discretion in admitting the evidence, after applying the 
factors articulated in United States v. Kohlbek, 78 M.J. 326, 
334 (C.A.A.F. 2019), we conclude that any error in this case 
did not materially prejudice Appellant’s substantial rights. 
Therefore, we affirm the decision of the ACCA. 
I. Background 
Appellant was best friends with SPC DJ 2 and fre-
quently spent time at  his house, watching over SPC DJ’s 
young children and  helping his thirteen -year-old sister , 
AG, with her homework. One afternoon in November 2020, 
Appellant was at SPC  DJ’s house with AG, who  was 
babysitting and doing her homework.  While the baby 
played on the floor nearby, Appellant leaned in and kissed 
AG. At some point, Appellant gave the baby a cell phone to 
distract her. Then he touched AG’s groin with his tongue 
and put his hand on her neck and squeezed. She felt pres-
sure in her eyes and ears but was unable to speak  as she 
tried to pull his hand away. A ppellant released his grip, 
pulled down his pants, and penetrated AG’s vulva with his 
penis. 
Appellant’s neighbor, SD, walked into the room and saw 
Appellant kneeling on the bed with his pants down and AG 
lying on the bed in front of him. SD immediately went into 
the bathroom and vomited. Appellant “jumped up and 
pulled his pants up” and told AG he would be in trouble if 
anyone found out what had happened. 
SD confronted Appellant later that day to clarify what 
she had seen. As Appellant began to explain, “When a man 
sees a woman ,” she terminated the conversation. H ours 
 
2 SPC DJ was a private first class at the time of the charged 
offenses and a s pecialist at the time of trial. Throughout this 
opinion we refer to him by his rank at the time of trial. 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
later, SD told SPC DJ and his wife what she had seen. Ap-
pellant admitted to SPC DJ that he had kissed AG. 
At approximately 4:00 a.m. on November 5, Appellant 
was interviewed by Army Criminal Investigation Division 
(CID) Special Agent (SA) CW . After being advised of and 
waiving his Article 31(b), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 831(b) (2018), 
rights, Appellant admitted that he kissed AG while helping 
her with her homework.  He admitted that he touched her 
breasts and vagina with his hands and mouth,  placed his 
unclothed genitals on her thigh, and choked her . He 
claimed that these acts were not only consensual but , for 
the most part, initiated by AG. 
Appellant told SA CW that he was interrupted by SD ’s 
arrival. He described his own and AG’s positions on the bed 
when SD walked in, including the fact that his pants were 
down and his genitals were on AG’s thigh. He told the 
agent that SD swore and went into the bathroom, and later 
confronted Appellant. Appellant admitted to the agent that 
he knew AG  was thirteen years old  and he apologized for 
his actions. 
About two hours into the nearly four -hour interview, 
Appellant provided written consent  to a search of his cell 
phone for text messages . CID subsequently obtained 
search and seizure authorization to conduct a digital foren-
sic examination of the cell phone for its internet search his-
tory. During an examination conducted on November 12, 
2020, CID took screen shots of Appellant’s November 4th 
and 5th browsing history. These screenshots, admitted into 
evidence over defense objection, show that on November 5, 
2020, someone using Appellant’s cell phone searched  
Google for “how many years for sexual assault,” “choking 
charge,” “Types of sexual assault,” and “what is sextual 
[sic] assault.” 
During findings arguments, the Government argued  
that Appellant exploited SPC DJ’s trust in order to sex-
ually assault SPC DJ’s sister, AG, knowing that AG  was 
only thirteen and that Appellant’s conduct was wrong. The 
Government urged the military judge to “look at the Google 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
history . . . and you will see looking up what is choking, sex 
assault. He knew what he did was wrong. ” The Govern-
ment emphasized that AG’s testimony was clear and cred-
ible; it was not inconsistent in any material way with her 
prior statements; and it was corroborated in significant 
part by SD’s testimony and Appellant’s admissions to CID.  
The defense countered that AG’s allegations were un-
corroborated because SD did not witness any penetration 
and Appellant admitted to CID only that he kissed AG, 
nothing more.  The defense argued that AG was the sole 
witness, and her testimony was not credible because she 
was an emotional child who  had given nine different ac-
counts of the alleged assault over the past year. 
The defense did not address Appellant’s internet search 
history during findings  arguments, and neither party ad-
dressed it during sentencing arguments.  Instead, the 
theme of the Government’s presentencing argument was 
that Appellant took advantage of his friendship with SPC 
DJ to gain access to SPC DJ’s young sister and exploited 
his trusted position as a family friend to assault her in her 
brother’s home. The Government argued: 
 We lock our doors at night to keep the bad guys 
out. What do you do when he has a key? From 
fairy tales to true crime, there has existed this 
concept of knowing evil when you see it. It’s the 
monster in the woods, the man in the mask lurk-
ing in the shadows . This evil exists outside, but 
not in our own home. While tucking in our chil-
dren at night, we check under the bed for mon-
sters, showing them that they are safe in their 
house, that the evil is only outside.  
 [Appellant] was the bad guy in plain sight, the 
wolf in sheep’s clothing. . . .  
 . . . .  
The monster was in the house the entire time, hid-
ing in plain sight. 
II. Legal Standards 
Under Article 59(a), UCMJ, a finding or sentence may 
be held incorrect as a matter of law only if the error 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
materially prejudiced a substantial right of the accused. 10 
U.S.C. § 859(a) (2018). “Importantly, it is the Government 
that bears the burden of demonstrating that the admission 
of erroneous evidence is harmless. ” United States v. 
Flesher, 73 M.J. 303, 318 (C.A.A.F. 2014). “For nonconsti-
tutional evidentiary errors, the test for prejudice ‘is 
whether the error had a substantial influence on the find-
ings.’ ” Kohlbek, 78 M.J. at 334 (quoting United States v. 
Fetrow, 76 M.J. 181, 187 (C.A.A.F. 2017)). “In condu cting 
the prejudice analysis, this Court weighs: (1) the strength 
of the Government’s case, (2) the strength of the defense 
case, (3) the materiality of the evidence in question, and (4) 
the quality of the evidence in question.” Id. (citations omit-
ted) (internal quotation marks omitted).
3 
III. Analysis 
Appellant argues that the Government leveraged  the 
erroneous admission of his post-incident browser history to 
characterize him as a predator, resulting in his conviction 
and a sentence to a term of confinement nearly  four years 
in excess of what the Government requested . We are un-
persuaded. Applying the Kohlbek factors, we conclude that 
even assuming the military judge erred, the error did not 
substantially influence the findings or sentence. 
1. The Strength of the Government’s Case 
The Government  presented a strong case , consisting 
primarily of the victim’s testimony, eyewitness testimony, 
 
3 Appellant asserts that this Court should adopt the test from 
United States v. Perez -Tosta, 36 F.3d 1552, 1562 (11th Cir. 
1994), for prejudice when dealing with erroneous M.R.E. 404(b) 
evidence. However, we decline to do so because, as the Govern-
ment persuasively argues, “The Perez-Tosta test is the 11th Cir-
cuit’s attempt to ‘discern three factors the court should consider 
in determining the reasonableness of pretrial notice under 
404(b)’ and not a test for prejudice of wrongly admitted evi-
dence.” Brief for Appellee at 11 n.6, United States v. Jones , No. 
23˗0188 (C.A.A.F. Oct. 16, 2023) (quoting Perez-Tosta, 36 F.3d 
at 1562). Instead, as noted above, this Court applies the test set 
forth in Kohlbek to ascertain prejudice in the wake of nonconsti-
tutional evidentiary error. 78 M.J. at 334. 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
and Appellant’s videotaped admissions. T he victim,  AG, 
was thirteen at the time of the offenses and fourteen at the 
time of trial. Her memory was clear and she described the 
events of November  4, 2020, in detail, providing evidence 
of the elements of the offenses.  She also testified that SD 
walked in on the assault, and that Appellant said he would 
get into trouble if anyone found out about what he had 
done. 
The Government’s case was strengthened by the eyewit-
ness testimony of SD, who corroborated significant details 
from AG’s testimony. She described Appellant’s and AG’s 
positions on the bed, the condition of Appellant’s clothing, 
her view of his bare buttocks, and her own visceral reaction 
to the scene she observed . She also testified about Appel-
lant’s response when she  confronted him several hours 
later. 
Finally, Appellant’s videotaped November 5 statement 
to CID was admitted at trial  and it further strengthened 
the Government’s case. In the interview, Appellant denied 
any penetration,
4 but he admitted  to kissing AG , pulling 
down his pants, placing his exposed genitals on AG’s thigh, 
touching her breasts and vagina, and placing his hand on 
her neck, knowing she was thirteen years old, all while the 
baby played on the floor nearby. 
2. The Strength of the Defense Case 
The defense case was comparatively weak. The defense 
cross-examined AG about alleged inconsistencies between 
her testimony and the various statements she made to 
family, medical personnel, and law enforcement personnel 
in the days and weeks after November 4.  Specifically, the 
defense questioned her about inconsistent accounts as to 
when Appellant entered the room where the alleged 
assault occurred; when Appellant gave the baby a cell 
 
4 Although Appellant denied penetrating AG’s vulva with his 
penis, he conceded to CID that it was “possible” that penetration 
occurred while he was rubbing his penis on AG’s inner thigh 
while he was focused on “making out” with her. 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
phone to distract her; whether AG objected to the kissing ; 
whether Appellant touched various parts of her body; 
whether there was any penetration; and whether AG could 
speak when Appellant had his hand on her throat.  
Although her recollection of the charged offenses was clear, 
AG could not recall the details of every statement she later 
made. Therefore, she did not acknowledge the alleged 
inconsistencies and the defense did not succeed in 
impeaching her trial testimony. The defense did not call 
any witnesses. 
In closing, the defense argued that AG was not credible 
because she was an emotional child who had made incon-
sistent statements about what transpired on November 4, 
2020. In addition, the defense argued that AG’s testimony 
was uncorroborated because SD did not witness any pene-
trative acts and Appellant admitted to CID only that he 
kissed AG. 
As this Court has noted, “ [i]nconsistencies . . . are not 
uncommon when child abuse victims testify” and “  ‘[a]ny 
person who suffers from some type of traumatic experience, 
adult or child, may have difficulty relating that experience 
in a chronological, coherent and organized manner. ’ ” 
United States v. Cano, 61 M.J. 74, 74 (C.A.A.F. 2005) (quot-
ing Paramore v. Filion, 293 F. Supp. 2d 285, 292 (S.D.N.Y. 
2003)). Nevertheless, AG was able to provide clear, detailed 
testimony about the offenses that was corroborated in sig-
nificant part by SD’s eyewitness testimony and Appellant’s 
admissions to CID, which went far beyond admitting to a 
kiss. In light of the corroboration of key parts of AG’s testi-
mony, we are unconvinced that any inconsistencies in her 
testimony undermined the strength of the Government’s 
case. 
3. The Materiality and Quality of the 
Evidence in Question 
Having considered the strength of the Government’s 
case and the strength of the defense case,  we turn to the 
final two factors of the prejudice analysis : the materiality 
and quality of the evidence in question. Kohlbek, 78 M.J. at 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
334. “In examining these factors , we e ssentially are as-
sessing how much the erroneously admitted evidence may 
have affected the court-martial.” United States v. Washing-
ton, 80 M.J. 106, 111 (C.A.A.F. 2020)  (analyzing material-
ity and quality together). In this case, we conclude that Ap-
pellant did not suffer material prejudice  to either the 
findings or sentence as a result of the admission of his post-
incident browser history. 
 Appellant’s post-incident internet browser history did 
not play a major role in the Government’s case: it was ref-
erenced only once in the Government’s findings argument 
and not at all during  sentencing. Moreover, Appellant’s 
post-incident browser history did not provide the factfinder 
with any new information, because Appellant’s searches for 
“sexual assault” and “choking charge” merely reflect the 
charges against him; they do not describe any conduct not 
already known to the factfinder. “When a ‘fact was already 
obvious from . . . testimony at trial ’ and the evidence in 
question ‘would not have provided any new ammunition,’ ” 
the erroneous admission of the evidence is likely to be 
harmless. United States v. Harrow , 65 M.J. 190, 200 
(C.A.A.F. 2007) (alteration in original) (quoting Cano, 61 
M.J. at 77 -78). Furthermore, even assuming (without de-
ciding) that his searches show consciousness of guilt,  Ap-
pellant’s statement to AG about getting in trouble if anyone 
found out and his own damning admissions and apology to 
CID are more compelling evidence of consciousness of guilt 
than search terms that could just as easily reflect Appel-
lant’s attempt to understand the legal jeopardy he faced af-
ter his CID interview. 
Finally, we reject Appellant’s contention that the Gov-
ernment compounded the error in the admission of his 
post-incident browser history  and adversely impacted his 
sentence
5 by calling Appellant “knowing evil” during 
presentencing. Viewed in the context of the Government’s 
 
5 The military judge sentenced Appellant to thirteen years 
and eight months of confinement, nearly four years longer than 
the confinement sentence requested by the Government. 
United States v. Jones, No. 23-0188/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
presentencing argument as a whole, which characterized 
Appellant as “a bad guy in plain sight,” a “wolf in sheep’s 
clothing,” and the “monster [who] was in the house the en-
tire time, hiding in plain sight,” the Government’s invoca-
tion of “knowing evil” refers only to Appellant’s exploitation 
of his close relationship with the victim’s family, not the 
screenshots of Appellant’s post-incident internet searches. 
IV. Conclusion 
Even if we assume (without deciding) that the military 
judge abused her discretion in admitting Appellant’s post-
incident browser history , after applying the Kohlbek fac-
tors, 78 M.J. at  334, we hold that there was no  material 
prejudice to Appellant’s substantial rights. Accordingly, we 
answer the granted issue in the negative. 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 