This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Thomas L. WHEELER, Master-at-Arms Third Class 
United States Navy, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0140 
Crim. App. No. 202100091 
 
Argued December 19, 2023—Decided August 22, 2024 
 
Military Judge: Kimberly J. Kelly  
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Commander Megan P. 
Marinos, JAGC, USN (argued); Major Jasper Casey, 
USMC. 
 
For Appellee: Colonel Joseph M. Jennings , USMC  
(argued); Captain Tyler W. Blair, USMC, and Brian 
K. Keller, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined.  
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
This case involves a charge of sleeping on post that was 
referred to a military judge-alone special court -martial. 
Had the convening authority referred this case to a general 
court-martial, Appellant would have been entitled to trial 
before a panel of members, Article 16(b)(1), Uniform Code 
of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 816( b)(1) (2018), 
and the maximum punishment would have included a 
dishonorable discharge, forfeiture of all pay and 
allowances, and one year of confinement.  Manual for 
Courts-Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 22.d.(1)(c) (2019 
ed.) (MCM). Instead, the convening authority referred the 
charge to a special court -martial before a military judge 
alone pursuant to Article 16(c)(2)(A), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 
816(c)(2)(A) (2018). As a result, Appellant could not elect 
trial by a panel of members and the military judge was 
barred from adjudging a sentence that included a punitive 
discharge, confinement for more than six months, Article 
19(b), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 819(b) (2018), or forfeitures of pay 
for more than six months. Rule for Courts -Martial 
(R.C.M.) 201(f)(2)(B)(ii) (2019 ed.). 
We hold that Appellant had no Fifth Amendment d ue 
process right to a court -martial consisting of a panel of  
members in a forum that statutorily limited the maximum 
possible sentence to six months of confinement with no pu-
nitive discharge authorized. Additionally, we hold that the 
convening authority’s referral of this case to a military 
judge-alone special court -martial did not violate Fifth 
Amendment due process. We therefore affirm the decision 
of the United States Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal 
Appeals (NMCCA). 
I. Background 
Appellant was charged with one specification of sleep-
ing on post in violation of Article 95, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 895 
(2018), after he was discovered asleep at his post as senti-
nel onboard a harbor patrol boat at Naval Station Everett, 
Washington. The convening authority referred the charge 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
under Article 16(c)(2)(A), UCMJ, to a special court-martial 
before a military judge alone. 
Before trial, Appellant filed a motion to dismiss, argu-
ing that sleeping on post is a “ ‘serious’ offense” which im-
plicated his Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights to trial by 
a panel of members, and therefore, the military judge-alone 
special court-martial lacked jurisdiction absent Appellant’s 
knowing and voluntary election of a military judge -alone 
forum. The military judge denied the motion, concluding 
that the military judge-alone special court -martial 
“whether on its face or as applied in this case is consistent 
with due process.” 
Contrary to his pleas, Appellant was convicted of sleep-
ing on post in violation of Article 95, UCMJ, and sentenced 
to fifteen days of confinement.
1 In an en banc published 
opinion, the NMCCA affirmed the findings and sentence. 
United States v. Wheeler, 83 M.J. 581, 592 (N-M. Ct. Crim. 
App. 2023) (en banc). 
We granted review to consider two issues: 
I. Did the lower court err in holding that the Due 
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment does not 
protect a servicemember’s fundamental right to a 
panel of members at court-martial? 
II. Did the lower court err by deferring to a con-
vening authority’s case-by-case referral decision 
rather than an objective standard to determine 
whether an offense is serious? 
 
1 The convening authority suspended confinement in excess 
of seven days for six months from the entry of judgment, to be 
remitted at that time without further action unless vacated  
sooner. A judge advocate reviewed the record pursuant to Article 
65(d), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 865(d) (2018), and did not recommend 
any corrective action. Upon Appellant’s application for relief 
pursuant to Article 69, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 869 (2018), the Judge 
Advocate General of the Navy forwarded the record to the 
NMCCA, recommending review of the question whether Appel-
lant’s Fifth and Sixth Amendment rights were violated by the 
convening authority’s referral of the charge to a forum offering 
no right to a panel verdict. 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
United States v. Wheeler, 83 M.J. 393 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (or-
der granting review). For the reasons set forth below, we 
answer both questions in the negative and affirm the deci-
sion of the NMCCA. 
II. Standard of Review 
The constitutionality of a statute is a question of law 
reviewed de novo. United States v. Begani, 81 M.J. 273, 280 
(C.A.A.F. 2021). 
III. Discussion 
A. The Military Judge-Alone Special Court-Martial 
In 2016, Congress amended Articles 16 and 19, UCMJ, 
to create a new kind of special court -martial by military 
judge alone. National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal 
Year 2017, Pub. L. No. 114- 328, § 5161, 130 Stat. 2000, 
2898 (2016). As amended, Article 16, UCMJ, allows a con-
vening authority to refer a case to a special court -martial 
consisting of a military judge alone, subject to the re-
strictions found in Article 19, UCMJ, and “such limitations 
as the President may prescribe by regu lation.” Article 
16(c)(2)(A), UCMJ. Article 19(b), UCMJ, as amended, 
states, “Neither a bad-conduct discharge, nor confinement 
for more than six months . . . may be adjudged if charges 
and specifications are referred to a special court -martial 
consisting of a military judge alone.” Article 19(b), UCMJ. 
Before these changes were enacted, a case referred to a 
special court-martial could be tried by military judge alone 
only upon the request of the accused. Article 16(2)(C), 
UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 816(2)(C) (2012). However, in 2015 the 
Military Justice Review Group (MJRG) recommended giv-
ing the convening authority discretionary authority to re-
fer a case to a military judge-alone special court -martial, 
subject to limitations on the military judge’s authority to 
adjudge confinement, forfeitures, and a punitive discharge, 
and subject to further limitations to be prescribed by the 
President. Office of the General Counsel, Dep’t of Defense, 
Report of the Military Justice Review  Group 217 (Dec. 22, 
2015) [hereinafter the MJRG Report ]. The proposed 
changes were designed to “offer military commanders a 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
new disposition option for low-level criminal misconduct—
one that would be more efficient and less burdensome on 
the command than a special court-martial, but without the 
option for the member to refuse as in summary courts-mar-
tial and non-judicial punishment.” Id. at 222. The MJRG’s 
recommendations drew “upon the successful experience of 
the military justice system with judge -alone trials since 
1968” and “upon the experience in the federal civilian sys-
tem, as well as in state courts, in which an accused defend-
ant does not have the right to trial by jury when the con-
finement does not exceed six months.” Id. at 221. 
Congress adopted the MJRG’s recommendations, 
amending Articles 16 and 19 “to improv[e] the efficiency of 
the military justice system.” H.R. Rep. No. 114-537, at 600 
(2016). The President then promulgated rules to imple-
ment these changes. R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(B)(ii) states, “A bad-
conduct discharge, confinement for more than six months, 
or forfeiture of pay for more than six months, may not be 
adjudged by a special court -martial when the case is re-
ferred as a special court -martial consisting of a military 
judge alone under Article 16(c)(2)(A).” R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(E) 
(2019 ed.) bars military judge-alone special court -martial 
jurisdiction if the accused objects before arraignment and 
the military judge determines that (I) the maximum au-
thorized confinement would be greater than two years if 
the case was tried by a general court -martial (with excep-
tions not applicable here) or (II) sex offender registration 
would be required. 
B. Fifth Amendment Due Process in Courts-Martial 
The first granted issue  asks whether the lower court 
erred in holding that there is no Fifth Amendment due pro-
cess right to a panel of members at courts -martial. Appel-
lant contends that the Sixth Amendment guarantee of an 
impartial jury for all criminal prosecutions of serious of-
fenses is a “bedrock procedural right” protected by the Due 
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.
2 He argues that 
 
2 Although Appellant asserted a Sixth Amendment violation 
before the lower court, at oral argument he conceded that his 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
he was entitled to trial before a panel of members because 
he was charged with a serious offense—that is, one with a 
maximum sentence to confinement of one year. 
The NMCCA recognized that servicemembers histori-
cally enjoyed a right to a panel of members at special 
courts-martial, due in part to the fact that military judges 
did not exist until they were created by Congress in 1968.  
Wheeler, 83 M.J. at 587. But citing Congress’s authority to 
make changes to the UCMJ and to delegate to the Presi-
dent the power to promulgate rules to implement Con-
gress’s legislative changes, the court found “no case law 
holding that historical practice created a fundamental 
right that precluded” the new military judge-alone special 
court-martial. Id. We conclude that the NMCCA did not 
err. 
The Fifth Amendment to the Constitution provides, in 
part, that “[n]o person shall be . . . deprived of life, liberty, 
or property, without due process of law.” U.S. Const. 
amend. V. Because servicemembers who are subject to ap-
pear before a court-martial “may be subjected to loss of lib-
erty or property,” they “are entitled to the due process of 
law guaranteed by the Fifth Amendment. Whether this 
process embodies” a specific right—in this case, a right to 
be tried by a panel of members—“depends upon an analysis 
of the interests of the individual and those of the regime to 
which he is subject.” Middendorf, 425 U.S. at 43; see United 
States v. Graf, 35 M.J. 450, 461 (C.M.A 1992) (recognizing  
that the Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment ap-
plies to servicemembers at special courts -martial). A pro-
cedure does not violate the Due Process Clause of the Fifth 
Amendment unless “ ‘it offends some principle of justice so 
 
appeal was based solely on a Fifth Amendment due process vio-
lation. Wheeler, 83 M.J. at 584- 85. He did not assert a Sixth 
Amendment violation before this Court. Therefore, we do not ad-
dress the applicability of the Sixth Amendment jury clause to 
this case. But see United States v. Anderson, 83 M.J. 291, 294-95 
(C.A.A.F. 2023) (“[T]he Supreme Court has repeatedly stated 
that the Sixth Amendment right to a jury does not apply to 
courts-martial.” (citing cases dating to 1866)). 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
rooted in the traditions and conscience of our people as to 
be ranked as fundamental.’ ” Graf, 35 M.J. at 462 (empha-
sis removed) (quoting Patterson v. New York, 432 U.S. 197, 
202 (1977)). 
“Congress has primary responsibility for the delicate 
task of balancing the rights of servicemen against the 
needs of the military,”  Solorio v. United States, 483 U.S. 
435, 447 (1987), subject to the requirements of the Due Pro-
cess Clause, Weiss v. United States, 510 U.S. 163, 176- 77 
(1994) (noting that “Congress, of course, is subject to the 
requirements of the Due Process Clause when legislating 
in the area of military affairs, and that Clause provides 
some measure of protection to defendants in military pro-
ceedings”). “[I]n determining what process is due, courts 
must give particular deference to the determination of Con-
gress, made under its authority to regulate the land and 
naval forces.” Weiss, 510 U.S. at 176- 77 (citation omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted); see Anderson, 83 M.J. 
at 298 (“When Congress acts pursuant to its power to make 
Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and 
naval Forces, judicial deference is at its apogee.” (citations 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
“To succeed in a due process challenge to a statutory 
court-martial procedure, an appellant must demonstrate 
that the factors militating in favor of [a different proce-
dure] are so extraordinarily weighty as to overcome the bal-
ance struck by Congress.” Anderson, 83 M.J. at 298 (alter-
ation in original) (citation omitted)  (internal quotation 
marks omitted). In weighing the servicemember’s interests 
in a procedural right against the needs of the military, the 
Court must consider (1) historical practice with res pect to 
the procedure at issue, Weiss, 510 U.S. at 179, (2) the effect 
of the asserted right on the military, Middendorf, 425 U.S. 
at 45, and (3) the existence in current practice of other pro-
cedural safeguards that satisfy the Due Process Clause of 
the Fifth Amendment, Weiss, 510 U.S. at 181. 
Accordingly, we consider each of these factors in turn to 
decide whether the unrefusable military judge-alone spe-
cial court -martial created by Congress, as defined in 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
Articles 16 and 19, UCMJ, and implemented by R .C.M. 
201(f)(2), offends fundamental principles of justice in viola-
tion of Fifth Amendment due process. 
1. Historical Practice 
The lower court succinctly summarized the long histor-
ical tradition of courts-martial by panels of members: 
 For nearly 200 years, courts -martial in the 
United States military consisted solely of panels 
of members of varying numbers and types. This 
was true for general courts -martial as well as 
“lesser” courts-martial (the predecessor of our cur-
rent special courts -martial). This requirement 
continued with the creation of the UCMJ in 1951. 
In 1968, Congress created military judges and, for 
the first time,  authorized courts-martial without 
panel members —but only when an accused re-
quested it. 
Wheeler, 83 M.J. at 586 (footnotes omitted) (citing David A. 
Schlueter, The Court-Martial: A Historical Survey, 87 Mil. 
L. Rev. 129 (1980)).3 
 
3 We note that alongside the tradition of courts -martial by 
panel there exists an equally long tradition of disposition of mi-
nor offenses —both civilian and military — without a jury or a 
panel. For example, the Government described military proceed-
ings dating as far back as 1775 in which a solitary officer could 
in his sole discretion administer limited punishments for low -
level offenses. See, e.g., Wilkes v. Dinsman , 48 U.S. 89, 127 
(1849) (“Where a private in the navy, therefore, is guilty of any 
‘scandalous conduct,’ the commander is . . . authorized to inflict 
on him twelve lashes, without the formality of a court-martial.” 
(citing 2 Stat. 45-46 (1800)); George B. Davis, A Treatise on the 
Military Law of the United States 25 (2d ed. 1899) (describing 
the field officer’s court, created by Congress during the Civil 
War, which was composed of a single officer); William Winthrop, 
Military Law and Precedents 490 (2d ed. 1920) (noting that a 
field officer’s court could impose up to one month of confinement 
or hard labor and a fine of up to one month of pay). In the civilian 
context, the Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury applies only 
to serious offenses; any offense where the accused cannot possi-
bly be sentenced to more than six months of confinement is pre-
sumed to be a petty offense not subject to the Sixth Amendment 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
Against that backdrop, we agree with the lower court 
that “the possibility of a criminal conviction at an unrefus-
able proceeding without members is  remarkable.” Id. at 
587-88. Therefore, this factor weighs in favor of a due pro-
cess right to a panel in this case. 
2. Effect on the Military 
The unrefusable military judge-alone special court -
martial was created to “improv[e] the efficiency of the mil-
itary justice system.” The MJRG recommended this new fo-
rum as a “more efficient and less burdensome” way for a 
command to address low-level misconduct: 
The judge-alone special court-martial will provide 
the convening authority with a greater range of 
disposition options, which may prove particularly 
useful when addressing cases involving a request 
for court-martial arising out of a non-judicial pun-
ishment or summary court-martial refusal, and in 
deployed environments where operational de-
mands may make it difficult to assemble a panel 
to address cases involving minor misconduct. 
MJRG Report at 222. The MJRG noted that the proposal 
was “[c]onsistent with the constitutional authority to au-
thorize civilian non-jury trials without obtaining a defend-
ant’s consent in cases involving confinement for six months 
or less.” Id. at 217. 
In Middendorf, the Supreme Court found that similar 
considerations outweighed a servicemember’s claim to a 
Fifth Amendment d ue process right to counsel in a sum-
mary court-martial, “an informal proceeding conducted by 
a single commissioned officer” with limited authority to 
 
jury clause. Blanton v. City of North Las Vegas, 489 U.S. 538, 
543 (1989); see Callan v. Wilson, 127 U.S. 540, 555 (1888) (“con-
ceding that there is a class of petty or minor offenses . . . which, 
if committed in this District, may, under the authority of con-
gress, be tried by the court and without a jury”); Schick v. United 
States, 195 U.S. 65, 70 (1904) (noting that there is no constitu-
tional right to trial by jury for petty offenses). 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
adjudge punishments,4 whose purpose “ ‘is to exercise jus-
tice promptly for relatively minor offenses under a simple 
form of procedure.’ ” 425 U.S. at 32 (quoting  MCM para. 
79.a. (1969 ed.)). The Court found that requiring counsel to 
be provided to servicemembers at summary courts-martial 
would impose a “particular burden” on the military “be-
cause virtually all the participants, including the defend-
ant and his counsel, are members of the mi litary whose 
time may be better spent than in possibly protracted dis-
putes over the imposition of discipline.” Id. at 45-46. 
Although the summary court-martial discussed in Mid-
dendorf is not a criminal forum and does not result in a 
criminal conviction, see Article 20(a), UCMJ, the Midden-
dorf analysis of the burdens that would accompany the pro-
posed process is equally applicable to the special court -
martial at issue in this case. Allowing a servicemember to 
refuse a military judge-alone special court-martial in favor 
of a proceeding before a panel of members would require 
the detailing and voir dire of a prospective panel. This 
would result in a longer proceeding requiring more service-
members to be pulled away from their regular duties in or-
der to serve as prospective and selected panelists in a case 
involving offenses the command deemed minor. See Toth v. 
Quarles, 350 U.S. 11, 17 (1955) (“[I]t is the primary busi-
ness of armies and navies to fight or be ready to fight wars 
should the occasion arise. . . . To the extent that those re-
sponsible for performance of this primary function are di-
verted from it by the necessi ty of trying ca ses, the basic 
fighting purpose of armies is not served.”). As a result, al-
lowing a  servicemember to refuse a military judge-alone 
special court -martial would burden the military by 
 
4 A summary court-martial may “adjudge any punishment 
not forbidden by this chapter except death, dismissal, dishonor-
able or bad -conduct discharge, confinement for more than one 
month, hard-labor without confinement for more than 45 days, 
restriction to specified limits for more than two months, or for-
feiture of more than two- thirds of one month ’s pay.” Article 
20(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 820(a) (2018). 
 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
transforming a proceeding “which may be quickly convened 
and rapidly concluded into an attenuated proceeding which 
consumes the resources of the military to a degree which 
Congress could properly have felt to be beyond what is war-
ranted by the relative ins ignificance of the offenses being 
tried.” Middendorf, 425 U.S. at 45.  We therefore conclude 
that this factor weighs against finding a due process right 
to a panel in this case. 
3. Legal Safeguards 
Finally, we must determine whether there are adequate 
procedural safeguards to ensure a servicemember receives 
a fair trial before a military judge-alone special court-mar-
tial. Appellant contends that a multi -member panel is es-
sential to prevent a “miscarriage of justice that is risked by 
trial before a sole fact -finder whose latent biases or limits 
on interpreting evidence will never be mitigated by the per-
spectives of fellow fact -finding members.” We understand 
Appellant’s concerns and recognize the potential benefits of 
having multiple factfinders in a criminal case. See Ballew 
v. Georgia, 435 U.S. 223, 232- 38 (1978) (discussing these 
potential benefits). However, we are not persuaded that 
these potential benefits would increase the fairness of a 
special court-martial so much that multiple factfinders are 
constitutionally required. We reach this conclusion in part 
because, even without multiple factfinders, several fea-
tures of the military justice system ensure the impartiality 
of the military judge and the fairness of the trial. 
First, a qualified, independent military judge presides 
over each military judge-alone special court-martial. Arti-
cle 26(a), (b), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 826(a), (b) (2018). In Graf, 
we concluded that the UCMJ provides substantial safe-
guards of a military judge’s independence. 35 M.J. at 463. 
There, the appellant argued that the absence of a fixed 
term of office for the military judges and appellate military 
judges who presided over his case precluded their judicial 
independence, in violation of the Due Process Clause of the 
Fifth Amendment. Id. at 454. While we recognized that the 
Fifth Amendment Due Process Clause applies to a service-
member at court -martial, id., we held that “other 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
guarantees of independence provided for military trial 
judges” in the UCMJ ensure “that court-martial judges can 
independently and fairly perform their duties without pro-
tection of a fixed term of office.” Id. at 463. Specifically, we 
noted that the UCMJ: 
• “provides for an administrative method of 
complaint against interfering superiors 
within the uniformed service itself, which 
ultimately requires the attention of the ci-
vilian secretary of that service,” id. (citing 
Article 138, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 938);  
• “provides for the preferral of charges and 
possible court-martial of any servicemem-
ber, whatever his grade or rank, who influ-
ences or attempts to influence a judge ’s 
findings or sentencing decisions at courts -
martial,” id. (citing Article 37, UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 837); and  
• “in extraordinary cases where the above 
remedies are not adequate, resort to this 
Court under the All Writs Act,  28 U.S.C. 
§ 1651(a), is possible.” Id. (citing cases). 
Those same provisions ensure the impartiality of the 
military judge in this case.5 
Second, an accused facing a military judge-alone special 
court-martial is entitled, at no cost to the accused, to de-
tailed military defense counsel, Article 27(a), UCMJ, 10 
U.S.C. § 827(a) (2018), or, to the extent reasonably availa-
ble, to military defense counsel of the accused’s choosing, 
Article 38(b)(3)(B), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 838(b)(3)(B) (2018). 
Third, R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(E) limits the offenses that can 
be referred to a military judge-alone special court-martial 
while Article 19(b), UCMJ, and R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(B)(ii) limit 
the punishments that can be adjudged, regardless of the 
specific offenses or number of offenses tried. As a result, 
Appellant’s potential legal exposure to confinement was 
 
5 We note that while the defense advocated for dismissal for 
lack of jurisdiction, the defense did not challenge the military 
judge’s impartiality in this case. 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
statutorily constrained to preclude more than six months 
of confinement or a punitive discharge.  See Middendorf, 
425 U.S. at 40 n.17 (noting that a servicemember forced to 
face a summary court -martial that could only impose one 
month of imprisonment for an offense that carried a ten -
year maximum “would no doubt be delighted at his good 
fortune”). 
Fourth, despite the fact that Appellant did not have a 
right of direct appeal to the NMCCA, Appellant’s convic-
tion was subject to post -trial review by a qualified judge 
advocate, Article 65(d)(2), UCMJ, the Judge Advocate Gen-
eral, Article 69(a), UCMJ, and the NMCCA, Article 66(b), 
UCMJ, to the same extent as any other general or special 
court-martial resulting in the same sentence.
6 The exist-
ence of all of these procedural safeguards weighs against a 
due process right to a panel in this case. 
4. Weighing the Interests 
After weighing Appellant’s interests in a court-martial 
before a panel against the needs of the military, and taking 
into account historical practice with respect to courts-mar-
tial before panels, the effect of such a right on the military, 
and the existenc e in current practice of other procedural 
safeguards that satisfy the Due Process Clause of the Fifth 
Amendment, we agree with the lower court’s conclusion  
that the benefits of a multi -member panel are no t so 
weighty as to overcome the balance struck by Congress and 
the President. See Wheeler, 83 M.J. at 591-92. Although we 
conclude that historical tradition weighs in favor of finding 
a due process right to a panel, historical tradition is not 
dispositive of the question whether a proceeding violates  
Fifth Amendment d ue process. Anderson, 83 M.J. at 299. 
 
6 Congress has now given an accused the right to appeal all 
convictions by special or general courts -martial, regardless of 
their punishments, to the Courts of Criminal Appeals. See Arti-
cle 66(b)(1), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 866(b)(1) (Supp. V 2023) (grant-
ing jurisdiction over “a timely appeal from the judgment of a 
court-martial, entered into the record . . . , that includes a find-
ing of guilty”). 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
As the Supreme Court noted in Solorio, there is nothing in 
the Constitution that suggests that “court-martial usage at 
a particular time [must be frozen] in such a way that Con-
gress might not change it.” 483 U.S. at 446. In determining 
whether the historical tradition of courts -martial before  
member panels gives rise to a right to a panel in this case, 
“we must give particular deference” to Congress’s determi-
nation that an unrefusable military judge-alone special 
court-martial promotes discipline in the arm ed forces and 
enhances a commander’s ability to fairly and efficiently 
deal with minor offenses. Middendorf, 425 U.S. at 43. 
Appellant “has the burden to demonstrate that Con-
gress’ determination should not be followed.” United States 
v. Vazquez, 72 M.J. 13, 19 (C.A.A.F. 2013)  (first citing 
Weiss, 510 U.S. at 181; and then citing  United States v. 
Mitchell, 39 M.J. 131, 137 (C.M.A. 1994) (the appellant 
bears a “ ‘heavy burden to show the Constitutional invalid-
ity of this facet of the military justice system’ ”)). Affording 
due deference to Congress’s determination that the mili-
tary judge-alone special court -martial promotes fairnes s 
and efficiency, we conclude that Appellant has not met his 
burden. We therefore hold that the unrefusable military 
judge-alone special court-martial where neither a punitive 
discharge nor confinement of more than six months may be 
adjudged does not run afoul of the Fifth Amendment Due 
Process Clause. 
C. The Convening Authority’s Referral Decision 
The second granted issue asks about the convening au-
thority’s referral of this case to an unrefusable military 
judge-alone special court-martial. According to Appellant, 
sleeping on post is an objectively serious offense because it 
is punishable by up to one year of confinement, forfeiture 
of all pay and allowances, and a dishonorable discharge. 
See Baldwin v. New York, 399 U.S. 66, 69 (1970) (holding 
“that no offense can be deemed ‘petty’ for purposes of the 
right to trial by jury where imprisonment for more than six 
months is authorized”). He argues that the convening au-
thority’s referral decision violated his fundamental due  
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
process right to have a serious offense tried by a panel of 
members. 
We disagree. Congress created the military judge-alone 
special court -martial pursuant to its constitutionally  be-
stowed authority “[t]o make Rules for the Government and 
Regulation of the land and naval Forces .” U.S. Const. art. 
I, § 8, cl. 14. Then, Congress delegated to the President the 
authority to promulgate regulations implementing the 
changes to Articles 16 and 19. Article 16(c)(2)(A), UCMJ. 
The Supreme Court “established long ago that Congress 
must be permitted to delegate to others at least some au-
thority that it could exercise itself.”  Loving v. United 
States, 517 U.S. 748, 758 (1996). The delegation of author-
ity to determine whether a case shall be referred to a forum 
that limits the maximum sentence that may be adjudged is 
a proper exercise of Congress’s power to delegate “the au-
thority to make policies and rules that implement its stat-
utes.” Id. at 771. 
Pursuant to Congress’ s delegation of power, the 
President promulgated rules limiting the cases that a 
convening authority may refer to a military judge-alone 
special court-martial and further limiting the punishments 
that may be adjudged therein. R .C.M. 201(f)(2)(B)(ii); 
R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(E)(i). In Loving, the Supreme Court noted, 
“ ‘The military constitutes a specialized community 
governed by a separate discipline from that of the civilian,’ 
and the President can be entrusted to determine what 
limitations and conditions on punishments are best suited 
to preserve that special discipline.”  517 U.S. at 773 
(quoting Orloff v. Willoughby , 345 U.S. 83, 94 (1953)). 
Therefore, the Court found “no fault” in Congress’s 
delegation of power to the President to prescribe 
aggravating factors that permit application of the statutory 
death penalty in military capital cases.  Id. at 772. 
Additionally, the Court concluded that the President’s 
promulgation of a Rule for Courts -Martial implementing 
the statutory death penalty and narrowing the category of 
death-eligible cases, “was well within the delegated 
authority.” Id. at 774. Here, as in Loving , the President 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
acted within his delegated authority to prescribe rules 
narrowing the category of cases that may be referred to a  
military judge-alone special court-martial and limiting the 
punishments that can be adjudged in that forum. 
The discretion to refer charges to the new forum was 
appropriately vested in the convening authority, subject to 
the limitations prescribed by Articles 16 and 19 and R.C.M. 
201(f)(2)(B)(ii) and 201(f)(2)(E)(i). See United States v. 
Nachtigal, 507 U.S. 1, 4 (1993)  (Congress’s delegation of 
power to the President is not “stripped of its ‘legislative’ 
character merely because the [convening authority] has fi-
nal authority to decide, within the limits given by Con-
gress, what the maximum prison sentence will be for a vi-
olation of a given regulation.”). “[T]he special character of 
the military requires civilian authorities to accord military 
commanders some flexibility in dealing with matters that 
affect internal discipline and morale.” Brown v. Glines, 444 
U.S. 348, 360 (1980). As we have observed: 
 One of the hallmarks of the military justice 
system is the broad discretion vested in command-
ers to choose the appropriate disposition of alleged 
offenses. The critical responsibility of command-
ers for the morale, welfare, good order, discipline, 
and military effectiveness of their units tradition-
ally has been viewed as requiring the exercise of 
such discretion. 
 The discretionary disposition authority of 
commanders includes the power to take no action, 
dismiss charges, initiate administrative actions 
under applicable regulations, institute [nonjudi-
cial punishment] proceedings under Article 15, re-
fer the matter to a summary, special, or general 
court-martial, or forward it to a superior com-
mander. 
United States v. Gammons, 51 M.J. 169, 173 (C.A.A.F. 
1999). 
The convening authority’s referral of this case to a mil-
itary judge-alone special court-martial was a proper exer-
cise of statutory authority. Article 16(c)(2)(A) provides that 
a special court -martial may consist of a military judge 
United States v. Wheeler, No. 23-0140/NA 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
alone “if the case is so referred by the convening authority, 
subject to [Article 19, UCMJ,] and such limitations as the 
President may prescribe by regulation.” Article 16(c)(2)(A). 
Here, the referral was consistent with the limitations im-
posed by Congress in Article 19, UCMJ (limiting the maxi-
mum punishments that may be adjudged), and with the ad-
ditional limitations imposed by the President in R .C.M. 
201(f)(2)(B)(ii) (imposing an additional limitation on the 
maximum permissible sentence), and R.C.M. 201(f)(2)(E)(i) 
(barring referral to a military judge-alone special court -
martial if the accused objects and the maximum sentence 
at a general court -martial would exceed two years of con-
finement, or if sex offender registration would be re-
quired).
7 
IV. Conclusion 
We hold that Appellant had no Fifth Amendment due 
process right to a trial before a panel of members where the 
military judge-alone special court -martial forum limited 
the maximum confinement that could be adjudged to six 
months and precluded a punitive discharge. We also hold 
that the convening authority’s forum selection in accord-
ance with Articles 16 and 19, UCMJ, and R. C.M. 201 did 
not violate due process. Therefore, the decision of the 
United States Navy -Marine Corps Court of Criminal Ap-
peals is affirmed. 
 
7 Although Appellant objected to the military judge-alone 
special court-martial’s jurisdiction, he could not prevail where 
the maximum confinement exposure he would have faced at a 
general court-martial was one year of confinement , and a con-
viction would not subject him to sex offender registration. 