This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Ladonies P. STRONG, Staff Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0107 
Crim. App. No. 20200391 
 
Argued October 11, 2023—Decided August 22, 2024 
 
Military Judge: G. Bret Batdorff 
 
For Appellant: Major Sean Patrick Flynn (argued) ; 
Colonel Philip M. Staten, Major Mitchell D. Herniak, 
Major Brian A. Osterhage, and Jonathan F. Potter , 
Esq. (on brief); Colonel Michael C. Friess. 
 
For Appellee: Major Timothy R. Emmons  (argued); 
Colonel Christopher B. Burgess, Lieutenant Colonel 
Jacqueline J. DeGaine, and Captain Alex J. Berkun  
(on brief). 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, 
and Judge HARDY joined. Judge MAGGS  filed a 
separate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court.1 
This case raises the question of when a seizure of digital 
evidence is complete. For the reasons set forth below, w e 
hold that the seizure of digital evidence is complete for pur-
poses of Article 131e, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 931e (2018), when the digital content 
is in the exclusive control of authorized personnel, secure 
from unauthorized manipulation or destruction. We fur-
ther hold that authorized personnel are endeavoring to 
seize digital evidence while they are executing processes to 
acquire such exclusive control. We therefore affirm the de-
cision of the United States Army Court of Criminal Appeals 
(ACCA). 
I. Background 
Contrary to her pleas, on July 18, 2020,  Appellant was 
convicted by a general court-martial panel composed of of-
ficer and enlisted members of one specification of negligent 
homicide in violation of Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 
(2018), and one specification of preventing an authorized 
seizure of property in violation of Article 131e, UCMJ. The 
latter charge arose when Appellant remotely reset her Ap-
ple iPhone to the original factory settings, effectively delet-
ing the digital content  stored on the iPhone, after Army 
Criminal Investigation Division ( CID) agents seized the 
iPhone pursuant to a valid search authorization. The court-
martial sentenced Appellant to reduction to the grade of 
E-1, confinement for three years, and a bad-conduct dis-
charge. 
Appellant appealed to the ACCA, challenging the legal 
and factual sufficiency of her convictions. United States v. 
Strong, 83 M.J. 509, 51 1 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2023)  (en 
 
1 The Court heard oral argument in this case at Joint Base 
Lewis-McChord, Washington, as part of the Court’s “Project 
Outreach.” Project Outreach seeks to expand awareness of the 
military justice appellate process by taking appellate hearings 
to military bases and educational institutions around the coun-
try. We thank the participants. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
banc).2 With respect to the offense of prevention of author-
ized seizure of property, Article 131e, UCMJ, “criminalizes 
actions taken by an accused to prevent the seizure of prop-
erty by authorized personnel,” id. at 513-14, when the ac-
cused then knew that the authorized personnel “were seiz-
ing, about to seize, or endeavoring to seize the property ,” 
Manual for Courts- Martial, United States, pt. IV, para. 
86.b.(1) (2019 ed.) (MCM). Appellant argued that her con-
duct was beyond the reach of the statute because it does 
not apply to conduct occurring after property is seized, and 
in this case, her iPhone had already been seized when she 
remotely deleted its digital content. Strong, 83 M.J. at 513. 
The ACCA noted that because the digital contents of a 
cell phone such as Appellant’s iPhone can be manipulated 
remotely: 
it is no longer enough for law enforcement officials 
executing a warrant for digital media to simply 
take possession of the physical device containing 
the media. To ensure the digital media is not re-
motely altered, destroyed, or rendered inaccessi-
ble after the physical device containing the data is 
lawfully seized, those executing seizures must 
take additional protective measures. 
Id. at 515. 
After listing various protective measures to prevent re-
mote access to the digital contents of  a cell phone , the 
ACCA noted that none are “foolproof” because “even when 
the physical device containing the data is in the hands of 
those authorized to seize it, the targeted data will often re-
main subject to active and passive alteration up until the 
time it is copied or extracted.” Id. at 515-16. Therefore, the 
ACCA found: 
that the routine efforts of law enforcement to pro-
tect digital media on a seized physical device are 
part and parcel of the seizure of digital media. 
 
2 The ACCA summarily concluded that the negligent homi-
cide conviction was both legally and factually sufficient. Strong, 
83 M.J. at 511. That ruling is not at issue in this appeal. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
Under this analysis, a seizure is ongoing while 
those authorized to seize the property execute the 
protocols necessary to isolate and preserve the 
digital media. For purposes of Art [icle] 131e, 
UCMJ, we further find that digital media is 
“seized,” and beyond the reach of the statute , 
when the device containing it is secure from pas-
sive or active manipulation, even if that does not 
occur until the targeted data is copied or other-
wise transferred from the seized device at some 
other location. 
Id. at 516. 
Applying these principles, the ACCA concluded that the 
seizure of digital content on Appellant’s iPhone was ongo-
ing at the time that  she erased it because Appellant “still 
had sufficient access to the data on the phone, whether ‘au-
thorized’ or not, to dispose of it in precisely the manner the 
seizing authority sought to prevent.” Id.  at 517 (footnote 
omitted). Having determined that Appellant destroyed the 
digital content on her iPhone while authorized personnel 
were endeavoring to seize it,  in violation of Article 131e, 
UCMJ, a majority of the en banc ACCA held  that her con-
viction was both legally and factually sufficient . Id. at 
517-18.
3 
We granted review to determine whether the ACCA 
erred when it concluded that agents were still endeavoring 
to seize the digital content on Appellant’s iPhone after they 
had already seized the iPhone.4 
 
3 Three judges dissented, concluding, inter alia, that the ev-
idence was factually and legally insufficient to support the con-
viction because Appellant deleted digital content from her iPh-
one after it was seized. Strong, 83 M.J. at 523 (Arguelles, J., with 
whom Smawley, C.J., and Penland, J., joined, dissenting ). The 
dissent argued that “once the Agent put the phone in the Fara-
day bag and secured it, law enforcement asserted a ‘fair degree’ 
of dominion and control over both the phone and its data, such 
that the seizure was complete.” Id. (quoting United States v. Ja-
cobsen, 466 U.S. 109, 120 (1984) (additional citation omitted)). 
4 We granted review of the following issues: 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
II. Facts 
On the morning of June 6, 20 19, a convoy of vehicles 
was transporting a group of United States Military Acad-
emy (USMA) cadets to a land navigation site for a training 
exercise. Appellant was driving one of the vehicles.  At 
around 6:41 a.m., Appellant’s vehicle flipped over while in 
transit, killing one cadet and injuring others. 
CID responded to the scene and interviewed the truck 
commander, who said that he saw Appellant on her  Apple 
Watch when the vehicle rollover incident occurred. At ap-
proximately 10:55 p.m., CID obtained authorization to 
seize and search  Appellant’s Apple Watch, as well as her 
iPhone, which was connected to the watch. 
Immediately after obtaining authorization, CID Special 
Agent (SA) ST was escorted by  Appellant’s 
noncommissioned officer (NCO) to Appellant’s living 
quarters to seize  the devices . SA ST left the NCO  alone 
with Appellant as she got dressed and instructed the NCO 
 
I. Whether the Army Court erred when it deter-
mined that agents were still “endeavoring to 
seize” the digital media on Appellant’s phone after 
agents had already seized the phone. 
II. Whether Appellant was prejudiced where the 
[military judge] failed to instruct the panel in ac-
cordance with the plain language of the charge 
sheet; and  
III. Whether Appellant was deprived of her consti-
tutional right to a unanimous verdict. 
United States v. Strong, 83 M.J. 392, 392-93 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (or-
der granting review). 
In a September 11, 2023, order, we vacated our grant of re-
view of Issue II.  United States v. Strong, 83 M.J. 481, 481 
(C.A.A.F. 2023) (order vacating Issue II). 
Issue III was not argued or briefed as it was held as a trailer 
to United States v. Anderson, 83 M.J. 291 (C.A.A.F. 2023), cert. 
denied, 144 S. Ct. 1003  (2024). Based upon the decision in An-
derson, we hold that Appellant was not deprived of the right to 
a unanimous verdict. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
to not let Appellant use her Apple Watch or iPhone. SA ST 
heard the NCO tell Appellant several times that she was 
not allowed to be on her iP hone, and when SA ST stepped 
inside Appellant’s living quarters , she saw Appellant 
trying to use her iPhone. 
At 11:07 p.m., after advising Appellant that CID was 
authorized to seize her  Apple Watch and iPhone, SA ST 
seized the devices. According to SA ST,5 Appellant became 
“belligerent” and tried to take her Apple Watch and iPhone 
back several times. SA ST cautioned her , “At ease, Ser-
geant”—the first time in her career that she had to admon-
ish a subject in that way. 
SA ST  testified that law enforcement  officials are 
trained to place a seized cell phone in airplane mode and to 
place it in a Faraday bag , which blocks any signals from 
being sent or received by the cell phone. These precautions 
prevent anyone with access to the user’s account from re-
motely wiping the digital contents of the cell phone. 
CID sought to protect the Apple Watch and iPhone from 
remote manipulation or destruction so they could be exam-
ined to determine whether Appellant was using one of the 
devices at the time that the vehicle flipped over . Accord-
ingly, CID attempted to put the iPhone in airplane mode 
but was unsuccessful. CID placed the iPhone into a bag la-
beled as a Faraday b ag and transported it to a CID office, 
where a CID forensic examiner would remove the digital 
content from the iPhone for analysis. 
The record is unclear as to whether the bag malfunc-
tioned, was mislabeled, or was not properly sealed. In any 
case, by 1:25 p.m. on June 7, 2019, CID learned that the  
iPhone had been remotely reset, erasing the digital content 
from the iPhone and with it, most of the digital content 
 
5 ST had retired from the Army and was no longer a CID 
special agent when she testified at Appellant’s court-martial. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
from the Apple Watch.6 According to CID, the factory reset 
occurred while the iPhone was in transit to a CID lab. CID 
was unable to access the remaining digital content from the 
Apple Watch because it was encrypted and encoded pro-
tected. Unable to access digital content  from the Apple 
Watch or iPhone, CID could not determine whether Appel-
lant was operating either device  when the vehicle rolled 
over. 
Through authorized search and seizure warrants  pur-
suant to 18 U.S.C. § 2703,7 CID acquired information from 
Apple, the manufacturer of Appellant’s watch and cell 
phone, and Verizon, Appellant’s cell phone carrier. This in-
formation revealed that about an hour after CID’s seizure 
of the Apple Watch and iPhone, someone using Appellant’s 
iCloud account8 searched the Internet for “find my iphone,” 
accessed webpages related to the service “Find My iPh-
one,”9 and issued a command to erase the digital content 
from Appellant’s iPhone.10 The command came from an IP 
 
6 A CID forensic examiner testified that  “probably 95 per-
cent” of the relevant digital content from the watch would have 
been found on the iPhone. 
7 The Stored Communications Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2703 (2018), 
generally requires the government, under specified circum-
stances, to obtain a warrant in order to compel service providers 
to disclose the contents of electronic or wire communications or 
records pertaining to subscribers or customers of such services. 
8 An iCloud account is an Apple account that store s infor-
mation in a remote location that can be accessed by various de-
vices. Appellant’s Apple Watch, iPhone and MacBook Pro were 
all registered to the same iCloud account. 
9 “Find My iPhone” is a service offered by Apple that enables 
a user to remotely wipe devices, such as phones and watches. 
The service can be accessed through an internet browser using 
the iCloud website or through an application on an Apple device. 
10 CID seized Appellant’s Apple Watch and iPhone at 11:07 
p.m. on Ju ne 6, 2019. Someone logged into Appellant’s iCloud 
account through a web browser at 12:17 a.m. on June 7, 2019, 
and three minutes later, at 12:20 a.m., gave the  command to 
erase Appellant’s iPhone. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
address in New York through an Apple MacBook Pro of the 
same model as one owned by Appellant . Execution of the 
command returned Appellant’s iPhone to factory settings.  
Although the command to erase Appellant’s iPhone was 
given shortly after midnight  on the day after the iPhone 
was seized, it took some time for the iPhone to receive the 
signal. As a result, the iPhone’s digital content was not 
erased until approximately 10:50 a.m. on June 7, 2019. 
After the command was sent to erase Appellant’s iPh-
one, information from Appellant’s iCloud account revealed 
continued research for information related to Find My iPh-
one, including a search for “Erase Your Device With Find 
My iPhone .” According to a  CID forensic examiner , this 
could have indicated that someone was trying to research 
how to erase an Apple Watch. 
III. Discussion 
The question in this case is whether CID  was “endeav-
oring to seize” the digital content of Appellant’s iPhone 
when Appellant erased it . Applying the plain meaning of 
the terms of the statute, we conclude (1) that seizure of the 
digital content was not complete when CID seized the iPh-
one and placed it in the Faraday -labeled bag, and (2) that 
CID was still endeavoring to seize the digital content when 
Appellant erased it. 
A. Standard of Review 
“Questions about the meaning of statutes, including the 
meaning of the UCMJ’s punitive articles, are questions of 
law that this Court reviews de novo. ” United States v. 
Mays, 83 M.J. 277, 279 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (citing United 
States v. Bennitt, 72 M.J. 266, 268 (C.A.A.F. 2013)). 
B. Law 
The elements of the offense of prevention of an author-
ized seizure under Article 131e, UCMJ, are: 
(1) That one or more persons authorized to make 
searches and seizures were seizing, about to seize, 
or endeavoring to seize certain property;  
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
(2) That the accused destroyed, removed, or other-
wise disposed of that property with intent to pre-
vent the seizure thereof; and  
(3) That the accused then knew that person(s) au-
thorized to make searches were seizing, about to 
seize, or endeavoring to seize the property. 
MCM pt. IV, para. 86.b.11 
“It is a general rule of statutory construction that if a 
statute is clear and unambiguous —that is, susceptible to 
only one interpretation—we use its plain meaning and ap-
ply it as written.” United States v. Schmidt, 82 M.J. 68, 73 
(C.A.A.F. 2022). Thus, “ ‘[t]he first step [in statutory inter-
pretation] is to determine whether the language at issue 
has a plain and unambiguous meaning with regard to the 
particular dispute in the case.  The inquiry ceases if the 
statutory language is unambiguous and the statuto ry 
scheme is coherent and consistent. ’ ” United States v. 
McPherson, 73 M.J. 393, 395 (C.A.A.F. 2014) (quoting 
Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co., Inc. , 534 U.S. 438, 450 
(2002)). “When the words of a statute are unambiguous, 
then, this first canon is also the last: ‘ judicial inquiry is 
complete.’ ” Connecticut Nat’l Bank v. Germain , 503 U.S. 
249, 254 (1992) (quoting Rubin v. United States, 449 U.S. 
424, 430 (1981)). The plain meaning of the words of a stat-
ute controls, “so long as that meaning does not lead to an 
absurd result.” United States v. Ortiz , 76 M.J. 189, 192 
(C.A.A.F. 2017). 
Whether statutory language is ambiguous “  ‘is deter-
mined by reference to the language itself, the specific 
 
11 As the ACCA noted: 
Prevention of Authorized Seizure of Property be-
came an enumerated article with the passage of 
the Military Justice Act of 2016 on 1 January 
2019. See National Defense Authorization Act for 
Fiscal Year 2017, Pub. L. No. 114-328, § 5448, 130 
Stat. 2957. Previously, a nearly identical offense 
was among those listed in the general article. 
Strong, 83 M.J. at 514 n.6. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
context in which that language is used, and the broader 
context of the statute as a whole.’ ” Schmidt, 82 M.J. at 76 
(Ohlson, C.J., with whom Erdmann, S.J., join ed, concur-
ring in the judgment ) (quoting Robinson v. Shell Oil Co. , 
519 U.S. 337, 341 (1997)). Where the statute does not de-
fine the relevant phrase, “we must seek to discern its ordi-
nary meaning through an analysis of its constituent 
words.” United States v. Badders, 82 M.J. 299, 303 
(C.A.A.F. 2022). “Words are to be understood in their ordi-
nary, e veryday meanings —unless the context indicates 
that they bear a technical sense.” Antonin Scalia & Bryan 
A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts 
69 (2012). 
C. Analysis 
Because Article 131e, UCMJ, criminalizes action taken 
with the intent to prevent an authorized seizure  of prop-
erty, the unlawful  action must occur before the seizure is 
complete. Specifically, it must occur while authorized per-
sonnel are “seizing, about to seize, or endeavoring to seize” 
the property in question , and the accused must act “ with 
intent to prevent the seizure thereof .” MCM pt. IV, para. 
86.b.(1)-(2). Applying the plain meaning of the statute, we 
conclude that law enforcement agents were endeavoring to 
seize the digital content of Appellant’s iPhone when she re-
motely wiped the iPhone to prevent the seizure of its digital 
content. 
The first element of the Article 131e, UCMJ, offense  of 
preventing an authorized seizure requires the government 
to prove that an authorized individual is “seizing, about to 
seize, or endeavoring to seize certain property .” MCM pt. 
IV, para. 86.b.(1). “[S]eizing” and “endeavoring to seize” de-
scribe ongoing actions, while “about to seize” describes an 
action that has not yet occurred. Once a seizure is com-
plete, no one is about to seize or is in the process of seizing 
or endeavoring to seize the property in question. 
The second element requires proof “[t] hat the accused 
destroyed, removed, or otherwise disposed of that property 
with intent to prevent the seizure thereof .” MCM pt. IV, 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
para. 86.b.(2). One cannot intend to prevent an event that 
has already occurred. The plain meaning of these terms in-
dicates that a violation of Article 131e, UCMJ, can only oc-
cur before a seizure is complete.12 
As Article 131e, UCMJ, applies only before a seizure is 
complete, in order to determine whether Appellant’s con-
duct fell within the reach of the statute we must first iden-
tify when a seizure is complete. According to Black’s Law 
Dictionary, “seize” is defined as “[t]o forcibly take posses-
sion (of a person or property)” and “[t]o be in possession (of 
property).” Seize, Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014). 
“[P]ossession” is defined as “[t]he fact of having or holding 
property in one’s power; the exercise of dominion over prop-
erty” and “[t]he right under which one may exercise control 
over something to the exclusion of all others; the continu-
ing exercise of a claim to the exclusive use of a material 
object.” Possession, Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014). 
The plain meaning of these terms, taken together, estab-
lishes that a seizure is complete  for purposes of Article 
131e, UCMJ,  when a person authorized to seize certain 
property has possession of the property  and exercises do-
minion over it to the exclusion of all others. 
Next, we must examine the meaning of “endeavoring to 
seize” in Article 131e, UCMJ.  “[E]ndeavor” is defined as 
“[a] systematic or continuous effort to attain some goal; any 
effort or assay to accomplish some goal or purpose.” En-
deavor, Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014). As the per-
tinent “goal or purpose ” in the context of Article 131e, 
UCMJ, is to seize, applying the above definition of  “seize” 
we conclude that the plain meaning of “endeavoring to 
seize certain property” is to be in the process of exert ing 
effort to exercise dominion over property to the exclusion of 
all others. 
 
12 Article 131e, UCMJ, differs in scope from its civilian cor-
ollary, 18 U.S.C. §  2232(a) (2018), which can be violated 
“before, during, or after any search for or seizure of prop-
erty.” (Emphasis added.) 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
With these definitions in place, we turn to the question 
presented in this case: whether authorized personnel were 
endeavoring to seize the digital content of Appellant’s iPh-
one after they seized the iPhone itself. Appellant contends 
that the digital content  of the iPhone was seized at the 
same time CID seized the device itself. According to Appel-
lant, because the seizure was already complete, CID was 
not endeavoring to seize the digital content of the iPhone 
when she erased it.  In the alternative, Appellant argues 
that agents were no longer endeavoring to seize the iPh-
one’s digital content once they placed the iPhone into what 
they thought was a functioning Faraday bag. We are un-
persuaded by either argument. 
We conclude, first, that t he seizure of Appellant’s  
iPhone did not constitute  seizure of the  digital content of 
the iPhone. We agree with the ACCA that in light of the 
ethereal nature of digital evidence and its  capacity for 
remote manipulation,  “it is no longer enough for law 
enforcement officials executing a warrant for digital media 
to simply take possession of the physical device containing 
the media.” Strong, 83 M.J. at 515.  In order to seize the 
digital content of the iPhone, CID had to take additiona l 
steps to protect it from unauthorized remote manipulation 
or destruction, whether by moving or copying the digital 
content to a secure location or by some other means. In this 
case, the iPhone was remotely reset and its digital content 
was erased before CID could complete the necessary  
additional steps to secure the iPhone’s digital content. The 
fact that Appellant was able to remotely delete the digital 
content even after the iPhone was seized conclusively 
demonstrates that CID did not have exclusive control over 
the digital content even if they had control over the iPhone 
itself. There fore, the seizure was not complete when the 
iPhone was seized or placed in the Faraday-labeled bag. 
Second, we conclude that CID was endeavoring to seize 
the digital content of Appellant’s iPhone when Appellant  
wiped the iPhone. As stated above, a seizure is complete for 
purposes of Article 131e, UCMJ, when a person authorized 
to seize certain property has possession of the property and 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
exercises dominion over it to the exclusion of all others. In 
this case, CID attempted to secure the digital content from 
remote manipulation or destruction by attempting to put it 
in airplane mode and placing it in the Faraday-labeled bag. 
Then CID sought to remove the digital content from the 
iPhone for forensic analysis, stopping only upon discover-
ing that the digital content had been wiped . CID had not 
achieved the purpose of the seizure—possession of and ex-
clusive dominion over the digital evidence —when Appel-
lant wiped the iPhone. By engaging in continuing efforts to 
take exclusive possession of the digital content  on Appel-
lant’s iPhone even after it was erased, CID was endeavor-
ing to seize  the digital content when Appellant wiped the 
iPhone.
13 
Although the plain meaning of the language in Article 
131e, UCMJ, is dispositive of the issue before this Court, 
we note that our analysis of the statutory language is con-
sistent with this Court’s precedent regarding when a sei-
zure is complete. 
In United States v. Hahn , we stated that “ ‘[a] seizure 
of property occurs when there is some meaningful interfer-
ence with an individual’s possessory interests in that prop-
erty.’ ” 44 M.J. 360, 362 (C.A.A.F. 1996) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) ( quoting United States v. Jacobsen , 466 
 
13 Thus, we agree with the lower court’s determinations that: 
[(1)] routine efforts of law enforcement to protect 
digital media on a seized physical device are part 
and parcel of the seizure of digital media. Under 
this analysis, a seizure is ongoing while those au-
thorized to seize the property execute the proto-
cols necessary to isolate and preserve the digital 
media. . . . [and (2) f]or purposes of Art. 131e, 
UCMJ, . . . digital media is “seized,” and beyond 
the reach of the statute, when the device contain-
ing it is secure from passive or active manipula-
tion, even if that does not occur until the targeted 
data is copied or otherwise transferred from the 
seized device at some other location. 
Strong, 83 M.J. at 516. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
U.S. 109, 113 (1984)). In that case , the appellant chal-
lenged the providence of his plea to preventing the seizure 
of property by authorized law enforcement agents, arguing 
that his conduct was outside of the scope of the statute 14 
because a seizure had already occurred. Id. 
The Court described the circumstances in Hahn as 
follows: 
 During a consensual search of another sailor’s 
house, [Naval Investigative Service (NIS)] agents 
found property that they suspected appellant had 
stolen. In order to confirm the identity of the thief, 
the agents suggested that the sailor telephone ap-
pellant and tell him that the NIS was going to 
search the house that evening and that appellant 
had to remove the property beforehand. When ap-
pellant arrived shortly thereafter and removed 
the items to his ca r, surveilling agents swarmed 
in and apprehended him. 
Id. at 361. The appellant argued that NIS gained physical 
control of the stolen property once they had entered the 
home, searched for the stolen property, identified the sto-
len property, and then waited until the appellant arrived. 
Id. at 362. 
We declined to adopt the appellant’s theory, which: 
would require a holding that whenever a law en-
forcement agent observes stolen or contraband 
property and has the opportunity to wrest exclu-
sive physical custody of it, as a matter of law the 
agent thereby has seized it at that moment. Such 
a holding would be inconsistent with the  concept 
of seizure as set out in  Jacobsen and is without 
any basis in legal theory of which we are aware. 
Id. 
 
14 In Hahn, the appellant was charged with the prevention 
of authorized seizure of property, then an Article 134, UCMJ , 
offense. 44 M.J. at 361; see also supra note 11. 
 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
Instead, we concluded that there was no meaningful in-
terference with the appellant’s possessory interest in the 
property, as evidenced by “the ease with which appellant 
was able to gather up the property and move it to his car.” 
Id. Therefore, the property had not been seized when the 
appellant moved it in an attempt to prevent its seizure. Id. 
In United States v. Hoffmann, we applied the same def-
inition of when a seizure is complete in the context of a mo-
tion to suppress  the fruits of a search of the appellant’s 
electronic media. 75 M.J. 120, 124 (C.A.A.F. 2016) (citing 
Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 113) . The appellant in that case ini-
tially consented to a search of his barracks room, but then 
he revoked his consent when he noticed that agents were 
collecting his electronic media. Id. at 123. The agents ter-
minated the search but did not return the items they had 
already collected. Id. The military judge denied the appel-
lant’s motion to suppress the fruits of the subsequent 
search of the electronic media, finding that the seizure was 
lawful because the appellant revoked his consent only after 
investigators had seized the electronic media. Id. 
We reversed, holding that the seizure of the media did 
not occur until after the appellant revoked his consent. Id. 
at 124. We reasoned: 
 A “seizure” of property occurs when there is 
some meaningful interference with an individ-
ual’s possessory interests in that property.” 
United States v. Jacobsen , 466 U.S. 109, 113 
(1984) (emphasis added). By employing the term 
“meaningful interference,” the Supreme Court 
must have “contemplated excluding inconsequen-
tial interference with an individual’s possessory 
interests.” United States v. Va Lerie, 424 F.3d 694, 
706 (8th Cir. 2005) (en banc). . . . A seizure re-
quires law enforcement agents to exercise a  fair 
degree of dominion and control over the property. 
See Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 120 (field testing con-
tents of a package for illegal substances was 
“meaningful interference”); Hudson v. Palmer , 
468 U.S. 517, 544 (1984) (completely destroying 
the property was “meaningful control”). 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
 Appellant withdrew his consent while the 
media were still sitting in his room. While the 
agents may have moved the media to a central 
location in the room, they did not meaningfully 
interfere with it until they removed it. As the 
seizure of the media occurred after Appellant had 
withdrawn his consent, the seizure violated the 
Fourth Amendment. 
Id. 
Although Hahn and Hoffman addressed the seizure of 
physical property, their analysis  is equally applicable to 
the attempted seizure of digital content in this case . CID 
was endeavoring to seize but had not yet seized the digital 
content on Appellant’s iPhone because, even as CID was 
attempting to “exercise a fair degree of dominion and con-
trol over the property,” Hoffman, 75 M.J. at 124, Appellant 
was able to easily “gather up the property and move it.” 
Hahn, 44 M.J. at 362. 
This is true even if the taking of the iPhone limited Ap-
pellant’s ability to access its digital content. Although Ap-
pellant could no longer access the digital content  in the 
same manner after the iPhone was physically taken from 
her by law enforcement, she was able to access and delete 
it by using another device. The ability to remotely delete 
digital content is a common feature of cell phones, and Ap-
pellant did not have to take extraordinary measures in or-
der to accomplish it. Her ability to completely remove all of 
the digital content from the iPhone with a readily available 
function shows that  notwithstanding any limitations on 
her access, law enforcement had not yet established “a fair 
degree of dominion or control over the [ digital content ].” 
Hoffman, 75 M.J. at 124. 
In light of the foregoing analysis, we conclude that au-
thorized personnel were “endeavoring to seize” the digital 
media on Appellant’s iPhone when she remotely erased the 
digital content on it. We answer the remaining granted is-
sue in the negative. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 
 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting.
The Court and I agree on a key proposition in this case: 
the legal sufficiency of the evidence  turns on whether the  
alleged mis conduct—erasing  the digital content of  a cell 
phone—oc curred after government agents had “seized” the 
phone and its contents. This proposition flows directly from 
the text of Article 131e, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §  931e (2018), under which Appellant 
was found guilty of “ [p]revention of authorized seizure of 
property.” By its terms, the article concerns  only obstruc-
tive acts committed while government agents “are seizing, 
are about to seize, or are endeavoring to seize property. ” 
Misconduct occurring  after government agents have al-
ready seized the property cannot violate Article 131e, 
UCMJ. Whether such misconduct might violate some other 
punitive article is not at issue in this appeal. 
The Court and I , however, disagree about the test for 
when a “seizure” occurs. The Court holds today that a sei-
zure is not complete until “a person authorized to seize cer-
tain property has possession of the property and exercises 
dominion over it to the exclusion of all others. ” (Emphasis 
added.) I cannot agree with t his holding because it is con-
trary to long-standing precedent establishing that a sei-
zure occurs “when there is some meaningful interference 
with an individual’s possessory interests in that property.” 
United States v. Hahn , 44 M.J. 360 , 362 (C.A.A.F. 1996) 
(quoting United States v. Jacobsen , 466 U.S. 109, 113 
(1984)). With its new holding, the Court has fundamentally 
transformed the definition of  what constitutes a “seizure” 
so that , in determining whether a seizure occurred,  the 
Court no longer focuses on whether government  agents 
have interfered with an individual’s possession of property 
but instead focuses on whether government agents have 
acquired the same exclusive possession as the property 
owner. This is an unwarranted departure from precedent 
that significantly raises the bar for what constitutes a sei-
zure. I therefore respectfully dissent. 
I. Analysis 
Article 131e, UCMJ, provides: 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
2 
Any person subject to this chapter who, knowing 
that one or more persons authorized to make 
searches and seizures are seizing, are about to 
seize, or are endeavoring to seize property, de-
stroys, removes, or otherwise disposes of the prop-
erty with intent to pre vent the seizure thereof 
shall be punished as a court-martial may direct. 
The specification at issue  in this case  alleged that Appel-
lant violated Article 131e, UCMJ, “[i]n that [she] did, at or 
near West Point, New York, on or about 7 June 2019, with 
intent to prevent its seizure, obstruct, obscure, and dispose 
of the digital content of her cellphone.” 
Appellant contends that the Government failed to prove 
that the erasure of the digital content occurred when 
agents were “seizing, [were] about to seize, or [were] en-
deavoring to seize property.” She argues that the erasure 
happened after the seizure had already occurred and that 
the seizure occurred either when the agents took posses-
sion of her phone or when they placed it in a Faraday bag
1 
to prevent it from receiving signals . Appellant contends  
that the agents had effectively seized her digital data when 
they had secured her physical phone and, thus , that the 
agents were no longer seizing, about to seize, or endeavor-
ing to seize the digital content of the phone. 
I agree with Appellant ’s position based on this Court ’s 
precedent in two decisions: Hahn, 44 M.J. 360, and United 
States v. Hoffmann , 75 M.J. 120 (C.A.A.F. 2016) . Both of 
these cases rely on the Supreme Court’s decision in Jacob-
sen, 466 U.S. 109. 
In Hahn, the appellant removed stolen property from a 
house after learning  that government agents were plan-
ning to search the house.  44 M.J. at 361. The appellant 
pleaded guilty to an enumerated offense under Article 134, 
UCMJ, that was very similar to the offense now codified in 
Article 131e, UCMJ. Id. (citing Manual for Courts-Martial, 
 
1 The investigating agents do not deny that they placed the 
phone in a bag, but testimony revealed that the Faraday b ag 
they used was faulty. 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
3 
United States pt. IV, para. 103 (1995 ed.)). On appeal, the 
appellant attacked the providence of his plea, arguing that 
he did not prevent government agents from “seizing or [in-
terfere when they] were about to seize or . . . endeavoring to 
seize” the property. Id. at 361-62 (internal quotation marks 
omitted). He asserted that the government agents had al-
ready effectively seized the property when they had  both 
located the property and had the opportunity to take phys-
ical custody of it before it was re moved by the appellant . 
Id. The Court rejected this argument, holding that a “sei-
zure” of property occurs “when there is some meaningful in-
terference with an individual’s possessory interests in that 
property.” Id. at 362 (emphasis added) (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Jacobsen, 466 U.S. at 113). The 
Court decided that such interference had not occurred be-
cause the government had not “even touched the property 
in question” and because of “the ease with which [the] ap-
pellant was able to gather up the property and move it to 
his car.” Id.  
Applying the test in Hahn to this case, I conclude that  
the Government agents “seized” Appellant’s cell phone and 
its digital content when they took  the physical cell phone 
from her possession, because taking the cell phone mean-
ingfully interfered with her possessory interest. “A person’s 
‘possessory interest’ in property ‘derives from rights in 
property delineated by the parameters of law.’ ”  United 
States v. Visser, 40 M.J. 86, 90 (C.M.A. 1994)  (quoting 
United States v. LaFrance, 879 F.2d 1, 7 (1st Cir. 1989)).  
One such right is “[t]he right to exclude,” which is “ ‘one of 
the most treasured ’ rights of property ownership.” Cedar 
Point Nursery v. Hassid, 594 U.S. 139, 149 (2021) (quoting 
Loretto v. Teleprompter Manhattan CATV Corp. , 458 U.S. 
419, 435 (1982)). In addition, “[p]ossession . . . involves the 
exercise of dominion and control over the thing allegedly 
possessed.” United States v. Myers, 20 C.M.A. 269, 270-71, 
43 C.M.R. 109, 110- 11 (1971) (citing United States v. Ro-
mano, 382 U.S. 136 (1965)). “By its very nature possession 
is unique to the  possessor.” Id. at 271, 43 C.M.R. at 111 
(emphasis added)  (internal quotation marks omitted) . 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
4 
Thus, a seizure occurs when the government “deprives the 
individual of dominion over his or her person or property.” 
Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 133 (1990) (emphasis 
added). That is what occurred in this case before the phone 
was wiped. And although Appellant later appears to have 
found a way to erase the phone’s data remotely, she could 
not use the phone or freely access its contents using the cell 
phone’s screen as she could have done if she still had pos-
session of the phone. Thus, both her possession of the phys-
ical phone—which neither the Government nor the Court 
denies was seized—and its digital data w ere seized before 
the alleged misconduct occurred.  
Although the Court cites Hahn in its opinion, the Court 
departs from Hahn’s holding that a seizure of property oc-
curs “when there is some meaningful interference with an 
individual’s possessory interests in that property.” 44 M.J. 
at 362. The Court instead adopts a new standard, contrary 
to precedent, that a seizure occurs only “when a person au-
thorized to seize certain property has possession of the 
property and exercises dominion over it to the exclusion of 
all others.” (Emphasis added.) In so doing, the Court turns 
on its head the test of when a seizure occurs. The test es-
tablished in Hahn focuses on whether the government has 
interfered with an individual’s possession. The Court’s new 
test improperly focuses instead on whether the government 
has acquired so great a possessory interest in property that 
no one else can interfere with it. T he Court thereby seem-
ingly creates an unobtainable seizure standard because the 
government does not acquire the same property interest as 
the property owner when it takes possession of property for 
law enforcement purposes.
2 
 
2 The new “dominion . . . to the exclusion of all others” test is 
not only higher than Hahn’s “meaningful interference” test, but 
it is so high that it is seemingly impossible to satisfy. For exam-
ple, suppose the government takes physical evidence from the 
accused and locks it in a government building, but the accused 
is still able to destroy the evidence by burning down the building. 
See United States v. Mix , 35 M.J. 283, 289 (C.M.A. 1992)  
 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
5 
Second, in Hoffmann, the accused initially consented to 
a search of his quarters but withdrew his consent shortly 
after investigators started gathering his  “digital media,” 
which included a laptop. 3 75 M.J. at 123.  The a ppellant 
withdrew his consent while the physical media was still sit-
ting in the room. Id. Although investigators terminated the 
search, they then removed the digital media items they had 
started collecting during the search. Id.  A dispute arose 
about whether the investigators had already seized the me-
dia before the appellant withdrew his consent  while the 
media was still sitting in the room,  or if the y had not yet 
seized the media until they  removed the physical items 
from the room after the appellant withdrew his consent. Id. 
at 123-24. Applying the test in Hahn , the Court held that 
the digital media had not been seized before the appellant 
withdrew his consent , explaining: “While the agents may 
have moved the media to a central location in the room, 
they did not meaningfully interfere  with it  until they re-
moved it .” Id. at 124 (emphasis added). Accordingly, the  
seizure occurred after the appellant  had withdrawn his 
consent. Id. Notably, throughout its opinion, the Court 
made no distinction between the seizure of the physical 
computer equipment and its digital content.  
In this case, the seizure of Appellant’s phone went far 
beyond the “inconsequential interference” that occurred in 
Hoffmann. Id. (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). And like the Court in Hoffman n, I see no legal 
distinction in this case between the seizure of Appellant’s 
 
(concerning an appellant who was charged with burning down 
the staff judge advocate ’s office and courtroom , presumably to 
destroy evidence). If the test is “dominion . . . to the exclusion of 
all others,” the conclusion must be that the physical evidence 
locked in the government building, which was physically inac-
cessible to the accused, had not yet been seized because accused 
could still destroy it.  
3 The opinion of the Court of Criminal Appeals in th is case 
clarified that the “ digital media ” included a laptop, thumb 
drives, and DVDs. United States v. Hoffmann, 74 M.J. 542, 546 
(N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2014), rev’d, 75 M.J. 120 (C.A.A.F. 2016). 
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
6 
phone and the digital content of the p hone. Accordingly, 
based on Hahn  and Hoffmann, I would conclude that the 
seizure of both the phone and the data was complete before 
the phone was remotely wiped. 
Two remaining points require attention. First, the 
Government argues that a seizure of the digital content 
could not occur “until the law enforcement agents were able 
to extract the contents of Appellant’s cell phone, ” which 
had not happened before the cell phone was wiped.  The 
Government, however, cites no precedent in support of this 
proposition and does not attempt to reconcile it with the 
Court’s analysis in Hoffmann. The Government’s proposal 
that a seizure does not occur until digital content is 
extracted, if adopted, would also have sweeping 
consequences. Although this case involves digital content, 
the logic of the proposed test would suggest that a 
recording of a wiretap does not constitute a seizure until 
agents listen to the recording. This is contrary to Supreme 
Court precedent. See Katz v. United States , 389 U.S. 347, 
353 (1967) (recording oral statements is a seizure).  For 
these reasons, I cannot accept the Government’s position.  
The second point concerns the rule of lenity, which  the 
dissenting opinion in  the United States Army Court of 
Criminal Appeals briefly addressed. See United States v. 
Strong, 83 M.J. 509, 519 n.16 (A. Ct. Crim. App. 2023) (Ar-
guelles, J. , dissenting). This rule generally provides that 
“criminal statutes are to be strictly construed, and any am-
biguity resolved in favor of the accused.” United States v. 
Thomas, 65 M.J. 132, 135 n.2 (C.A.A.F. 2007). For the rea-
sons stated above,  I would not find any ambiguity in  the 
application of Article 131e, UCMJ, to digital data . But if 
the disagreement between the Court and me suggests that 
the seizure of digital content in this case makes application 
of the words of Article 131e, UCMJ, and th is Court’s prec-
edent effectively ambiguous, then the Court should resolve 
the ambiguity in Appellant’s favor using the rule of lenity.  
United States v. Strong, No. 23-0107/AR 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
 
7 
II. Conclusion 
The evidence in this case was legally  insufficient to 
show that Appellant’s conduct violated Article 131e, 
UCMJ. Whether Appellant’s conduct might have violat ed 
some other punitive article  is not an issue before this 
Court. I therefore would set aside the finding that Appel-
lant is guilty of violating Article 131e, UCMJ, and remand 
the case for a sentence reassessment or a new hearing on 
sentencing.  