This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Jonel H. GUIHAMA, Master Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0085 
Crim. App. No. 40039 
 
Argued February 7, 2024—Decided August 14, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Jennifer E. Powell (motions) and 
Colin P. Eichenberger (trial) 
 
For Appellant:  Catherine M. Cherkasky , Esq. (ar-
gued); Major Heather M. Caine (on brief). 
 
For Appellee:  Colonel Zachary Eytalis (argued); 
Colonel Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel 
James P. Ferrell , and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on 
brief).  
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a 
separate opinion concurring in part and in the 
judgment. 
_______________ 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court -martial composed of a military judge 
sitting alone convicted Appellant of, among other offenses, 
aggravated sexual abuse of his nephew on divers occasions, 
and aggravated sexual contact upon his niece in violation 
of Article 120, U niform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) , 
10 U.S.C. §  920 (2006 & Supp. IV 2007- 2011). Those con-
victions stemmed from statements Appellant made to fed-
eral agents in which he admitted to fondling his niece and 
nephew. At trial, Appellant moved to suppress those state-
ments on the basis that they were not adequately corrobo-
rated by independent evidence as required by Military Rule 
of Evidence (M.R.E.) 304(c). The miliary judge denied Ap-
pellant’s motion, and the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) affirmed. We granted review to 
determine whether the military judge abused her discre-
tion by admitting Appellant’s confession. 
Although the military judge abused her discretion with 
respect to her reliance on certain evidence, she did not 
abuse her discretion  with respect to her ultimate conclu-
sion that sufficient independent evidence tended to estab-
lish the trustworthiness of Appellant’s statements as re-
quired by M.R.E.  304(c)(1). Accordingly, we affirm the 
decision of the AFCCA.  
I. Background 
In 2018, the FBI suspected that Master Sergeant Jonel 
Guihama (Appellant) was receiving and sharing child por-
nography online. Agents from the Federal Bureau of Inves-
tigation (FBI) and Air Force Office of Special Investigations 
(AFOSI) conducted an early morning raid at Appellant’s 
house and executed a search warrant for his digital devices, 
electronic storage media, and associated items. The agents 
arrested Appellant, placed him in a government vehicle 
outside of his residence, and advised him of his Mirand a 
rights,1 which he waived. The forensic analysis that was 
 
1 Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966).  
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
later conducted on the digital devices that were seized dur-
ing the raid  revealed that Appellant possessed thousands 
of pornographic pictures and videos of underage boys and 
girls.  
A. Interviews with Appellant 
Law enforcement agents  first started questioning Ap-
pellant while he was handcuffed and seated in the govern-
ment vehicle. Appellant admitted that he was involved in 
group chats where he shared links of naked boys and girls. 
When asked if he spent a lot of time around kids, Appellant 
replied that he did not have his own children but that he 
did have nieces and nephews.  Appellant denied ever hav-
ing put his hands on a child in a sexual way, but the ques-
tioning agent later testified that while Appellant was being 
asked about whether he had ever inappropriately touched 
children, “it looked . . . like he was going to start crying” 
and “his mouth was trembling a bit and his eyes got kind 
of red and watery.” Near the conclusion of the interview in 
the government vehicle, Appellant consented to take a pol-
ygraph examination at an AFOSI detachment. 
At the conclusion of the polygraph, the agent conducting 
the exam told Appellant that the examination “did not go 
like I was hoping it was going to go” because “Appellant 
was clearly responding to some questions regarding sexual 
contact with a minor.” Appellant initially remained 
steadfast that he had never inappropriately touched a 
child, but during the course of continued questioning, he  
admitted to t ouching minors in an inappropriate way on 
various occasions. 
Appellant described—to the best of his memory —an in-
cident that occurred approximately seven years earlier in 
about 2011 while he was stationed in Texas but  was visit-
ing his wife’s family in Missouri. Appellant explained how 
he and his two nieces and nephew fell asleep on the floor of 
his in-law’s living room while watching movies. Appellant 
admitted that he fondled his nephew —who was twelve or 
thirteen at the time—when his nephew  fell asleep. Appel-
lant said that his nephew did not wake up during the 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
incident and had “[n]o clue” that anything had happened to 
him while he was sleeping. As the interview continued, Ap-
pellant admitted that he also fondled his preteen niece as 
she slept on the living room floor. Like her brother, Appel-
lant said that his niece was asleep during the incident and 
did not “see or notice anything.”   
After describing the incidents with his niece and 
nephew to the agent , Appellant reconsidered the timing 
and speculated that the incidents  must have occurred  
when he returned from deployment in January or February 
of 2011. When the agent pressed for more information, Ap-
pellant admitted that he fondled his nephew again in 2012 
in the same way as before, after the boy fell asleep watch-
ing a movie at his residence in Missouri. 
B. Motion to Suppress 
Before arraignment, Appellant moved to suppress his 
statements about touching his nephew and niece in a sex-
ual manner on the basis that the statements were not suf-
ficiently corroborated by independent evidence under 
M.R.E. 304(c). In response, the Government pointed to 
statements made by  Appellant’s family members during 
sworn preliminary hearing testimony and AFOSI inter-
views as well as other supporting documentary evidence. 
The Government argued that this evidence established the 
trustworthiness of Appellant’s statements by verifying the 
essential facts, including the identities of the alleged vic-
tims and the circumstances, timing, and location of the al-
leged assaults. 
Appellant’s sister-in-law confirmed that she had two 
daughters and one son whose ages were consistent  with 
Appellant’s statement to law enforcement. She also clari-
fied that she and her family lived in Texas until her family 
moved to Missouri in 2012  during her overseas deploy-
ment. She verified that Appellant and his wife would fre-
quently visit them in Texas and would occasionally stay 
overnight. She said that when the families got together, the 
children slept in the living room where they would watch 
movies before falling asleep. Appellant’s sister-in-law did 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
not know whether Appellant ever joined the kids when 
they watched movies, but she assumed that he did. 
Appellant’s brother-in-law recalled that Appellant came 
to visit in Missouri on two occasions . On his first visit in 
May 2013, Appellant slept in the living room with the chil-
dren. But Appellant’s brother-in-law could not remember 
the dates or sleeping arrangements of Appellant’s second 
visit. 
Appellant’s nephew remembered that his uncle visited 
him frequently in Texas, but he had no recollection of Ap-
pellant ever visiting him in Missouri . The nephew con-
firmed that he, along with his two sisters, would fall asleep 
while watching movies. Although his memory was not 
clear, the nephew believed that it was possible that Appel-
lant joined them. The nephew also recognized the possibil-
ity that Appellant watched movies and slept in the living 
room with the children while no other adults were present. 
The nephew had no memory of Appellant sexually abusing 
him. 
Appellant’s older niece also had no memory of Appellant 
touching her inappropriately. But t his niece did confirm 
that Appellant would often visit when she lived in Texas, 
and that Appellant, along with his wife, would frequently 
join her and her siblings to watch movies in the living room. 
But the older niece did not remember Appellant ever visit-
ing her family when they lived in Missouri.  The military 
judge found, however, that Appellant’s younger niece dis-
tinctly remembered sleeping in the living room in Missouri 
with her older siblings and Appellant. 
In addition to the testimony from Appellant’s family, 
the Government also offered Appellant’s military travel 
and leave records to corroborate Appellant’s statements. 
For example, a travel voucher indicated that Appellant re-
deployed to Dyess Air Force Base in Texas in January 
2011, and other records showed that Appellant took leave 
multiple times in 2011, 2012, and 2013. 
Based on this evidence, the military judge concluded 
that Appellant’s statements about touching his niece and 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
nephew in a sexual manner were sufficiently corroborated 
to satisfy the requirements of M.R.E. 304(c). Importantly 
for the purpose of this appeal, the military judge rejected 
Appellant’s argument that his niece’s and nephew’s lack of 
memory of any sexual touching undermined the trustwor-
thiness of Appellant’s admission. To the contrary, the mil-
itary judge concluded that the alleged victims’ lack of 
memory might justify an inference that Appellant’s state-
ments were true given th at Appellant had been adamant 
that both children were asleep when Appellant touched 
them. Based on this and the other independent evidence 
presented by the Government , t he military judge denied 
Appellant’s motion to suppress, and Appellant’s state-
ments were admitted at trial.  
C. Trial and Appeal 
A general court -martial composed of a military judge 
sitting alone convicted Appellant, contrary to his pleas, of 
possessing, viewing, and distributing child pornography, in 
violation of Article 134, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2012). Ap-
pellant was also convicted, contrary to his pleas, of aggra-
vated sexual abuse of his nephew on divers occasions, and 
aggravated sexual contact upon his niece in violation of Ar-
ticle 120, UCMJ . The military judge sentenced Appellant 
to confinement for ten years, forfeiture of all pay and allow-
ances, reduction to the grade of E -1, and a dishonorable 
discharge. 
Before the AFCCA, Appellant argued that the military 
judge abused her discretion in denying the defense’s  mo-
tion to suppress Appellant’s confession because it was not 
sufficiently corroborated as required by M.R.E.  304(c)(1). 
United States v. Guihama, No. ACM 40039 , 2022 CCA 
LEXIS 672, at *2, 2022 WL 17078714, at *1 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. Nov. 18, 2022) (unpublished ). In response, the Gov-
ernment relied on the same evidence that it  presented to 
the military judge and also offered, for the first time on ap-
peal, two additional pieces of evidence as corroboration. Id. 
at *61,  2022 WL 17078714,  at *20 . First, that the “vast 
amount of child pornography” found on Appellant’s elec-
tronic devices “confirmed his sexual interest in children 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
and motive to commit the offenses” against his niece and 
nephew. Id., 2022 WL 17078714, at *20 (internal quotation 
marks omitted). And second, that Appellant’s emotional re-
sponse to the FBI’s questions about whether he had ever 
touched a child—looking like he was going to cry, his 
mouth trembling, and his eyes getting red and watery —
was evidence of his consciousness of guilt.  Id., 2022 WL 
17078714, at *20. 
The AFCCA declined to  address whether Appellant’s 
motive and intent to fondle his niece and nephew could be 
shown by evidence of his possession of child pornography . 
Id. at *65- 67, 2022 WL 17078714,  at *21 -22. But the 
AFCCA did conclude that Appellant’s emotional reaction 
during questioning was  independent evidence that could 
bear on the sufficiency of the corroboration. Id. at *67, 2022 
WL 17078714, at *22. 
Next, t he AFCCA concluded that each piece of inde-
pendent evidence raised an inference of the truth of Appel-
lant’s confessions.2 Id. at *67-70, 2022 WL 17078714,  at 
*23. With respect to the children’s lack of memory, t he 
AFCCA agreed with the military judge that their  lack of 
awareness “ ‘may justify a ju ry’s inference that [Appel-
lant]’s statements were true given the specific way the ac-
cused claims to have committed the charged offenses’ ” be-
cause Appellant’s niece and nephew did not wake up when 
he allegedly fondled them. Id. at *69, 2022 WL 17078714, 
at *23 (alteration in original) . The AFCCA also held that 
Appellant’s visibly emotional response to questions about 
inappropriately touching children “permitted the inference 
 
2 The AFCCA was unconcerned with the discrepancies be-
tween when and where Appellant said the fondling incidents oc-
curred and the testimony offered by his family as to the dates 
and locations of his visits.  It stated that “the circumstances of 
these visits— wherever and whenever they occurred— show that 
Appellant had access to his nephew and niece and raise an in-
ference of the truth of Appellant’s admissions.” Guihama, 2022 
CAAF LEXIS 672, at *67-68, 2022 WL 17078714, at *23.  
 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
that he had touched a child in such a manner.”  Id., 2022 
WL 17078714, at *23. 
Finally, the AFCCA concluded that the military judge 
did not abuse her discretion in applying the third step un-
der United States v. Whiteeyes, 82 M.J. 168, 174 (C.A.A.F. 
2022), because the pieces of independent evidence, consid-
ered together, tended to establish the trustworthiness of 
Appellant’s confession. Id. at *70-72, 2022 WL 17078714 , 
at *23-24. We granted review of the following issue: 
Whether the military judge abused her discretion 
by admitting a confession that was not trustworthy 
because it lacked sufficient corroboration.  
United States v. Guihama, 83 M.J. 454 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (or-
der granting review). 
II. Discussion 
M.R.E. 304(c)(1) provides that “[a]n admission or a con-
fession of the accused may be considered as evidence 
against the accused on the question of guilt or innocence 
only if independent evidence, either direct or circumstan-
tial, has been admitted into evidence that would tend to 
establish the trustworthiness of the admission or confes-
sion.” The rule further states that “[t]he independent evi-
dence necessary to establish corroboration need not be suf-
ficient of itself to establish beyond a reasonable doubt the  
truth of facts stated in the admission or confession. The in-
dependent evidence need only raise an inference of  the 
truth of the admission or confession.” M.R.E. 304(c)(4) (em-
phasis added). This Court reviews a military judge’s deci-
sion to admit a statement under M.R.E. 304(c) for an abuse 
of discretion. United States v. Jones, 78 M.J. 37, 41 
(C.A.A.F. 2018).  
Although the military justice system first adopted a 
confession-corroboration rule in 1969, 3 the President 
 
3 See Manual for Courts -Martial, United States , 
para. 140a(5) (1969 rev. ed.) (MCM) (“It is a general rule that a 
confession or admission of the accused cannot be considered as 
evidence against him on the question of guilt or innocence unless 
 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
revised the current version of the rule—now incorporated 
into the Military Rules of Evidence as M.R.E.  304(c)—in 
2016 to “bring[] military practice in line with federal prac-
tice.” MCM, Analysis of the Military Rules of Evidence app. 
22 at A22- 12 (2016 ed.) . In Whiteeyes, this Court applied 
the updated version of M.R.E. 304(c) to determine whether 
individual pieces of evidence established the trustworthi-
ness of the appellant’s confession in that case . 82 M.J.  at 
174. In doing so , the Court established a thre e-part test 
that details the procedures and standards that a military 
judge must follow when deciding whether an accused’s ad-
mission or confession is  sufficiently corroborated. Id. The 
Whiteeyes test closely tracks the language of M.R.E. 304(c) 
and can be summarized as follows: 
First, the military judge must decide whether the prof-
fered evidence is in fact independent evidence. Id . Inde-
pendent evidence cannot consist of other uncorroborated 
confessions of the accused that would also require corrobo-
ration, but independent evidence can be either direct or cir-
cumstantial. Id. (citing M.R.E 304(c)(1)). 
Second, the military judge must decide whether each 
piece of independent evidence “raises an inference of the 
truth of the admission or confession.” Id . (internal quota-
tion marks omitted) (quoting M.R.E. 304(c)(2)). If the piece 
of evidence meets this threshold, the military judge can use 
it to determine whether the accused’s statement is corrob-
orated. Id. 
Third, the military  judge must decide whether the 
pieces of evidence, considered together, corroborate the ad-
mission or confession of the accused. Id . In doing so, the 
military judge must assess whether the pieces of evidence 
“would tend to establish the trustworthiness of the admis-
sion or confession.” Id. (citation omitted) (internal quota-
tion mark omitted). 
 
independent evidence, either direct or circumstantial, has been 
introduced which corroborates the essential facts admitted suf-
ficiently to justify an inference of their truth.”). 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
In Whiteeyes, the Court also reaffirmed that under the 
updated version of M.R.E.  304, the quantum of evidence 
necessary to corroborate an accused’s admissions or confes-
sion under M.R.E.  304(c) remains “slight.” Id. at 174 n.6 
(citations omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted).  
A. Voluntariness of Appellant’s Confession 
We begin by addressing Appellant’s argument that his 
confession was not trustworthy because of the context in 
which it occurred. Appellant argues that his “alleged 
confession was borne out of hours of manipulative and 
repetitive questioning in four different locations, amidst 
dozens of adamant denials , and [it was] the stated intent 
of the FBI agent to not stop questioning until [Appellant] 
confessed to a crime of which they admittedly had no other 
evidence.” 
If an accused makes a timely motion or objection under 
M.R.E. 304(a), an involuntary statement will generally be 
inadmissible at trial .4 The voluntariness of a confession 
turns on whether an accused’s “will has been overborne.” 
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 225-26 (1973) (ci-
tation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted) . To 
make that determination, this Court examines the totality 
of the surrounding circumstances by  “looking to both the 
personal characteristics of the accused as well as  the cir-
cumstances of the interrogation .” United States v. Nelson , 
82 M.J. 251, 255 (C.A.A.F. 2022) (emphasis added) (citation 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Appellant’s claims regarding the environment in which 
he was questioned and the circumstances that led to his 
confession would seem to relate  to the confession’s volun-
tariness. But as Appellant’s trial defense counsel explained 
at the preliminary hearing on his motion to suppress: “The 
defense is not claiming that the confession was involun-
tary. We are saying that it was false and it’s not supported 
by corroboration  . . . .” Thus, because Appellant conceded 
 
4 Involuntary statements can be used against an accused 
only in the rare circumstances provided in M.R.E. 304(e).  
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
that his confession was voluntary and because the granted 
issue only deals with corroboration , we have no reason to 
address the length, location, or method of the interroga-
tion. Instead, we focus only on whether Appellant’s state-
ments that he fondled his niece and nephew were  suffi-
ciently corroborated in accordance with Whiteeyes. 
B. Whiteeyes Analysis 
1. Independent Evidence 
Under the first Whiteeyes step, we must decide whether 
the evidence proffered by the Government is in fact “inde-
pendent evidence.” 82 M.J. at 174 (citation omitted) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted) . The corroborative evidence 
that the Government presented to the military judge  in-
cluded statements obtained from AFOSI interviews with 
the named  victims and Appellant’s in-laws, preliminary 
hearing testimony,  and Appellant’s military records. Be-
cause none of this  evidence consists of other uncorrobo-
rated confessions or admissions made by Appellant that 
would themselves require corroboration, the military judge 
did not err in ruling that each piece was independent. For 
the same reason —and because independent evidence can 
be direct or circumstantial —the AFCCA did not err by la-
beling Appellant’s emotional reaction to the FBI question-
ing as independent evidence that could bear on the suffi-
ciency of corroboration. 
2. Inference of the Truth 
The second Whiteeyes step instructs military judges to 
determine whether each piece of independent evidence 
“raises an inference of the truth of the admission or confes-
sion.” Id. (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted). Only if it meets this threshold test can the military 
judge then use that evidence to determine whether the ac-
cused’s statement is corroborated. Id. The government does 
not face a weighty burden at this step. The s tandard to 
raise an inference of a confession’s truth is only marginally 
higher than the standard necessary to show that evidence 
is relevant. 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
Only relevant evidence is admissible at courts -martial. 
M.R.E. 402(b); United States v. Hendrix , 76 M.J. 283, 289 
(C.A.A.F. 2017). To be relevant, evidence need only have 
“any tendency to make a fact more or less probable than it 
would be without the evidence, and . . . the fact is of conse-
quence in determining the action.” M.R.E. 401(a)-(b). “The 
relevance standard is a low  threshold.” United States v. 
White, 69 M.J. 236, 239 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (citing  United 
States v. Reece, 25 M.J. 93, 95 (C.M.A. 1987)).  
Evidence at the second Whiteeyes step must be more 
than just relevant. Instead of just having a tendency to 
raise an inference of a confession’s truth, it must actually 
raise an inference of its truth. If a piece of evidence does  
not actually raise an inference of the confession’s truth , 
then the military judge cannot use it for corroboration pur-
poses. While the difference between the two standards is 
small, we underscore the variance to point out that not all 
evidence that meets  the relevancy standard qualifies at 
Whiteeyes step two. Thus, we review the independent evi-
dence that the Government presented to see if each piece 
in fact infers that Appellant fondled his niece and nephew. 
a. Appellant’s emotional reaction 
The AFCCA concluded that  Appellant’s emotional re-
sponse following the FBI’s questions about sexually touch-
ing children raised an inference of the truth of his  confes-
sion. Before us, the Government contends that Appellant’s 
emotional reaction was a nontestimonial act that tended to 
show his consciousness of guilt for fondling his niece and 
nephew. We disagree.  
Appellant’s emotional reaction does not raise an infer-
ence of the truth of his confession because it is susceptible 
to multiple explanations. Appellant’s vague and subtle re-
sponse—starting to cry, a trembling mouth, and red, wa-
tery eyes—might have indicated consciousness of guilt, but 
it just as easily could have indicated something else. See 
United States v. Clark, 69 M.J. 438, 445 n.1 (C.A.A.F. 2011) 
(“Subtle physical demeanor is not admissible as relevant to 
an accused’s consciousness of guilt, because it is equally 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
susceptible to other inferences.” (citing United States v. 
Cook, 48 M.J. 64, 67 (C.A.A.F. 1998))). For example, Appel-
lant might have simply beg un to realize the gravity of his 
situation. The reaction  occurred just after his home had 
been raided by federal agents, while he was sitting hand-
cuffed in a government vehicle being asked about child por-
nography and unlawful acts with children.  More im-
portantly, i f Appellant had never touched a child, being 
suspected of doing so by the federal agents might have trig-
gered the response. Because we do not find Appellant’s re-
action to be a reliable indication of consciousness of guilt, 
it does not raise an inference of the truth of Appellant’s ad-
missions. We therefore decline to use that evidence to  de-
termine whether Appellant’s admissions were sufficiently 
corroborated. 
b. Alleged victims’ lack of memory 
The AFCCA also agreed with the military judge that 
Appellant’s niece’s and nephew’s lack of any knowledge or 
memory of Appellant’s actions raised an inference of  the 
truth of his admissions. The lower court found that the chil-
dren’s lack of awareness “  ‘may justify a jury’s inference 
that [Appellant]’s statements were true given the specific 
way the accused claims to have committed the charged of-
fenses.’ ” Guihama, 2022 CCA LEXIS 672, at *69, 2022 WL 
17078714, at *23 (alteration in original) . Essentially, the 
AFCCA agreed with t he military judge  that because the 
children’s recollections were consistent with Appellant’s 
description of his acts, their statements corroborate d his 
admissions. We conclude, however, that the military judge 
abused her discretion in reaching this finding. 
Whether or not Appellant committed the acts as he de-
scribed, the children would have no memory  of being as-
saulted either way. If Appellant’s admissions are true, the 
children would have been asleep and would have been un-
aware of Appellant’s acts. If his admissions are false, then 
the events never happened, and the children also would not 
have memory of his acts. Because the children’s statements 
to the agents would  have been the same whether 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
Appellant’s confession was true or false, they do not raise 
an inference of the truth of Appellant’s admissions. 
Relying on United States v. Seay, 60 M.J. 73 (2004), the 
Government argues that an absence of a fact may help cor-
roborate a confession. In Seay, the  Court held that the 
truth of an accused’s confession to participating in the lar-
ceny of a murder victim’s wallet could be inferred from the 
fact that “the victim named in the confession knew the ap-
pellant, died as a result of foul play, was found in a con-
cealed place, and did not have a wallet at the time or there-
after.” Id. at 80. We decline to extend the reasoning in Seay 
to the facts of this case. Knowledge of t he absence of the 
murder victim’s wallet—an item that adults routinely and 
habitually carry—differs  significantly from children hav-
ing no memory of being inappropriately touched by their 
uncle. It is reasonable to expect that individuals would typ-
ically be in possession of their wallet . So, when a murder 
victim’s body is found without one, it can be inferred that 
the suspect who confessed to t he act  is telling the truth 
when the suspect knows that the victim’s wallet is missing. 
In sharp contrast, an adult’s participation in lewd conduct 
with a sleeping child is, thankfully, a rare occurrence.  It 
was therefore an abuse of discretion for the military judge 
to use Appellant’s niece’s and nephew’s absence of 
knowledge to infer that Appellant did in fact fondle them 
while they slept.5  
 
5 We also decline to use the child pornography found on Ap-
pellant’s phone to corroborate his confession. For the first time 
on appeal, the Government argued that the “vast amount” of por-
nography that Appellant possessed “confirmed his sexual inter-
est in children and motive to commit the offenses.”  Guihama, 
2022 CCA LEXIS 672, at *61, 2022 WL 17078714, at *20 (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). But at the motions hearing, the 
Government only presented this evidence to bolster the trust-
worthiness of Appellant’s confessions. It was not offered in front 
of the trial court to show Appellant’s motive under 
M.R.E. 404(b)(2). We therefore decline to draw the connection 
between Appellant’s possession of child pornography and his 
 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
c. Remaining independent evidence 
We conclude that the military judge  did not abuse her  
discretion in considering the remaining statements made 
by the named victims and Appellant’s in-laws, preliminary 
hearing testimony, and Appellant’s military records. Each 
piece of evidence allows an inference that Appellant fon-
dled his niece and nephew.  
3. Trustworthiness of Appellant’s Confession 
Under the third Whiteeyes step, the military judge must 
decide whether the remaining pieces of evidence, consid-
ered together, “corroborate the accused’s admission or con-
fession.” 82 M.J. at 174. In doing so, the military judge  
must assess whether the pieces of independent evidence 
“would tend to establish the trustworthiness of the admis-
sion or confession.” Id. (citation omitted) (internal quota-
tion marks omitted). We conclude that the military judge 
did not abuse her discretion because the remaining evi-
dence sufficiently corroborated Appellant’s confession.  
In 2015, Congress directed the President to modify 
M.R.E. 304(c), to the extent he considered practicable, “to 
conform to the rules governing the admissibility of the cor-
roboration of admissions and confessions in the trial of 
criminal cases in the United States district courts.” Na-
tional Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2016, Pub. 
L. No. 114–92, § 545, 129 Stat. 726, 820 (2015). In the fed-
eral civilian courts, corroboration has consistently been an 
easy bar for the g overnment to clear. “[C]orroborative evi-
dence does not have to prove the offense beyond a reasona-
ble doubt, or even by a preponderance  . . . .” Smith v. 
United States, 348 U.S. 147, 156 (1954). “Independent evi-
dence adequately corroborates a confession if it  ‘supports 
the essential facts admitted sufficiently to justify a jury in-
ference of their truth.’ ” United States v. Abu Ali, 528 F.3d 
210, 235 (4th Cir. 2008) ( quoting Opper v. United States, 
348 U.S. 84, 93 (1954)); see also Wong Sun v. United States, 
 
motive to commit child molestation where no testimony or evi-
dence was presented at trial to establish such a connection. 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
371 U.S. 471, 489 (1963) (stating “extrinsic proof [i]s suffi-
cient which merely fortifies the truth of the confession, 
without independently establishing the crime charged” (in-
ternal quotation marks omitted)).  Independent evidence 
need not be “overwhelming” to achieve corroboration, but 
it must only  support the truthfulness or reliability of the 
confession. United States v. Taylor, 802 F.2d 1108, 1116-17 
(9th Cir. 1986). 
Our predecessor court noted that “[a]lthough no mathe-
matical formula exists to measure sufficient corroboration, 
our review of the federal court decisions . . . leads us to con-
clude that the amount of corroboration generally needed is 
not great .” United States v. Melvin , 26 M.J. 145, 146 
(C.M.A. 1988). Based on this review, our predecessor con-
cluded that “the amount needed in military courts may be 
very slight.” Id. This Court’s recent decision in Whiteeyes 
reaffirmed that the President’s 201 6 revisions to 
M.R.E. 304(c) did not materially alter this low standard. 82 
M.J. at 174 n.6. We believe that even without considering 
the children’s lack of memory or Appellant’s emotional re-
sponse while being questioned, t hat low bar was cleared 
here. 
Independent evidence establishes that: (1) Appellant 
had a niece and nephew whose ages at the time the alleged 
incidents took place were consistent with the ages that Ap-
pellant provided to the FBI; (2) Appellant visited his wife’s 
family during the time frame that he said he committed the 
offenses; (3) records show that Appellant was authorized to 
take leave at times where he lived close to his wife’s family 
and could visit them; and (4) Appellant’s niece and nephew 
recalled watching movies with Appellant in the living room 
of their home and then falling asleep. This evidence put  
Appellant in the place that he claimed to have committed 
the crimes, with the children whom he claimed to have vic-
timized, and shows that he had the opportunity to commit 
the crimes in the very specific way that he described. 
The minor discrepancies between the children’s testi-
mony and Appellant’s confessions—such as the exact dates 
and locations of his visits that had occurred years earlier—
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
do not change that Appellant’s family confirmed that he  
watched movies with his underage nieces and nephew 
while they fell asleep. Taken together, the independent ev-
idence meets the low corroboration standard because it  
tends to establish the trustworthiness of Appellant’s ad-
missions. Accordingly, the military judge did not abuse her 
discretion in finding corroboration and allowing Appel-
lant’s admission to be used against him at trial.  
III. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Air Force Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Guihama, No. 23-0085/AF 
Judge MAGGS, concurring in part and concurring in 
the judgment. 
I join the Court’s opinion except for parts II.B.2.a. and 
II.B.2.b. I do not join those two parts because they involve 
difficult issues that the Court need not decide in this ap-
peal. Military Rule of Evidence 304(c)(1) provides that “[a]n 
admission or a confession of the accused may be considered 
as evidence against the accused on the question of guilt or 
innocence only if independent evidence . . . has been admit-
ted into evidence that would tend to establish the trustwor-
thiness of the admission or confession.” The Court correctly 
determines that ample independent evidence—namely, in-
terview statements, preliminary hearing testimony, and 
Appellant’s military records—su pports an inference of the 
truth of Appellant’s admissions in this case. Accordingly, it 
does not matter  whether the additional evidence that the 
Court discusses at length in parts II.B.2. a. and II.B.2.b . 
also supports, or does not support, an inference of the truth 
of Appellant’s admissions. I therefore respectfully concur 
in the opinion in part and in the judgment. 