This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Matthew P. LEIPART, Technical Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0163 
Crim. App. No. 39711 
Misc. Dkt. No. 2021-03 
 
Argued January 24, 2024—Decided  August 1, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Jefferson B. Brown (arraignment and 
motions hearing), Joseph S. Imburgia (trial), and 
Christina M. Jimenez (DuBay hearing) 
 
For Appellant: Captain Samantha M. Castanien  
(argued); Major David L. Bosner and Megan P. 
Marinos, Esq. (on brief); Lieutenant Colonel Allen S. 
Abrams. 
 
For Appellee: Captain Kate E. Lee (argued); Colonel 
Matthew D. Talcott , Lieutenant Colonel James P. 
Ferrell, and Mary Ellen Payne, Esq. (on brief); Major 
Zachary T. West. 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Judge MAGGS and Judge HARDY joined. 
Chief Judge OHLSON filed a separate opinion 
concurring in the judgment , in which Judge 
JOHNSON joined. 
_______________ 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge SPARKS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
A general court -martial composed of a military judge 
sitting alone convicted Appellant, pursuant to his pleas, of 
one specification of aggravated assault, two specifications 
of assault consummated by a battery, and two 
specifications of wrongfully communicating threats in 
violation of Articles 128 and 134, Uniform Code of Military 
Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§ 928,  934. Contrary to his 
pleas, Appellant was convicted of two specifications of 
sexual assault in violation of Article 120, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§ 920.1 The adjudged and approved sentence provided for a 
reduction to E -1, twenty -one years  of confinement, 
forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and a reprimand. The 
United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals 
affirmed the findings and sentence as approved by the 
convening authority.  United States v. Leipart , No. ACM 
39711, Misc. Dkt. No. 2021-03, 2023 CCA LEXIS 39, at *2, 
*88, 2023 WL 415990, at *1, *28 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 
26, 2023) (unpublished).  
We granted review of the following two issues: 
I. Whether trial defense counsel were ineffective 
for, inter alia, allowing the military judge to 
consider Appellant’s guilty plea when 
determining whether Appellant was guilty of the 
litigated offenses. 
II. Whether the trial counsel’s “clear error” in 
findings argument — leveraging Appellant’s 
guilty plea to prove his guilt of the litigated 
offenses—was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
United States v. Leipart, 83 M.J. 448 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order 
granting review). 
 
1 The military judge acquitted Appellant of one specification 
of communicating a threat, two specifications of sexual assault, 
and one specification of the lesser included offense of attempted 
sexual assault. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
For Issue I, we conclude that trial defense counsel’s 
performance was not deficient. For Issue II, we conclude 
that trial counsel’s statements amounted to plain, obvious 
error, but the error was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
I. Background 
In January 2016, Appellant and KC met on an online 
dating site. At the time, Appellant was stationed in 
Missouri, and KC was a lawyer liv ing in Perth, Australia. 
In March 2016, KC flew to the United States to visit 
Appellant, during which time she became pregnant with 
their child. After approximately two weeks, KC returned to 
Australia. 
In May 2016, KC visited Appellant a second time in 
Missouri and stayed until July 2016. In August 2016, KC 
returned to Missouri for a third time. In November 2016, 
KC gave birth to their son in Missouri. In December 2016, 
Appellant, KC, and their son flew to Australia together. 
Appellant returned to the United States in January 2017, 
while KC and their son remained in Australia.  
In May 2017, Appellant visited KC in Australia. While 
in Australia, Appellant physically assaulted KC by 
grabbing and choking her with his hand and  arm, holding 
a screwdriver at her neck, and striking her on the head 
with his hand. Appellant also threatened KC with physical 
injury approximately twenty times. In June 2017, 
Appellant returned to the United States.  
In early August 2017, KC reported the physical assaults 
to the Australian police. Later that month, the Air Force 
Office of Special Investigations (OSI)  called KC regarding 
Appellant, and she again reported the physical assaults 
that had occurred in Australia. In September 2017, during 
an interview with OSI , KC disclosed that Appellant had 
sexually assaulted her several times over the course of 
their relationship. 
At trial, Appellant faced five specifications of sexual 
assault, two specifications of assault consummated by a 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
battery, one specification of aggravated assault, and three 
specifications of communicating a threat. Appellant pled 
not guilty to the three specifications of sexual assault and 
two specifications of communicating a threat. Appellant 
pled guilty to grabbing and choking KC with his hand and 
arm, to holding a screwdriver to her neck , to striking her 
on the head with his hand, and to threatening to injure her. 
After the providence inquiry, the military judge 
accepted Appellant’s pleas.  The parties then began the 
litigated proceedings and gave opening statements. During 
the defense’s opening statement, civilian trial defense 
counsel, Mr. DC, stated: 
     Now by 15 August, OSI is going to be involved 
and [KC’s] story is going to take some more turns. 
She’s going to tell OSI, specifically, that there was 
never any abuse in Missouri. The very first time 
OSI talks to her, in their efforts to be thorough, 
they ask  her some detailed questions and she’s 
going to tell them, very specifically, [hand 
pounded on the table] and clearly, there was never 
any abuse in Missouri. Now that’s relevant, 
obviously, to the Additional Charge I, as four of 
the sexual assault allegations supposedly 
occurred in Missouri. In that first statement to 
OSI, she’s not going to report any sexual assaults, 
at all. Now at this point, we’re literally three —
she’s had three interactions with law 
enforcement, at this point—a lawyer. Now then, I 
will note, in fairness, that the 15 August 
statement did in fact include statements that 
essentially covered the charges subject to the 
mixed guilty plea, for the most part. Okay.  
     . . . . 
. . . we’re going to ask you at the end of this 
particular case to enter a not guilty finding as to 
the remaining charges and specifications. Thank 
you.  
 After Mr. DC concluded his opening statement, he 
had the following colloquy with the military judge: 
MJ2: Thank you.  
Defense, putting back on my judge hat—  
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
[DC:] Yes, sir.  
MJ2: —you had mentioned —  
                  . . . . 
MJ2:  But you had mentioned in your opening 
statement about the mixed pleas, the 
guilty pleas, and one of the questions I was 
going to ask you, regardless of that, is your 
position—from the defense team —on 
consideration, or the fact-finder being 
aware that there has been previous guilty 
pleas? I think your opening statement 
probably answered the question, because 
now you’ve alerted to me in your opening 
statement. But, I still want to give you the 
opportunity to bring that up.  
[DC:]  Yeah, I think in a mixed plea in front of a 
panel type fact -finder, sometimes we 
would have the optionality of certainly 
disclosing to the members the existence of 
the plea. I thought that it was appropriate 
in the opening statement here, because 
you’re going to hear prior inconsistent 
statements in impeachment, based on the 
15 August statement to Ms. [KC]. And in 
that particular statement, the reference in 
opening statement was, she talks about 
the content of the mixed plea, but not these 
additional charges and specifications. So to 
the extent, I wasn’t necessarily asking you 
to, as the fact -finder, to necessarily 
consider that mixed plea. But, I was 
alerting you to the fact of what you’re going 
to hear on the cross -examination, if she 
made statements that are similar to that. I 
hope that answers your question, sir.  
MJ2:  It does.  
[DC:] I’m not trying to be nonresponsive.  
MJ2:  No, that’s responsive.  
[DC:]  Okay.  
MJ2:  That answers the question.  
Anything else on that issue from you the 
government?  
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
CTCl: No, Your Honor, I was going to ask the 
Court the same question, so thank you.  
MJ2: So we’re operating in a world where I'm 
aware of the previous guilty plea?  
[DC:] Of course, sir; yes.  
MJ2: I mean, obviously I am as the judge but 
even as the fact-finder now—  
[DC:] Yes, sir.  
MJ2: —I’m aware of it.  
[DC:] Then obviously, I certainly appreciate your 
thoroughness in compartmentalizing your 
various functions here, but I agree that 
we’re in that universe now. 
During the Government’s closing argument on the 
merits, without objection, trial counsel argued: 
The defense counsel asked you to operate in this 
world where you know that he pled guilty to a 
number of offenses. So right now, I want to talk 
about how that goes towards the victim’s 
credibility, because as you’re standing here 
operating in this world wh ere he has admitted to 
crimes against Ms. [KC], the government believes 
you can use that in assessing her credibility on the 
stand. Whether or not she’s telling the truth for 
the 120 offenses.  
     So you know that she’s telling the truth when 
she says the accused threatened her. You know 
that, Your Honor. Undeniable. You know that 
she’s telling the truth about her being choked by 
the accused. Undeniable. You know that she’s 
telling the truth about her being threatened with 
a screwdriver. That is undeniable. You know she’s 
telling the truth about being hit in the back of the 
head by the accused. You can’t deny it. You know 
that even after she sat right where she’s sitting 
right now, and heard the accused plead guilty, she 
still continued to testify—but she could have left. 
 . . . .  
 She had to get up here and talk about sex, 
unwanted sex from the accused in front of a room 
of strangers. She didn’t have to. No one was 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
forcing her to and that of itself, Your Honor, is 
obviously not a sole indicator of whether or not 
she’s telling the truth or not but taken into 
consideration that she knows the accused has 
already pled guilty to a number of offenses, that 
gives her more m otivation to drop out, if she was 
telling—if she was lying, but she didn’t.  
 . . . .  
 Your Honor, it’s the government’s position 
that you really have to find her to be an evil person 
if you think she’s going to come here and testify 
and lie about someone raping her. I mean, because 
that’s what an evil person does. That she had such 
motivation to lie about being raped, but not lie 
about the other charges that the accused has pled 
guilty to. And so, when defense is asking you or 
pushing forth this theory that she’s a liar. They’re 
really saying she’s a partial liar —that she’s lied 
about some things, but not lied about others. And 
that makes it even more difficult for you when 
you’re looking at her saying, “Okay. You’re a liar. 
Well, did you lie about this, but why would you lie 
about that?” 
After trial, the lower court ordered a post -trial hearing 
pursuant to United States v. DuBay , 17 C.M.A. 147, 37 
C.M.R. 411 (1967) , to answer, inter alia,  whether trial 
defense counsel was ineffective by  allowing the military 
judge to consider Appellant’s guilty plea. United States v. 
Leipart, No. ACM 39711, Misc. Dkt. No. 2021-03, 2021 CCA 
LEXIS 595, at *3-5, 2021 WL 5113965, at *2 (A.F. Ct. Crim. 
App. June 14, 2021) (order).  In his declaration Mr. DC 
stated:  
 There is no indication the Military Judge used 
the providence inquiry for any improper basis. I 
do not believe there was uncharged misconduct in 
the providence inquiry. There may have been 
alternative theories for the admissibility of many 
aspects of the providence inquiry. The purpose of 
the mixed plea was because the evidence on those 
specifications was uncontroverted and to obtain 
credibility with the military judge. Permitting the 
judge to consider [Appellant’s] testimony for any 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
proper purpose he desired seemed in [Appellant’s] 
best interest. 
Leipart, 2023 CCA LEXIS 39, at *32-33, 2023 WL 415990, 
at *11 (alterations in original).  
During the DuBay hearing, “Mr. DC conceded that if he 
had the situation to do over again, he ‘probably’ would not 
make the same decision. ” Id. at *33, 2023 WL 415990, at 
*11. Detailed counsel Captain CB “stated that he was not 
part of any prior discussion regarding the military judge’s 
awareness of the guilty plea, and that he was ‘confused’ by 
Mr. DC’s  agreement to it because it ‘ immediately 
corroborated’ KC.” Id. at *34, 2023 WL 415990, at *11. 
Appellant’s other civilian trial defense counsel, Mr. JC, 
“recalled having a pretrial conversation with Mr. DC about 
the military judge ’s awareness of the guilty plea during 
findings, but otherwise provided little information on the 
subject.” Id. at *34, 2023 WL 415990, at *11. 
At the lower court, Appellant argued that Mr. DC’s 
agreement for the military judge “ to ‘consider’ his guilty 
pleas as the trier of fact was ‘ patently erroneous ’ and 
without any useful purpose for the [d]efense.” Id. at *32, 
2023 WL 415990, at *11. Appellant contended that he was 
“prejudiced because the guilty plea  corroborated KC’s 
allegations regarding the Article 128 and 134, UCMJ, 
offenses, and thereby tended to enhance her credibility as 
to the litigated specifications.” Id. at *32 , 2023 WL 415990, 
at *11. Notably, the lower court observed: 
On appeal, and at the DuBay hearing, the Defense 
repeatedly referred to Mr. DC having allowed the 
trial judge to “consider” Appellant’s guilty plea 
and providence inquiry during findings. 
However— notwithstanding that Mr. DC, to an 
extent, and Capt CB, to a greater extent, appear 
to have accepted Appellant’s characterization —
the record does not indicate that, at the time, Mr. 
DC agreed the trial judge would “consider” the 
guilty plea, nor is that what the trial judge 
proposed to do. Instead, the trial judge indicated 
that he would be “aware” of the guilty plea, not 
that he would consider or use the guilty plea 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
during his deliberation on findings. This 
distinction is significant. 
Id. at *34-35, 2023 WL 415990, at *11. Ultimately, the 
lower court concluded: 
Although we perceive a reasonable argument that 
Mr. DC’s action did not fall measurably below the 
expected standard, given the weak defense trial 
counsel offered in their declarations and at the 
DuBay hearing for their performance in this 
regard, we decline to decide whether that 
performance was constitutionally deficient. 
Instead, we hold Appellant has failed to 
demonstrate a reasonable probability of a more 
favorable result in the absence of any such 
deficiency, given the absence of evidence that the 
trial judge misused Appellant’s guilty pleas. 
Id. at *37, 2023 WL 415990, at *13.  
II. Analysis  
A. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
The first assigned issue asks whether Appellant’s 
defense counsel provided ineffective assistance by allowing 
the military judge to consider  Appellant’s guilty plea. We 
review de novo allegations of ineffective assistance of 
counsel. United States v. Gooch, 69 M.J. 353, 362 (C.A.A.F. 
2011) (citing United States v. Mazza , 67 M.J. 470, 474 
(C.A.A.F. 2009)). To establish that ineffective assistance of 
counsel occurred, an appellant must prove both that the 
defense counsel’s performance was deficient, and that the 
deficiency caused prejudice. United States v. Captain , 75 
M.J. 99, 103 (C.A.A.F. 2016) (citing Strickland v. 
Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 698 (1984)). With respect to the 
first prong of this test, co urts “must indulge a strong 
presumption that counsel’s conduct falls within the wide 
range of reasonable professional assistance”; and “[a]s to 
the second prong, a challenger must demonstrate a 
reasonable probability that, but for counsel’s [deficient 
performance] the result of the proceeding would have been 
different.” Id. (second alteration in original) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
689, 694). Further, a military judge is presumed to know 
the law and apply it correctly, absent clear evidence to the 
contrary. United States v. Erickson , 65 M.J. 221, 225 
(C.A.A.F. 2007). 
In United States v. Flores , 69 M.J. 366, 368 (C.A.A.F. 
2011), the appellant pleaded guilty to two spec ifications 
but pleaded not guilty to four other unrelated 
specifications. After the military judge accepted the guilty 
pleas, the government moved forward to prove those four 
specifications. Id. at 369. The military judge convicted the 
appellant of those specifications. Id. at 368. In her closing 
argument on the merits, the trial counsel made two 
comments about what the appellant told the military judge 
during the earlier providence inquiry.  Id. at 369- 71. The 
trial counsel specifically referred to the statements made 
by the appellant during the plea inquiry and argued that 
those statements reinforced the credibility of a key 
government witness. Concluding that the trial counsel 
erred, we held that “[a] guilty plea and related statements 
to one offense cannot be admitted to prove any element of 
a separate offense.” Id. at 369. Moreover, a military judge 
“must not later rely on those statements as proof of a 
separate offense.” Id. at 369-70. “To do so would compel an 
accused to incriminate herself in the separate criminal 
proceeding.” Id. at 370. 
Appellant’s underlying contention is that Mr. DC, by 
allowing the military judge to consider his guilty pleas 
when deliberating on the findings , usurped his right to 
remain silent as to the contested offenses. Although our 
review for allegations of ineffective assistance of counsel is 
de novo, we agree with the lower court’s well -reasoned 
analysis: 
 Absent clear evidence to the contrary, a 
military judge is presumed to know and to follow 
the law. Erickson, 65 M.J. at 225. We find no clear 
evidence to the contrary in this record. At no point 
did the trial judge indicate he would consider or 
use either the guilty plea itself or Appellant ’s 
providence inquiry during the contested portion of 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
the trial. On the contrary, the trial judge had 
advised Appellant he would not do so. 
 Notwithstanding trial defense counsel ’s post-
trial statements, at the time, Mr. DC indicated 
that he “wasn’t necessarily asking [the trial judge] 
to, as the fact-finder, to necessarily consider that 
mixed plea.” Instead, Mr. DC referenced the fact 
that, in a mixed -plea case with court members, 
the military judge would typically ask the defense 
whether the accus ed wanted the members to be 
“informed” of the guilty pleas. See  Department of 
the Army Pamphlet 27 -9, Military Judges’ 
Benchbook (Benchbook), ¶ 2-5 -4 (10 Sep. 2014). 
The purpose of such information is not, of course, 
that the court members should use the fact of the 
guilty plea as evidence for their findings as to 
contested offenses. In Appellant’s case, as Mr. DC 
explained at the time, the evident purpose of 
allowing the trial judge to be “aware” of the mixed 
plea was simply to help orient the trial judge, as 
factfinder, to how the expected evidence related to 
both the contested and uncontested specifications, 
as described in the Defense ’s opening sta tement. 
Had the trial judge not clarified that he was 
“aware” of the guilty plea in his role as factfinder, 
such references to the “mixed pleas”—whether by 
the Defense or the Government —could be 
objectionable references to matters not in 
evidence and not r easonably anticipated to be 
entered into evidence. Mr. DC trusted that the 
trial judge would not use this information 
“inappropriately,” and there is no clear indication 
the trial judge did misuse it. 
Leipart, 2023 CCA LEXIS 39, at *36-38, 2023 WL 415990, 
at *12 (alteration in original).  
We are ultimately not persuaded that Mr. DC’s  
performance was deficient. Importantly, the record does 
not indicate that Mr. DC agreed that the military judge 
would consider the guilty plea, nor is that what the 
military judge stated he would do. As Mr. DC explained at 
the time, the purpose of allowing the military  judge to be 
“aware” of the mixed plea was to help familiarize the 
military judge, as factfinder, to how the expected evidence 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
related to both the contested and uncontested 
specifications, as described in the d efense’s opening 
statement. There is no indication in the record that Mr. DC 
was allowing the military judge to use Appellant’s guilty 
plea and related statements to prove any element of the 
contested offenses. The fact that the military judge was  
aware of the mixed plea does not implicate the concerns we 
addressed in Flores. Under these facts , we conclude that  
the trial defense counsel’s performance was not deficient.  
B. Improper Argument 
At the lower court, Appellant argued,  in relevant part, 
that trial counsel’s closing argument was improper because 
it requested that the military judge inappropriately  use 
Appellant’s prior guilty pleas to find him guilty of the 
sexual assault charges. Id. at *69-70, 2023 WL 415990, at 
*23. The lower court agreed,  finding that trial counsel 
clearly erred by using Appellant’s guilty plea  and 
providence inquiry to bolster the Government’s argument 
that Appellant was guilty of the contested sexual offense.  
Id. at *70, 2023 WL 415990, at *23.  However, the lower 
court found Appellant was not prejudiced because there 
was no clear evidence that the military judge improperly 
considered trial counsel’s argument. Id. at *71-74, 2023 WL 
415990, at *24. On appeal to this Court, Appellant agrees 
with the lower court’s finding of clear error but contends 
that the lower court incorrectly found the error was 
harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. 
“We review prosecutorial misconduct and improper 
argument de novo and where . . . no objection is made, we 
review for plain error.” United States v. Voorhees, 79 M.J. 
5, 9 (C.A.A.F. 2019) (citing United States v. Andrews, 77 
M.J. 393, 398 (C.A.A.F. 2018)). Under plain error review, 
the appellant bears the burden to demonstrate error that 
is clear or obvious and results in material prejudice to his 
substantial rights. United States v. Knapp , 73 M.J. 33, 36 
(C.A.A.F. 2014).  “[W]here a forfeited constitutional error 
was clear or obvious, ‘material prejudice’ is assessed using 
the ‘harmless beyond a reasonable doubt’ standard  . . . .” 
United States v. Tovarchavez , 78 M.J. 458, 460 (C.A.A.F. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
2019) (citations omitted). “That standard is met where a 
court is confident that there was no reasonable possibility 
that the error might have contributed to the conviction.” 
Id. (citation omitted).  
“Improper argument is one facet of prosecutorial 
misconduct.” United States v. Sewell , 76 M.J. 14, 18 
(C.A.A.F. 2017) (citation omitted). “Prosecutorial 
misconduct occurs when trial counsel ‘overstep[s] the 
bounds of that propriety and fairness which should 
characterize the conduct of such an officer in the 
prosecution of a criminal offens e.’ ” United States v. 
Hornback, 73 M.J. 155, 159 (C.A.A.F. 2014) (alteration in 
original) (quoting United States v. Fletcher, 62 M.J. 175, 
178 (C.A.A.F. 2005)). 
The Fifth Amendment guarantees that “[n]o person . . .  
shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness 
against himself.” U.S. Const. amend. V. “In a guilty plea 
context, a military judge who has advised an accused that 
she is waiving her right against self -incrimination only to 
those offenses to which she is pleading guilty cannot later 
rely on those statements as proof of a separate offense.” 
Flores, 69 M.J. at 368. Neither the guilty plea itself nor any 
related statements as to one offense may be “admitted to 
prove any element of a separate offense.” Id. at 369. “To do 
so would compel an accused to incriminate herself in the 
separate criminal proceeding.” Id. at 370. 
We agree with Appellant that trial counsel committed a 
clear error when he used Appellant's guilty plea  and 
providence inquiry to bolster the Government’s argument 
that Appellant was guilty of the contested sexual offenses. 
Trial counsel appears to have  relied on the d efense’s 
agreement that the trial participants were “operating in a 
world” where the military judge was “aware” of the guilty 
pleas. But the defense’s agreement that the military judge 
was aware of the guilty pleas was not an agreement that 
the Government could use Appellant ’s guilty plea and his 
sworn statement during the providence inquiry as evidence 
of his guilt.  
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
Due to the constitutional dimensions of trial counsel’s 
error, we test for harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The 
Government argues that the error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt due to the presumption that the military 
judges are presumed to know the law and follow it absent 
clear evidence to the contrary. Specifically, the 
Government argues that there is no evidence that trial 
counsel’s reference to Appellant’s guilty pleas caused the 
military judge to use the guilty pleas for an improper 
purpose.  
In United States v. Hukill , 76 M.J. 219,  220 (C.A.A.F. 
2017), we held that w hether considered by members or a 
military judge, evidence of a charged offense, of which an 
accused is presumed innocent, cannot be used as 
propensity evidence in support of a companion charged 
offense. Because there were constitutional dimensions at 
play, the erroneous admittance of evidence was  tested for 
prejudice under the harmless beyond a reasonable doubt 
standard. Id. at 222. In that case, like the instant case, the 
government argued “that the error was harmless beyond a 
reasonable doubt due to the presumption that military 
judges are presumed to know the law and follow it absent 
clear evidence to the contrary. ” Id. However, the 
presumption was not helpful to the government  in Hukill 
because the common understanding of the law was that 
charged misconduct could be used as propensity evidence. 
Id. We cautioned that “[t]he presumption that the military 
judge knows and follows the law is only as valid as the law 
itself.” Id. at 223. 
Unlike in Hukill , here there is no indication that the 
military judge  misunderstood the law. Flores clearly 
prohibited the type of arguments made by  trial counsel . 
Nothing in the record suggests the military judge was 
unaware of Flores or unwilling to follow it. Although trial 
counsel made various misstatements, we cannot presume 
the military judge adopted trial counsel’s view of the law. 
There is no evidence of error on the part  of the military 
judge, to whom the presumption attaches. In fact, the 
military judge’s mixed findings on the contested sexual 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
assault offenses suggest that the military judge thoroughly 
analyzed the evidence for each offense. 
We hold that the presumption that the military judge 
knew and correctly followed the law was not rebutted in 
this case by the military judge’s silence in a military 
judge-alone trial. The misstatements by the trial counsel 
are not imputed to the military judge, absent evidence the 
military judge adopted the rationale of the misstatements. 
Accordingly, there is  no reasonable possibility that the 
error might have contributed to Appellant’s conviction. 
III. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Air Force  Court of 
Criminal Appeals is affirmed. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, with whom Judge JOHNSON 
joins, concurring in the judgment. 
For the reasons cited below, I concur in the judgment of 
the Court.1 
Issue I: Ineffective Assistance of Counsel 
The first granted issue asks “[w]hether trial defense 
counsel were ineffective for, inter alia, allowing the 
military judge to consider Appellant’s guilty plea when 
determining whether Appellant was guilty of the litigated 
offenses.” United States v. Leipart , 83 M.J. 448 (C.A.A.F. 
2023) (order granting review). As can be seen, the language 
of this granted issue squarely focuses on whether defense 
counsel erred by “allowing” the military judge to “consider” 
during the contested phase of the court -martial 
proceedings the admissions Appellant previously had made 
during the providence inquiry. And yet, Appellant now 
seeks to argue that trial defense counsel were also 
ineffective because they failed to object to trial counsel’s  
slides during findings argument and failed to object to trial 
counsel’s “clearly improper” findings argument.  As is 
evident, however, the latter two arguments are outside the 
scope of the granted issue. 
In order to ensure that a claim of error lies within the 
scope of an issue, an appellant must raise it with a reason-
able degree of specificity based on the wording of that issue. 
Any notion that the phrase “inter alia” —which Appellant 
inserted into the issue statement —necessarily serves to 
later open the door to other,  unreferenced arguments is 
mistaken. And in the instant case , there is no reason for 
this Court to exercise its discretion and consider the addi-
tional two arguments raised by Appellant. See, e.g., United 
States v. Pyron, 83 M.J. 59, 63 n.2 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (declin-
ing to “weigh in on [a] matter” outside of the scope of the 
granted issue).  Accordingly, only Appellant’s argument 
pertaining to the effect his  prior guilty pleas had on the 
contested charges merits our review. 
Upon engaging in an analysis of the issue presented , a 
preliminary point must be addressed. Specifically, the 
 
1 I adopt the facts as laid out by the majority opinion. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
2 
 
language of Issue I asserts that trial defense counsel al-
lowed the military judge  to “consider” Appellant’s prior 
guilty pleas. However, during the exchange between civil-
ian defense counsel and the military judge , the issue was 
whether the military judge—in his role as the factfinder for 
the contested charges —should be deemed “ aware of ” the 
prior guilty pleas: 
[Military Trial Judge (MJ2)]: But you had 
mentioned in your opening statement about the 
mixed pleas, the guilty pleas, and one of the ques-
tions I was going to ask you, regardless of that, is 
your position—from the defense team —on consid-
eration, or the fact-finder being aware that there 
has been previous guilty pleas? . . . 
[Civilian Defense Counsel ( CivDC1)]: . . . I 
wasn’t necessarily asking you to, as the fact -
finder, to necessarily consider that mixed plea. . . . 
. . . . 
MJ2: So we’re operating in a world where I’m 
aware of the previous guilty pleas? 
CivDC1: Of course, sir; yes. 
MJ2: . . . [E]ven as the factfinder. . . .  
. . . . 
MJ2: . . . I’m aware of it. 
(Emphasis added.) This point is not a mere matter of tech-
nical precision. If the military judge  had used the word 
“consider,” Appellant perhaps would have a stronger argu-
ment that civilian trial counsel was authorizing—and even 
encouraging—the military judge to  use the facts elicited 
during the providence inquiry when deciding whether the 
elements of the contested offenses had been met.  That ap-
proach would be a matter of grave concern. Compare  
United States v. Flores, 69 M.J. 366, 36 8 (C.A.A.F. 2011) 
(“[A] military judge who has advised an accused that she is 
waiving her right against self -incrimination only to those 
offenses to which she is pleading guilty cannot later rely on 
those statements as proof of a separate offense.” ), with 
United States v. Kaiser, 58 M.J. 146, 148-49 (C.A.A.F. 2003) 
(stating the factfinder should not be notified of an accused’s 
guilty pleas “[i]n the absence of a specific request by the 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
3 
 
accused”), and United States v. Rivera, 23 M.J. 89, 96  
(C.M.A. 1986) (same), and R.C.M. 913(a) Discussion (2016 
ed.) (same). 
I concede that this point is complicated by the DuBay 2 
military judge’s finding which conspicuously uses the word 
“consider” rather than the phrase “aware of.” But, as indi-
cated above, the actual record of trial is clear on this point 
and the contemporaneous record is the preferred source for 
determining what civilian defense counsel’s position was at 
the time of trial and what the military judge’s state of mind 
was at the time of findings. Moreover, the United States 
Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) made a finding 
that supersedes the finding of the DuBay  military judge. 
Namely, the CCA made a factual finding that “the trial 
judge indicated that he would be ‘aware’ of the guilty plea, 
not that he would consider or use the guilty plea during his 
deliberations on findings.” United States v. Leipart , No. 
ACM 39711, Misc. Dkt. No. 2021-03, 2023 CCA LEXIS 39, 
at *34, 2023 WL 415990, at *11 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. Jan. 
26, 2023) (unpublished) . This finding by the CCA is not 
clearly erroneous and thus controls . See United States v. 
Tollinchi, 54 M.J. 80, 82 (C.A.A.F. 2000) (“We will not over-
turn findings of fact by a Court of Criminal Appeals unless 
they are clearly erroneous or unsupported by the record.”). 
Turning to the gravamen  of the granted issue, this 
Court “recognize[s] that trial defense counsel’s perfor-
mance is presumed to be competent.” United States v. Har-
pole, 77 M.J. 231, 237 (C.A.A.F. 2018). An appellant may 
overcome this presumption if he satisfies his burden by 
first demonstrating that his allegation about his counsel’s 
conduct is accurate and, if so, by then showing that “there 
[is no]  reasonable explanation for counsel’ s actions ” and 
these actions “fall measurably below the perfor-
mance . . . [ordinarily expected] of fallible lawyers.” United 
States v. Gooch , 69 M.J. 353, 362 (C.A.A.F. 2011)  (second 
and third alterations in original) (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting United States v. Polk , 32 M.J. 150, 153 
 
2 United States v. DuBay , 17 C.M.A. 147, 37 C.M.R. 411 
(1967). 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
4 
 
(C.M.A.1991)). For the reasons stated below, I conclude 
that Appellant cannot succeed on his ineffective assistance 
of counsel claim because there was a “reasonable explana-
tion” for counsel’s decision to make the military judge, as 
the factfinder, “aware of ” Appellant’s guilty pleas, such 
that the civilian defense counsel’s performance was not de-
ficient. Therefore, no further analysis of this issue is re-
quired. See United States v. Captain , 75 M.J. 99, 103  
(C.A.A.F. 2016) (indicating that ineffective assistance of 
counsel claim s can be disposed of based on  the deficient 
performance prong). 
At the outset of my analysis, I acknowledge that civilian 
defense counsel (1)  did not place specified limitations on 
how the military judge should employ his awareness of Ap-
pellant’s prior guilty pleas; (2) conceded in his DuBay tes-
timony that upon reflection he “probably” would not have 
taken the same approach; and (3) did not consult with other 
counsel—or with Appellant —before asking the military 
judge to be aware of the guilty pleas. However, these three 
points do not warrant a finding of deficient performance. 
In regard to the first point, there is no indication in the 
record that civilian defense counsel erroneously intended 
for the military judge  to consider Appellant’s admissions 
during the providence inquiry as evidence supporting an 
element of the contested charges.  Instead, counsel only 
asked the military judge to be “aware of” Appellant’s guilty 
pleas. Importantly, civilian defense counsel had no reason 
to believe that the military judge would use his “awareness 
of” the prior guilty pleas in an improper ma nner. Indeed, 
the counsel knew that the military judge seemed meticu-
lously mindful of his distinct role during each phase of the 
proceedings. Therefore, the  civilian defense counsel  was 
not required to place specified limitations on how the mili-
tary judge  should employ his awareness of Appellant’s 
prior guilty pleas. 
In regard to the second point, the mere fact that civilian 
defense counsel subsequently question ed whether he 
should have taken this approach at trial carries very little 
weight in an ineffective assistance of counsel context. The 
full benefit of hindsight, whereby counsel  now knows that 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
5 
 
his trial strategy was unsuccessful, can affect perceptions. 
See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 689 (1984) (“A 
fair assessment of attorney performance requires that 
every effort be made to eliminate the distorting effects of 
hindsight, to reconstruct the circumstances of counsel’s 
challenged conduct, and to evaluate the conduct from coun-
sel’s perspective at the time.”); United States v. Mazza, 67 
M.J. 470, 474 (C.A.A.F. 2009) (“We are not to assess coun-
sel’s actions through the distortion of hindsight . . . .”). 
And in regard to the third point, there is some indica-
tion in the record that the two civilian defense counsel had 
at least briefly conferred about this general topic.  But re-
gardless, Appellant has not cited any statute or case law 
that requires one counsel who is arguing a point to obtain 
the agreement of fellow counsel about how best to proceed. 
Moreover, Appellant cannot prevail solely because civilian 
defense counsel failed to consult with Appellant himself be-
fore counsel took the approach now at issue in this appeal. 
Simply stated, Appellant’s constitutional right to silence 
was not at issue in this case . That is because civilian de-
fense counsel did not advocate for any statements made by 
Appellant during the providence inquiry to be used against 
Appellant as evidence of guilt . Moreover, there is no evi-
dence in the record that the military judge improperly used 
these statements in that manner . Therefore, the decision 
to pursue the “awareness approach” rested within the 
sound discretion of defense counsel and Appellant’s acqui-
escence was not required. See McCoy v. Louisiana, 584 U.S. 
414, 422 (2018) (contrasting between the decisions that are 
“the lawyer’s province” and those an accused must person-
ally make , including “whether to plead guilty, waive the 
right to a jury trial, testify in one’s own behalf, . . . forgo an 
appeal,” and “[a]utonomy to decide that the objective of the 
defense is to assert innocence”); see also Rivera, 23 M.J. at 
96 (“[A] military judge certainly should not presume that 
an accused is willing to have this potentially damaging in-
formation as to a guilty plea brought to the members’ at-
tention unless, in fact, the accused or his counsel has given 
some specific indication to this effect.” (emphasis added)). 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
6 
 
The key question then is whether civilian defense coun-
sel had a reasonable explanation for his actions at the time 
of trial such that counsel’s conduct was not deficient. I con-
clude that he did. To begin with, the record before us indi-
cates that civilian defense counsel concluded that this par-
ticular military judge would properly handle his 
“awareness of” the prior guilty pleas. Next, by acknowledg-
ing the obvious and being reasonable in his approach, civil-
ian defense counsel wanted to cultivate “goodwill” with the 
military judge which would redound to the benefit of his 
client. See Rivera, 23  M.J. at 96 (discussing one rationale 
for an accused to inform the factfinder of his guilty pleas 
was to prevent the factfinder from feeling “duped”). And fi-
nally, it was “reasonable” for civilian defense counsel to 
take the tack of arguing that Appellant had demonstrated 
through the prior guilty pleas that he was willing to accept 
responsibility for those offenses which he actually commit-
ted, and that he was pleading not guilty to the remaining 
offenses because he was, in fact, innocent of those charges. 
See id. at 95-96 (discussing another rationale to inform the 
factfinder of an accused’s guilty pleas as “counsel wish[ing] 
to argue that the accused was perfectly willing to plead 
guilty to the crimes of which he, in fact, was guilty, but that 
he has pleaded not guilty to the remaining charges because 
he is innocent thereof”). 
For all these reasons, I conclude that there was no inef-
fective assistance of counsel in this case. 
Issue II: Improper Argument 
The second granted issue asks “[w]hether the trial coun-
sel’s ‘clear error’ in findings argument—leveraging Appel-
lant’s guilty plea to prove his guilt of the litigated of-
fenses— was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt.” Leipart, 
83 M.J. at 448. Consistent with the phrasing of this issue 
statement, I conclude that trial counsel did indeed commit 
clear error when he used Appellant’s admissions during the 
providence inquiry to argue that Appellant was guilty of 
the contested charges. 
Civilian defense counsel’s decision to have the military 
judge be aware of the prior guilty pleas did not extend to 
authorizing the military judge to use those guilty pleas and 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
7 
 
related admissions as evidence of Appellant’s guilt to the 
other offenses.  And yet, t rial counsel argued during 
findings that “the [G]overnment believes  [the military 
judge should] use [Appellant’s guilty pleas] in assessing 
[the victim’s] credibility on the stand.” 3 If the military 
judge had used the guilty plea inquiry in this manner, it 
would have violated Appellant’s presumption of innocence 
as well as his Fifth Amendment right against self -
incrimination. See Flores, 69 M.J. at 369-70 (To “later rely 
on [the providence inquiry] statements as proof of a 
separate offense  . . . would compel an accused to 
incriminate [himself] in the separate criminal proceeding.” 
(citation omitted) ); Kaiser, 58  M.J. at 150 (notifying the 
factfinder of guilty pleas “ implicates the presumption of 
innocence”). Thus, the t rial counsel’s conduct constituted 
“clear error.” See Flores, 69 M.J. at 370 (stating that “the 
direct reference made by trial counsel to a statement made 
by [the accused] at the providence inquiry” was error that 
was “plain and obvious”). 
Because this type of error is of constitutional magni-
tude, the Government bears the burden in the plain error 
context of demonstrating that the error was harmless be-
yond a reasonable doubt . See United States v. Palacios 
Cueto, 82 M.J. 323, 334 (C.A.A.F. 2022)  (citing United 
States v. Tovarchavez, 78 M.J. 458, 460 (C.A.A.F. 2019) ).4 
In evaluating prejudice, this Court  considers such factors 
as “ ‘(1) the severity of the misconduct, (2) the measures 
adopted to cure the misconduct,  . . . (3) the weight of the 
evidence supporting the conviction,’ ” Andrews, 77 M.J. at 
 
3 For instance, t rial counsel implicated Appellant’s guilty 
pleas when counsel said that the military judge “kn[e]w for a fact 
[the victim was] telling the truth about X, Y, and Z. So that 
increases her credibility automatically.” (Internal quotation 
marks omitted.) 
4 The Government argues that Tovarchavez should be 
overruled. In my view, the Government did not meet its 
“substantial burden of persuasion” to overrule this case because 
it failed to evaluate each  stare decisis factor. United States v. 
Andrews, 77 M.J. 393, 399 (C.A.A.F. 2018)  (citation omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
8 
 
402 (quoting United States v. Fletcher, 62 M.J. 175, 184 
(C.A.A.F. 2005)), and (4) “the lack of defense objection,” 
United States v. Carpenter, 51 M.J. 393, 397 (C.A.A.F. 
1999). 
Although I view it as a close call, I conclude that the 
Government has met its burden when evaluating these fac-
tors. In terms of the first factor, I note that trial counsel’s 
conduct was only moderately severe because the reason for 
the erroneous reference to Appellant’s guilty pleas origi-
nated from civilian defense counsel’s request that the mili-
tary judge be “aware of ” the pleas, which apparently was 
somewhat confusing for all of the participants.5 In terms of 
the third factor, the evidence in support of the convictions 
was not particularly compelling . See Leipart , 2023 CCA 
LEXIS 39, at *74, 2023 WL 415990, at *24 (stating “the 
evidence in favor of conviction was not overwhelming” ). 
 
5 The Government contends that this confusion invited trial 
counsel’s response during findings argument such that there 
was no plain error. Indeed, this Court has recognized: “[T]he 
Government is permitted to make ‘a fair response’ to claims 
made by the defense, even when a Fifth Amendment right is at 
stake.” United States v. Gilley, 56 M.J. 113, 120 (C.A.A.F. 2001) 
(quoting United States v. Robinson, 485 U.S. 25, 32 (1988)). 
“Under the ‘invited response’ or ‘invited reply’ doctrine, the 
prosecution is not prohibited from offering a comment that 
provides a fair response to claims made by the defense.” United 
States v. Carter, 61 M.J. 30, 33 (C.A.A.F. 2005) (citations 
omitted); Gilley, 56 M.J. at 121 (“In reviewing whether an 
appellant was deprived of a fair trial by such comments, the 
question an appellate court must resolve is whether, viewed 
within the context of the entire trial,  . . . defense counsel’s 
comments ‘clearly invited the reply.’ ” (citation omitted)). Here, 
the Government claims that the defense opened the door to trial 
counsel’s use of the providence inquiry and guilty pleas by 
referring to them in the opening statement, asking the military 
judge to be aware of them, and by cross-examining the victim on 
her statements that formed the basis for the guilty plea offenses 
in order to challenge her credibility. Viewed in context, the 
Government contends that trial counsel’s use of the providence 
inquiry statements and guilty pleas to rehabilitate the victim’s 
credibility was a fair response to the defense’s strategic use of 
the evidence. While the Government makes some strong points, 
I choose to resolve this issue on other grounds. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
9 
 
Thus, this factor weighs in favor of Appellant. And in terms 
of the fourth factor,  Appellant’s trial defense counsel did 
not object to trial counsel’s erroneous argument, which “is 
‘some measure of the minimal impact’ of a prosecutor’s im-
proper comment.” Carpenter, 51 M.J. at 397 (quoting 
United States v. Nelson, 1 M.J. 235, 238 n.6 (C.M.A. 1975)).  
The key to the resolution of this issue therefore lies with 
the second factor. It must be noted, however, that i n mili-
tary judge -alone trials, the question of whether any  
measures were adopted to cure the misconduct “adds little 
to the [prejudice] analysis.” United States v. Erickson , 65 
M.J. 221, 224 (C.A.A.F. 2007). Of course, this Court has of-
ten stated that “[m]ilitary judges are presumed to know the 
law[,] . . . to follow it absent clear evidence to the contrary,” 
and “to distinguish between proper and improper . . . argu-
ments.” Id. at 225. Nevertheless, the presumption that a 
military judge knows the law is not dispositive of the prej-
udice issue in a case such as this one. Instead, the fact that 
there was a bench trial merely serves as an additional point 
to weigh in the course of assessing the issue of prejudice. 
See id. at 224-25.6 
The record causes me to conclude that it is appropriate 
in this case to invoke the presumption that the military 
judge knew the law and followed it. And as a result , I pre-
sume that the military judge  was able to distinguish 
 
6 In the court-martial panel context, there is a presumption 
that members follow military judges’ instructions. United States 
v. Norwood , 81 M.J. 12, 20 (C.A.A.F. 2021). Importantly, 
however, this Court has acknowledged that a trial counsel’s 
conduct may be “so prejudicial that the curative instructions 
were inadequate.” United States v. Short , 77 M.J. 148, 151 
(C.A.A.F. 2018); see also Donnelly v. DeChristoforo, 416 U.S. 637, 
644 (1974) (observing that “some occurrences at trial may be too 
clearly prejudicial for such a curative instruction to mitigate 
their effect”); United States v. Crutchfield , 26 F.3d 1098, 1103 
(11th Cir. 1994) (“When [prosecutorial misconduct] permeate[s] 
a trial to such a degree as occurred in this case, we do not believe 
that instructions from the bench are sufficient to offset the 
certain prejudicial effect suffered by the accused.”). As Erickson, 
65 M.J. at 224, demonstrates, this same exception applies to the 
presumption that miliary judges follow the law. 
United States v. Leipart, No. 23-0163/AF 
Chief Judge OHLSON, concurring in the judgment 
 
10 
 
between proper and improper argument here , and thus, 
contrary to trial counsel’s clearly erroneous argument, did 
not use Appellant’s statements during the providence in-
quiry as evidence to prove any element of the contested of-
fenses. See id. at 225. 
In support of this position, I note that the military judge 
made it repeatedly clear on the record that he was only 
going to deem himself “aware of” the prior guilty pleas. He 
never said that he would “consider” those pleas in the 
course of the contested proceedings.  Further, there is no 
evidence in the record that the military judge was confused 
or mistaken about the practical application of Appellant’s 
Fifth Amendment rights in this context. And finally, the 
fact that the military judge  found Appellant no t guilty of 
certain offenses demonstrates that he did not adopt the 
trial counsel’s  expansive argument that because 
Appellant’s own words during the providence inquiry 
verified the victim’s credibility, the victim must 
automatically be believed in regard to all of her allegations. 
See United States v. Sewell, 76 M.J. 14, 19 (C.A.A.F. 2017) 
(“The panel’s mixed findings further reassure us that the 
members weighed the evidence at trial and independently 
assessed Appellant’s guilt without regard to trial counsel’s 
arguments.”). 
When weighing these various factors for evaluating 
prejudice, the presumption that the military judge knew 
and applied the law tips the scale in the Government’s fa-
vor. Accordingly, I conclude that the Gov ernment has 
demonstrated that the trial counsel’s clear error during 
findings argument was harmless beyond a reasonable 
doubt. 
Conclusion 
As the discussion above demonstrates, I believe that  
Appellant cannot prevail on either of the granted issues, 
and therefore I would affirm the decision of the United 
States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals . Because the 
majority opinion reaches the same result, I concur in the 
judgment. 
 