This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Allan L. ARMSTRONG, Master Sergeant 
United States Army, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0002 
Crim. App. No. 20210644 
 
Argued April 16, 2024—Decided July 26, 2024 
 
Military Judge: Jacqueline L. Emanuel 
 
For Appellant: Captain Rachel M. Rose (argued); 
Colonel Philip M. Staten , Lieutenant Colonel Au-
tumn R. Porter , Major Robert W. Rodriguez , and 
Jonathan F. Potter, Esq. (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Captain Alex J. Berkun (argued); Colo-
nel Christopher B. Burgess,  Colonel Jacqueline J. 
DeGaine, and Lieutenant Colonel Kalin P. Schlueter 
(on brief); Major Chase C. Cleveland. 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court, 
in which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS , 
Judge MAGGS, and Judge HARDY joined. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Armstrong, No. 24-0002/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Judge JOHNSON delivered the opinion of the Court. 
I. Background 
During Appellant’s general court-martial, consisting of 
a panel with enlisted representation, defense counsel mo-
tioned for the military judge to recuse herself on the basis 
of actual and apparent bias. The military judge denied de-
fense counsel’s motion. Appellant was convicted of sexual 
assault under Article 120, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 920 (201 8), and sentenced to seven  
years of confinement, a reprimand, reduction to the grade 
of E-1, forfeiture of all pay and allowances, and a dishonor-
able discharge. The United States Army Court of Criminal 
Appeals summarily affirmed the findings and sentence. 
United States v. Armstrong , No. ARMY 20210644, 2023 
CCA LEXIS 340, at *1 (A. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 2, 2023) (per 
curiam). Upon examination of the petition for grant of re-
view, which described some of the exchanges between the 
military judge and defense counsel during the trial , we 
granted review of the following issue: 
Whether the military judge’s departure from im-
partiality deprived Appellant of his right to a fair 
trial. 
United States v. Armstrong , 84 M.J. 145, 145 (C.A.A.F. 
2023) (order granting review). At oral argument, Appellant 
asserted that he was only challenging the military judge’s 
impartiality based on the appearance of bias, not actual 
bias. We conclude that the  military judge ’s impartiality 
could not reasonably be questioned and that Appellant was 
not deprived of his right to a fair trial. Thus, we answer the 
granted issue in the negative. 
II. Law 
A military judge should be disqualified if there is an ap-
pearance of bias. United States v. Uribe,  80 M.J. 442, 446 
(C.A.A.F. 2021). “In the military context, the appearance of 
bias principle is derived from [Rules for Courts -Martial 
(R.C.M.)] 902(a). ” Hasan v. Gross, 71 M.J. 416, 418 
(C.A.A.F. 2012). R.C.M. 902(a) (2019 ed.), provides that “a 
military judge shall disqualify himself or herself in any 
United States v. Armstrong, No. 24-0002/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
proceeding in which that military judge’s impartiality 
might reasonably be questioned.” This Court uses “an ob-
jective standard for identifying an appearance of bias by 
asking whether a reasonable person knowing all the cir-
cumstances would conclude that the military judge’s im-
partiality might reasonably be questioned.” United States 
v. Sullivan , 74 M.J. 448, 453 (C.A.A.F. 2015) ; see also  
Uribe, 80 M.J. at 446. 
For an appearance of bias claim, t his Court reviews  a 
military judge’s decision to not recuse under an abuse of 
discretion standard, considering the facts and 
circumstances using an objective standard.  United States 
v. Butcher, 56 M.J. 87, 91 (C.A.A.F. 2001) . “ ‘A military 
judge’s ruling constitutes an abuse of discretion if it 
is arbitrary, fanciful, clearly unreasonable or clearly 
erroneous, not if this Court merely would reach a different 
conclusion.’ ” Uribe, 80 M.J. at  446 (internal quotation 
marks omitted) (quoting Sullivan, 74 M.J. at 453). “There 
is a strong  presumption that a judge is impartial, and a 
party seeking to demonstrate bias must overcome a high 
hurdle, particularly when the alleged bias involves actions 
taken in conjunction with judicial proceedings. ” United 
States v. Quintanilla , 56 M.J. 37, 44 (C.A.A.F. 2001).  A 
military judge “  ‘must avoid undue interference with the 
parties’ presentations or the appearance of partiality.’ ” Id. 
at 43 (quoting R.C.M. 801(a)(3)  Discussion). Additionally, 
as explained by the Supreme Court: 
[J]udicial remarks during the course of a trial that 
are critical or disapproving of, or even hostile to, 
counsel, the parties, or their cases, ordinarily do 
not support a bias or partiality challenge. . . . 
[T]hey will do so if they reveal such a high degree 
of favoritism or antagonism as to make fair judg-
ment impossible. 
Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 540, 555 (1994). 
If a military judge erroneously decided to not recuse be-
cause of an appearance of bias , this Court analyzes three 
factors established in  the Supreme Court’s decision in  
Liljeberg v. Health Services Acquisition Corp., 486 U.S. 847 
United States v. Armstrong, No. 24-0002/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
(1988), to determine whether reversal is warranted. Uribe, 
80 M.J. at 449; United States v. Martinez, 70 M.J. 154, 159 
(C.A.A.F. 2011). Those factors are “[1] the risk of injustice 
to the parties in the particular case, [2] the risk that the 
denial of relief will produce injustice in other cases, and [3] 
the risk of undermining the public’s confidence in the judi-
cial process.” Liljeberg, 486 U.S. at 864. 
III. Discussion 
To determine whether the military judge abused her 
discretion when she denied defense counsel’s motion for her 
recusal, we must decide “ whether a reasonable person 
knowing all the circumstances would conclude that the 
military judge’s impartiality might reasonably be 
questioned.” Sullivan, 74 M.J. at 453. If so, we must then 
determine whether reversal is warranted for such an abuse 
of discretion. 
We hold that t he military judge did not abuse her dis-
cretion when she denied Appellant’s motion to recuse her-
self because “a reasonable person knowing all the circum-
stances would [ not] conclude that the military judge’s 
impartiality might be reasonably questioned. ” Id. In our 
examination of the written record and audio recording of 
the court-martial proceedings, we noted the following: first, 
many of the interactions between the military judge and 
defense counsel that are at issue occurred outside the pres-
ence of the panel ; second, the interactions were “actions 
taken in conjunction with judicial proceedings ,” Quinta-
nilla, 56 M.J. at  44; and third, the military judge used a 
measured tone during the exchanges with defense counsel 
at issue in this case .
1 Considering the interactions in the 
context of the courtroom dynamics  as a whole , although 
there were tense moments between the military judge and 
defense counsel, the military judge “  ‘avoid[ed] undue in-
terference with the parties’ presentations [and] the appear-
ance of partiality .’ ” Id. at 43 (quoting R.C.M. 801(a)(3) 
 
1 We also note that at times the civilian defense counsel was 
discourteous to the military judge and that the military judge 
acknowledged that she needed to work on her patience. 
United States v. Armstrong, No. 24-0002/AR 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
Discussion). Additionally, even if the military judge made 
a poor choice of words at times, “judicial remarks during 
the course of a trial that are critical or disapproving of, or 
even hostile to, counsel, the parties, or their cases, ordinar-
ily do not support a bias or partiality challenge.” Liteky , 
510 U.S. at 555. In this case, the military judge’s remarks 
do not “reveal such a high degree of favoritism or antago-
nism as to make fair judgment impossible .” Id. Therefore, 
we hold in this case that “a reasonable person knowing all 
the circumstances would [not] conclude that the military 
judge’s impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” Sul-
livan, 74 M.J. at 453. Thus, Appellant was not deprived of 
his right to a fair trial.  Accordingly, because the military 
judge did not abuse her discretion in denying defense coun-
sel’s recusal motion, we need not analyze whether her de-
cision warrants reversal. 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Army Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is affirmed. 