This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Thomas H. TAPP, Private First Class 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 23-0204 
Crim. App. No. 202100299 
 
Argued March 5, 2024—Decided July 24, 2024 
 
Military Judges: Derek A. Poteet (arraignment),  
John P. Norman (trial), Kevin Scott Woodard 
(post-trial motion), and Glen Ray Hines Jr. 
(sealing orders and entry of judgment)  
 
For Appellant: Lieutenant Christopher B. Dempsey , 
JAGC, USN (argued); Lieutenant Megan E. Horst , 
JAGC, USN, and Captain Colin W. Hotard, USMC. 
 
For Appellee: Lieutenant Michael A. Tuosto, JAGC, 
USN (argued); Colonel Joseph M. Jennings, USMC, 
Lieutenant Colonel James A. Burkart , USMC , and 
Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief); Lieutenant James P. 
Wu Zhu, JAGC, USN. 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge SPARKS, Judge MAGGS, 
Judge HARDY, and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
 
_______________ 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
In July of 2018, Appellant and another Marine 
simultaneously sexually assaulted a n intoxicated sixteen-
year-old girl in a barracks room, leaving her with internal 
and external injuries requiring hospitalization. Following 
a contentious six -day trial in February of 2021, members 
sitting as a general court -martial convicted Appellant of 
two offenses, one of which was sexual assault in violation 
of Article 120, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 
10 U.S.C. § 920 (2018). In addition to other penalties, the 
members sentenced Appellant to three years  of 
imprisonment. 
Immediately following the trial but without defense 
counsel present, the military judge held an impromptu ex 
parte session with trial counsel. He criticized trial counsel’s 
performance, to include the fact that they had asked the 
panel members to impose a period of confinement of “only” 
eleven years. Trial counsel soon notified the defense of this 
ex parte session . The defense counsel then moved to dis-
qualify the military judge from further proceedings, citing 
both the ex parte session as well as other comments and 
rulings made by the military judge during trial. 
At a post-trial Article 39(a), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 839(a) 
(2018), session to address the defense motion, the military 
judge denied any bias or partiality . However, he  recused 
himself from the remainder of the proceedings. Thereafter, 
a different military judge, Colonel (Col) Woodard , was as-
signed to the case. He denied the defense motion, conclud-
ing that the military judge’s rulings and comments during 
and after trial did not display any actual  or apparent bias 
against Appellant. Col Wooda rd further concluded that, 
even assuming the military judge was disqualified, no rem-
edy was warranted under Liljeberg v. Health Services Ac-
quisition Corp. , 486 U .S. 847 (1988).  The United States 
Navy-Marine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals (NMCCA) 
subsequently held that “no error materially prejudicial to 
Appellant’s substantial rights occurred” and affirmed the 
findings and sentence in this case. United States v. Tapp, 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
3 
 
83 M.J. 600, 625 ( N-M. Ct. Crim. App. 2023). We granted 
review to determine whether Appellant was “ deprived of 
his constitutional right to an impartial judge.” United 
States v. Tapp, 83 M.J. 491 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (order granting 
review).  
We are required to apply  an abuse of discretion stand-
ard to Col Woodard’s post-trial analysis. And upon doing 
so, we hold that there is an insufficient basis to conclude 
that Col Woodard  abused his discretion when he deter-
mined that relief is not warranted in this case . Conse-
quently, we answer the granted issue in the negative and 
affirm the decision of the NMCCA.  
I. Background 
A. The Underlying Offenses 
Appellant and another Marine, Private First Class 
(PFC) Hanley, met A.N., a sixteen-year-old high school stu-
dent, on a beach in Oceanside, California. Appellant and 
PFC Hanley invited A.N. to accompany them back to their 
barracks on nearby Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, 
California. During an Uber ride back to the barracks, Ap-
pellant, PFC Hanley, A.N., and a fourth Marine began 
drinking from a bottle of vodka and PFC Hanley kissed 
A.N. and put his fingers in her vagina. Upon arriving at the 
barracks, Appellant , PFC Hanley, and A.N. consumed 
more alcohol and A.N. became visibly intoxicated. PFC 
Hanley later testified under a grant of immunity  that Ap-
pellant had sexual intercourse with A.N. on the floor of the 
barracks while PFC Hanley orally sodomized her. At some 
point, A.N. began bleeding from her vagina and became 
nonresponsive. After being unable to wake A.N., PFC Han-
ley and Appellant summoned another Marine with medical 
training to attempt to revive her. 
Meanwhile, A.N.’s mother became worried when A.N. 
failed to arrive home by a prearranged time and noticed 
through an iPhone tracking application that A.N. was on 
Camp Pendleton. She contacted  Camp Pendleton law en-
forcement and asked them to conduct a welfare check at 
A.N.’s location. Upon arrival at the barracks, law 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
4 
 
enforcement found A.N. unconscious and bleeding on the 
bathroom floor, a twelve-to-eighteen-inch puddle of blood 
on the barracks room floor, vomit on the wall and the floor, 
and Appellant passed out on the bed.  A.N. woke up in the 
hospital the following morning  suffering from painful in-
ternal and external injuries. 
Appellant was subsequently charged with  violating a 
lawful general order by consuming alcohol while under the 
age of twenty -one, and with sexual assault without con-
sent, in violation of Article s 92 and 120, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 892, 920 (2018). 
B. The Trial 
Lieutenant Colonel Norman (hereinafter the military 
judge) was detailed as the military judge for the trial in this 
case and presided over all sessions of the court-martial ex-
cept for arraignment and the final post -trial Article 39 (a) 
session. Appellant argues that throughout the course of the 
court-martial, the military judge made rulings and com-
ments which demonstrated bias against Appellant. For ex-
ample, after a third counsel was detailed to represent Ap-
pellant, the defense team filed a Military Rules of Evidence 
(M.R.E.) 412 motion three weeks before trial. The military 
judge expressed his frustration with this development be-
cause he believed the M.R.E. 412 issue “was litigated pre-
viously in this case” and the motion was filed late per his 
trial management order. During an Article 39 (a) session, 
the military judge stated that the behavior of the defense 
counsel was “not . . . professional” and questioned why Ap-
pellant was assigned three counsel when “the accused is 
not indigent under the UCMJ” and the Rules for Courts -
Martial (R.C.M.) “rates [him] one free counsel.” He asked if 
the government could “get away” with “add[ing] a counsel 
who just starts to reassess and change the whole dynamic 
of the case and give[s] new notices of new issues ,” and he 
questioned whether defense counsel’s behavior warranted 
“censure, contempt, [or] reporting to state bars.” Despite a 
“lack of diligence and lack of good cause attached to the 
whole defense team,” the military judge stated that “the 
Court will not hold this against the accused himself ” 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
5 
 
especially given that it was “an issue of [a] constitutional 
admission [sic].” He then ruled on the merits of the motion, 
albeit contrary to Appellant’s position. 
Appellant also points to t he military judge ’s various 
admonishments of defense counsel throughout the course 
of the trial.  For example, the military judge  rebuked 
defense counsel for what he saw as an untimely response 
to a motion in limine, accusing them of “l[ying] in wait ,” 
and questioning whether defense counsel “know or couldn’t 
understand or perceive or figure out, as a basically 
qualified defense counsel, that one of the things you might 
want to do is suppress the accused’s statement where h e 
makes inculpatory admissions.” Although he deemed the 
motion “untimely,” the military judge ultimately ruled on 
the motion “for [Appellant’s]  sake, and not for [defense 
counsel’s] sake.”  
The military judge further chastised defense counsel for 
being “glib” in response to a comment made during an Ar-
ticle 39(a) session regarding an expert consultant. He also 
“counseled both sides” for repeated “electronic communica-
tion or consultation over the bar.” In addition to comments 
made to defense counsel, the military judge admonished 
trial counsel for the poor “standard of appearance” of Ap-
pellant (who was in pretrial confinement) and unfavorably 
critiqued trial counsel’s examination of a witness. 
The military judge served as neither the finder of fact 
nor the sentencing authority for Appellant’s case. Instead, 
a panel of officer and enlisted members found Appellant 
guilty of one specification of violating a lawful general or-
der in violation of Article 92, and one specification of sexual 
assault in violation of Article 120. Appellant faced a maxi-
mum of thirty -two years of confinement. At sentencing, 
trial counsel asked the panel to sentence Appellant to 
eleven years of confinement, a dishonorable discharge, for-
feiture of all pay and allowances, and reduction to E-1. De-
fense counsel argued for nineteen  months of confinement. 
The members ultimately sentenced Appellant to three 
years of confinement, a dishonorable discharge, forfeiture 
of all pay and allowances, and reduction to E-1. 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
6 
 
Immediately after the trial adjourned  on February 20, 
2021, and defense counsel had left the courtroom, the lead 
trial counsel asked the military judge if he would be willing 
to conduct an after-action brief with both defense and trial 
counsel, to which the military judge replied “no.” Neverthe-
less, before trial counsel exited the courtroom —and  with 
the court reporter and bailiff still present —the military 
judge suddenly asked from the bench “if [trial counsel] felt 
there were ‘worse’ sexual assault cases than the instant 
case.” One of the assistant trial counsel took this inquiry to 
mean that the military judge  “thought it was one of —one 
of the worst [he had seen].” The military judge then ad-
dressed the prosecution team for thirty to forty minutes—
which an assistant trial counsel later characterized as an 
“ass chewing”—during which  trial counsel remained stand-
ing and the military judge remained seated on the bench. 
Trial counsel described the military judge’s tone as 
“pretty aggressive” and an assistant trial counsel described 
the military judge’s demeanor as “angry,” noting that she 
“felt like [the military judge] was just chastising the trial 
counsel.” The military judge  was critical of trial counsel’s 
performance, stating that they “should have asked for more 
confinement, up  to and including the max sentence”  of 
thirty-two years of imprisonment, that “[trial counsel] uni-
laterally decided to ‘cap’ the sentence by only asking for 
eleven years of confinement,” and that when the Govern-
ment “caps” the sentence “the Defense have no incentive to 
avoid contested trials, and that there is no ‘price’ to be paid 
by the Defense for their earlier decisions.”  When an assis-
tant trial counsel  stated that,  in his experience , eleven 
years of confinement seemed reasonable, the military judge 
raised his voice and stated that he had more experience 
than the assistant trial c ounsel did. The military judge 
mentioned that a case such as this one “doesn’t come up . . 
. that often” and discussed some of the aggravating factors 
of the case —including the age of the victim and that she 
was found on the barracks room floor in a pool of blood and 
vomit—and how those facts should have been raised in the 
sentencing argument. When the  military judge concluded  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
7 
 
what the court reporter later described as a “blasting,” trial 
counsel collected their things and left the courtroom. 
Shortly after leaving the courtroom, the lead trial coun-
sel called his supervisor to report on the outcome of the case 
and to discuss the military judge’s ex parte conversation  
with the prosecution team. After “expressing concern about 
whether or not [trial counsel] might need to disclose” the 
ex parte conversation, the lead trial counsel memorialized 
the conversation in a memorandum for the record which he 
sent to defense counsel  on March 1 , 2021.  Sometime in 
early March, the Chief Defense Counsel of the M arine 
Corps filed an ethics complaint against the military judge. 
On March 6, defense counsel filed a motion requesting dis-
missal with prejudice of the findings and sentence or a mis-
trial because of a violation of the right to an impartial mil-
itary judge, and disqualification of the military judge from 
the remainder of the court-martial proceedings. 
C. Post-Trial Sessions and Rulings  
At an Article 39(a) session held on March 8, 2021, the 
military judge stated that he “remained completely impar-
tial throughout this trial and remain[s] impartial now.” He 
stated that he did not believe “there [was] a reasonable ap-
pearance of bias based on the totality of the circumstances” 
and that the ex parte conversation with trial counsel  did 
not support an appearance of bias “particularly, on the 
facts of this case, where [he] already encouraged the de-
fense to put on a robust sentencing case.”
1 He character-
ized his comments to defense counsel as “frank judicial 
feedback [which] remains an important aspect of counsel 
development.” The military judge concluded his statement 
by reasserting that he had been impartial throughout the 
 
1 During an Article 39(a) session held while the panel was 
deliberating on findings, the military judge expressed concern 
that defense counsel had “virtually no sentencing case” other 
than “an unsworn statement by the accused.”  Accordingly, he 
once again advised Appellant of his rights regarding sentencing 
because of the “significant long -term impacts that could result 
from a conviction on these offenses.” 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
8 
 
trial and did not believe there was an appearance of bias 
based upon his behavior , but “to ensure that the accused 
has confidence in the post -trial process, I have decided to 
recuse myself from any further post -trial matters.” There-
fore, he left it to a “new military judge [to] take up any is-
sues from [that] point forward, up to and including” the de-
fense motion for appropriate relief. 
Following the military judge’s recusal, a new military 
judge, Col Woodard, was detailed to the case.
2 He then 
heard testimony from several witnesses regarding the mil-
itary judge’s alleged appearance of bias.  Col Woodard 
called the military judge as a witness, but the military 
judge invoked his right to remain silent and did not answer 
any questions.
3 In a written ruling, Col Woodard made a 
number of findings of fact to include  the following: (1) the 
military judge  “has very high standards for all trial liti-
gants and expects counsel before him to meet his high 
standards”; (2) although the military judge “expressed his 
frustration and dissatisfaction with [the] defense counsel 
team for their failure to meet or abide by trial ordered 
deadlines, . . . without fail, [the military judge] thoroughly 
considered the merits of the issue[s] raised” by the defense; 
(3) during the proceedings the military judge not only chas-
tised the defense, he “also expressed his frustration and 
dissatisfaction with trial counsel and victim’s legal counsel 
(VLC) for their failure to follow Circuit Rules”; (4) the mil-
itary judge “never stated that the trial counsel should have 
asked for more than [eleven] years of confinement” but ra-
ther “focused his comments on the impact of tr ial counsel 
 
2 After extensive voir dire of Col Woodard, newly detailed de-
fense counsel challenged him on an “implied bias” theory under 
R.C.M. 902(a) based upon his previous relationship with the mil-
itary judge. Col Woodard denied the motion. That issue is not 
before this Court.  
3 Despite the noncriminal nature of the allegations against 
the military judge levied in the ethics complaint and in the de-
fense motion to disqualify him, Col Woodard did not require the 
military judge to answer questions after he invoked his “right to 
remain silent.” That issue also is not before this Court. 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
9 
 
arguing for a sentence in a contested members case that is 
far below the maximum authorized punishment” ; (5) the 
military judge “did not express an[y] displeasure or disa-
greement with the adjudged sentence,” and his critical 
comments “instead focused on the content, or lack thereof, 
of trial counsel’s sentencing argument”; and (6) the mili-
tary judge “referenced the defense counsel paying a price 
for their earlier actions during trial” but “never stated or 
suggested that any accused or speci fically the accus ed in 
this case . . . should pay a price.” 
Based on these findings, Col Woodard concluded that 
the military judge “possessed no personal bias or prejudice 
against [Appellant] or the Defense,” that the military 
judge’s comments to both trial counsel and defense counsel 
“were firm but fair,” and comments to trial counsel during 
the ex parte session were a “misguided attempt by [the mil-
itary judge] to provide objective but pointed critical feed-
back.” He stated that the military judge’s ex parte com-
ments “did not focus on the accused, but instead focused on 
what he viewed as the litigants’ short-comings in the rep-
resentation of their respective clients.” 
In his written ruling, Col Woodard further stated that 
“even assuming arguendo [that the military judge’s] ac-
tions in this trial created an apparent bias,” analysis of the 
facts under the Liljeberg factors caused him to conclude  
that Appellant was not entitled to any relief . In reaching 
this determination, Col Woodard found or otherwise stated: 
(1) “the Defense ha s not identified any specific injustice 
[Appellant] suffered at the hands of [ the military judge ],” 
particularly because the military judge’s ex parte com-
ments came “after the members had rendered their ver-
dicts” and thus “there remained no matter of significance 
in this case where [the military judge] would be called upon 
to exercise discretion”; (2) the military judge “did not rule 
uniformly in the Government’s favor and he also sustained 
many of the Defense’s objections during the course of the 
trial”; (3) denial of relief in this case will not produce injus-
tice in other cases because “this court does not condone, or 
approve of [the military judge ’s] post -trial ex parte 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
10 
 
communication with trial counsel” and the “fallout” from 
his conduct, to include the filing of an ethics complaint 
against him, will “no doubt . . . be a teaching point to all 
military judges and counsel ”; and (4) even if the military 
judge’s actions created an appearance of bias, the nature of 
“that appearance would not create an intolerable risk of 
undermining the public’s confidence in the judicial pro-
cess.” Thus, Col Woodard denied the defense motion. 
The convening authority subsequently approved Appel-
lant’s sentence and credited him with 215 days of pretrial 
confinement. Another military judge entered judgment. On 
appeal, a unanimous panel of the  NMCCA affirmed the 
findings and sentence. Tapp, 83 M.J.  at 625. We then 
granted review on the issue of judicial impartiality. Tapp, 
83 M.J. at 491. 
II. Standard of Review 
A military judge’s ruling on the issue of judicial impar-
tiality is reviewed for an abuse of discretion.4 United States 
v. Burton, 52 M.J. 223, 226 (C.A.A.F. 2000). An abuse of 
discretion occurs when:  
(1) the military judge predicates a ruling on find-
ings of fact that are not supported by the evidence 
of record; (2) the military judge uses incorrect le-
gal principles; (3) the military judge applies cor-
rect legal principles to the facts in a way that is 
clearly unreasonable; or (4) the military judge 
fails to consider important facts. 
United States v. Rudometkin , 82 M.J. 396 , 401 (C.A.A.F. 
2022) (citations omitted). An abuse of discretion does not 
mean that “this Court merely would reach a different 
conclusion” but rather that the military judge’s ruling was 
“arbitrary, fanciful, clearly unreasonable[,] or clearly 
erroneous.” United States v. Uribe, 80 M.J. 442 , 446  
 
4 The parties agree that this Court is reviewing Col 
Woodard’s ruling on the defense counsel’s post-trial motion chal-
lenging the impartiality of the military judge, not the NMCCA’s 
ruling.  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
11 
 
(C.A.A.F. 2021)  (internal quotation marks omitted)  
(citation omitted).  
III. Applicable Law 
A. Judicial Impartiality 
“An accused has a constitutional right to an impartial 
judge.” United States v. Greatting , 66 M.J.  226, 230 
(C.A.A.F. 2008) (internal quotation marks omitted)  (quot-
ing United States v. Butcher, 56 M.J. 87, 90 (C.A.A.F.  
2001)). Indeed, “the validity of the military justice system 
and the integrity of the court -martial process ‘depend[] on 
the impartiality of military judges in fact and in appear-
ance.’ ” Uribe, 80 M.J. at 446 (alteration in original) (quot-
ing Hasan v. Gross, 71 M.J. 416, 419 (C.A.A.F. 2012) ( per 
curiam)). “ ‘[W]hen a military judge’s impartiality is chal-
lenged on appeal, the test is whether, taken as a whole in 
the context of this trial, a court-martial’s legality, fairness, 
and impartiality were put into doubt’ by the military 
judge’s actions.” United States v. Martinez , 70 M.J. 154, 
157-58 (C.A.A.F. 2011) (alteration in original) (quoting 
United States v. Burton, 52 M.J. 223, 226 (C.A.A.F. 2000)). 
To prove judicial bias, a party “must overcome a high hur-
dle” since there exists a “strong presumption that a judge 
is impartial.” United States v. Quintanilla, 56 M.J. 37, 44 
(C.A.A.F. 2001). 
Under R.C.M. 902, military judges may be disqualified 
on grounds of an appearance of bias or actual  bias. See 
United States v. Norfleet , 53 M.J. 262, 269-70 (C.A.A.F. 
2000); Quintanilla, 56 M.J. at 76. Disqualification of a mil-
itary judge under R.C.M. 902 requires a two-step analysis. 
First, it must be determined “whether disqualification is 
required under the specific circumstances [of actual bias] 
listed in R.C.M. 902(b).” Quintanilla, 56 M.J. at 45. If these 
specific circumstances of actual bias do not apply, “the sec-
ond step asks whether the circumstances nonetheless war-
rant disqualification based upon a reasonable appearance 
of bias [under R.C.M. 902(a)].” Id.  
R.C.M. 902(b) provides five specific grounds that re-
quire a military judge to disqualify himself or herself. 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
12 
 
These grounds include “where the military judge has a per-
sonal bias or prejudice concerning a party .” R.C.M. 
902(b)(1). Just as in civilian courts, t o meet this standard 
a military judge must demonstrate bias or prejudice at 
such a “high degree of favoritism or antagonism as to make 
fair judgment impossible.” Liteky v. United States, 510 U.S. 
540, 555 (1994). Further, “judicial rulings almost never 
constitute a valid basis for a bias or partiality motion,” nor 
does a judge’s “ordinary efforts at courtroom a dministra-
tion,” even if these efforts are “stern and short-tempered.” 
Id. at 555-56. 
Even if actual bias does not arise, “an appearance of bias 
is sufficient to disqualify a military judge.” Uribe, 80 M.J. 
at 446 (citing Norfleet , 53 M.J. at 270) . R.C.M. 902(a) re-
quires a military judge  to “disqualify himself or herself in 
any proceeding in which that military judge’s impartiality 
might reasonably be questioned .” This Court applies “an 
objective standard for identifying an appearance of bias by 
asking whether a reasonable person knowing all the cir-
cumstances would conclude that the military judge’s im-
partiality might reasonably be questioned.” United States 
v. Sullivan, 74 M.J. 448, 453 (C.A.A.F. 2015).  
B. The Liljeberg Factors 
R.C.M. 902(a) is silent on remedies that are available  
when this Court determines that a military judge failed to 
recuse himself or herself even though recusal was required 
because of an appearance of bias. Therefore, this Court ap-
plies the three-part test outlined in Liljeberg to determine 
whether “reversal of a decision should be granted as a rem-
edy” when “the judge’s impartiality might reasonably be 
questioned.” Quintanilla, 56 M.J. at 80 -81. The three fac-
tors are: (1) “the risk of injustice to the parties in the par-
ticular case”; (2) “the risk that the denial of relief will pro-
duce injustice in other cases”; and (3)  “the risk of 
undermining public confidence in the judicial process.”  
Liljeberg, 486 U.S. at 864. 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
13 
 
IV. Discussion 
Exemplary judicial conduct is the sine qua non of a re-
spected, professional, and effective military justice system. 
Judges are expected to act with “independence, impartial-
ity, integrity, and competence” and to avoid any semblance 
of “impropriety and the appearance of impropriety” in  or-
der to “maintain the dignity of judicial office at all times.” 
Model Code of Jud. Conduct Preamble [2] (Am. Bar Ass’n 
2011). “Both the appearance and reality of impartial justice 
is necessary to the public legitimacy of judicial pronounce-
ments and thus to the rule of law itself.” Williams v. Penn-
sylvania, 57 9 U.S. 1, 16 (2016) . Indeed, “ ‘to perform its 
high function in the best way , justice must satisfy the ap-
pearance of justice.’ ” Liljeberg, 486 U.S. at 864 (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting In re Murchison , 349 
U.S. 133, 136 (1955)).  
A. Actual Bias 
Applying the first step of the two -part test from Quin-
tanilla, we conclude that Col Woodard did not abuse his 
discretion when he determined that the military judge in 
this case did not display actual bias. As noted above, under 
the categorical approach outlined in R.C.M. 902(b), a mili-
tary judge demonstrates actual bias when he or she “has a 
personal bias or prejudice concerning a party.” R.C.M. 
902(b)(1). But as Col Woodard  observed, the military 
judge’s “remarks, comments, and rulings did not display 
deep-seated favoritism or antagonism that would make a 
fair judgment impossible.” Rather, throughout the trial the 
military judge seemed attuned to Appellant’s constitu-
tional and statutory rights and took steps to ensure he was 
treated fairly. There are a number of examples. First, the 
military judge ruled on defense motions filed outside the 
deadline of his trial management order “to protect [the] 
constitutional rights of the accused.” Second, when the mil-
itary judge learned that defense counsel planned to present 
only an unsworn statement from Appellant during sentenc-
ing, he “expressed concern that [Appellant] may not have 
fully u nderstood the import [ance] of putting on a robust 
sentencing case.” He therefore “confirmed for a second time 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
14 
 
that [Appellant] understood his sentencing rights, explain-
ing in detail what extenuation and mitigation entailed and 
how [Appellant] could put evidence before members for 
their consideration.” And third, during the trial t he mili-
tary judge rebuked the Government regarding the appear-
ance of Appellant (who was in pretrial confinement) and 
stated that “it’s [the Government’s] responsibility to have 
him appropriately attired . . . at these hearings .” This ac-
tion indicates that the military judge was concerned about 
how Appellant’s appearance might adversely affect Appel-
lant during the panel members’ deliberations. Under these 
circumstances, there is an insufficient basis to conclude 
that Col Woodard abused his discretion when he deter-
mined that there was no actual bias here because the mili-
tary judge “possessed no personal bias or prejudice” against 
Appellant. 
B. Apparent Bias 
Moving to the second step of the Quintanilla test, Ap-
pellant makes a strong argument that the military judge’s 
actions resulted in an  appearance of bias.  Indeed, Col 
Woodard stated in his ruling on the defense motion to dis-
qualify that he did not “condone or approve of [the military 
judge’s] post-trial ex parte communication with trial coun-
sel.” The Government counters that no appearance of bias 
occurred because a reasonable person, knowing all the facts 
and circumstances, would not reasonably question the mil-
itary judge’s impartiality. A reasonable person, the Gov-
ernment asserts, would recognize that the military judge 
treated counsel for both sides similar ly throughout the 
trial, there was no evidence of “ ‘extra-judicial’ ” bias, such 
as making comments unrelated to the case, and the con-
duct in question occurred after the trial was over when the 
military judge could no longer affect Appellant’s due pro-
cess rights. (Citation omitted.)  
Upon considering these opposing views, we are mindful 
that the Supreme Court has made it clear that  even when 
a judge’s conduct rises to the level of  apparent partiality, 
relief is only warranted if the judge’s conduct risks injus-
tice to  the parties, risks injustice in future cases, and/ or 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
15 
 
undermines “the public’s confidence in the judicial pro-
cess.” Butcher, 56 M.J. at 92-93 (internal quotation marks 
omitted) (quoting Liljeberg, 486 U.S. at 864). In light of this 
precedent, we deem it unnecessary to resolve the dispute 
between Appellant and the Government about whether 
there was an appearance of bias. We reach this conclusion 
because even if we assume without deciding that there was 
such an appearance, Col Woodard did not abuse his discre-
tion when, after applying the Liljeberg  factors, he decided 
that Appellant was not entitled to any relief.   
Consistent with the abuse of discretion standard, Col 
Woodard’s Liljeberg determination regarding an 
appearance of  impartiality may only be reversed if he 
predicated his ruling on erroneous findings of fact, he used 
incorrect legal principles or applied correct legal principles 
in an unreasonable manner , or he failed to consider 
important facts when reaching his conclusions.  See 
Rudometkin, 82 M.J. at 401. 
Appellant preliminarily argues  that Col Woodard 
abused his discretion because he allegedly made multiple 
erroneous findings of fact in his ruling. Specifically, 
Appellant writes that Col Woodard’s “erroneous findings of 
fact . . . led to an incorrect conclusion of law in finding the 
case did not warrant reversal .” Brief for Appellant at 63, 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23 ˗0204 (C.A.A.F. Dec. 15, 
2023). However, “a military judge’s findings of fact . . . will 
be reversed only if they are clearly  erroneous.” United 
States v. Mizgala, 61 M.J. 122, 127 (C.A.A.F. 2005). And in 
order for a finding of fact to be clearly erroneous, there 
either must be “no  evidence to support the finding” or, 
“although there is evidence to support it, the reviewing 
court on the entire evidence is left with the definite and 
firm conviction  that a mistake has been committed.” 
United States v. Harrington , 81 M.J. 184, 189 (C.A.A.F. 
2021) (citation omitted) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). Here, after examining the record in depth, we are 
persuaded that Col Woodard’s findings of fact are 
supported by at least some evidence on the record , and we 
are not left  with a “definite and firm conviction ” that an 
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
16 
 
error has occurred. Therefore, we adopt Col Woodard’s 
findings of fact as we progress through the Liljeberg factors 
to determine whether he abused his discretion in reaching 
his decision in this case. 
1. First Liljeberg Factor: Risk of Injustice to Appellant 
For the first Liljeberg  factor, this Court examines 
whether there is “any specific injustice that [ Appellant] 
personally suffered.” Martinez , 70 M.J. at 159. Col 
Woodard ruled that “the Defense [did] not identif [y] any 
specific injustice [Appellant] suffered at the hands of [the 
military judge],” and we conclude that he did not abuse his 
discretion when he made that determination.  Specifically, 
we concur that t he military judge’s rulings did not reflect 
any “deep-seated favoritism or antagonism” against Appel-
lant and instead appear grounded in the law and facts of 
the case.5 Liteky, 510 U.S. at 555. Indeed, Col Woodard cor-
rectly noted that the military judge’s expressions of “impa-
tience, dissatisfaction, annoyance, and even potentially an-
ger [were directed] towards counsel on both sides of the 
aisle.” (Emphasis added.) Moreover, the military judge did 
not publicly display bias against Appellant in front of the 
members, and he properly instructed the panel  that they 
should “disregard any comment or statement or expression 
made by me during the course of the trial that might seem 
to indicate any opinion on my part as to whether the ac-
cused is guilty or not guilty , since you alone have the re-
sponsibility to make that determination.” 
Col Woodard also did not abuse his discretion when he 
determined that the military judge’s post -trial ex parte 
session with trial counsel did not pose a risk of injustice to 
Appellant. We first note that a risk of injustice is 
“considerably diminished” when the events giving rise to a 
 
 5 Further, as discussed on pages  thirteen through fourteen 
supra, actions taken by the military judge to ensure that Appel-
lant’s rights were protected and that he received fair treatment 
during the court-martial are applicable to the Liljeberg analysis 
and support Col Woodard’s conclusion that Appellant did not 
suffer a specific injustice at the hands of the military judge.  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
17 
 
disqualification claim occur “near the end of [a members] 
trial, after the presentation of evidence and discussion of 
instructions on findings” when: (1) a military judge is “not 
called upon to exercise discretion on any matter of 
significance concerning findings after that point”; and (2) a 
military judge’s subsequent participation in the sentencing 
portion of the trial is “limited to instructions and rulings.” 
Butcher, 56 M.J. at 92. Here, Appellant was tried and 
sentenced by members, thereby ameliorating  any “risk of 
injustice” arising from the military judge’s actions.  
Further, the military judge’s ex parte comments regarding 
his displeasure with the Government’s approach to 
sentencing were made after the sentencing occurred—all 
that remained for the military judge to do in this case was 
to issue a s tatement of t rial results and, later, to enter  
judgment. And so, unlike in other cases before this Court 
where ex parte statements were made prior to or during 
trial proceedings, the fact that the military judge  in this 
case made his comments at the end of trial weighs against 
Appellant suffering an injustice. See, e.g. , Martinez, 70 
M.J. at 158-59 (ex parte conversations between supervisory 
military judge and trial counsel occurred during trial); 
Greatting, 66 M.J. at 230- 31 (military judge  provided “ex 
parte critique” to staff judge advocate prior to trial ). We 
therefore conclude that under the first Liljeberg factor, Col 
Woodard did not abuse his discretion when he determined 
that Appellant did not suffer a “specific injustice”  as a 
result of the military judge’s actions.  
2. Second Liljeberg Factor: Injustice in Other Cases 
The second Liljeberg  factor assesses whether “the de-
nial of relief will produce injustice in other cases.” 486 U.S. 
at 864. Stated differently, the second factor requires this 
Court to consider w hether granting relief is necessary in 
order to compel a judge or litigant to more closely examine 
possible grounds for disqualification and to handle such 
matters promptly and properly. See Uribe, 80 M.J. at 450 
(“[O]ur conclusion that Judge Rosenow abused his discre-
tion will cause military judges in future cases t o be appro-
priately mindful of their obligations under R.C.M. 902.”).  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
18 
 
Reversal is not always necessary “in order to ensure that 
military judges exercise the appropriate degree of discre-
tion in the future.” Butcher, 56 M.J. at 93. Rather, because 
of the “highly sensitive” nature of the military judiciary—
as well as the public nature of opinions from this Court and 
from the courts of criminal appeals—other forms of admon-
ishment may suffice to preserve confidence in the judicial 
process. Id. 
Here, we conclude that Col Woodard did not abuse his 
discretion when he determined that “granting a remedy 
would not be necessary to ensure that [this military judge] 
or other military judges exercise the appropriate degree of 
discretion in the future. ” Simply stated, the military 
judge’s conduct has not gone unaddressed. In fact, as noted 
by Col Woodard:  
Given the fallout from his ex parte communication 
in this case, which include the filing of a profes-
sional responsibility/judicial ethics complaint 
against him, this Court is certain that if [the mil-
itary judge] did not previously appreciate the 
problems posed by such contacts, he certainly does 
now and will refrain from any such interactions in 
the future. Further, this Court has no doubt that 
this case will be a te aching point to all military 
judges and counsel . . . .  
3. Third Liljeberg Factor: Confidence in 
the Judicial Process 
The third and final Liljeberg factor employs a totality of 
the circumstances approach and requires the application of 
an “objective standard” to determine “whether denying a 
remedy . . . under the circumstances of [a] case will risk 
undermining the public’s confidence in the military justice 
system.” Martinez, 70 M.J. at 159. This factor “differs from 
the initial R.C.M. 902(a) inquiry” because it is not 
“limit[ed] . . . to facts relevant to recusal , but rather re-
view[s] the entire proceedings , to include any post -trial 
proceeding, the convening autho rity action, the action of 
the [CCA], or other facts relevant to the Liljeberg test.” Id. 
at 160.  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
19 
 
With respect to this third factor, we conclude that Col 
Woodard did not abuse his discretion when he determined 
that “even if the [military judge’s] actions in this case re-
sulted in an appearance of bias, that appearance would not 
create an intolerable risk of undermining the public’s con-
fidence in the judicial process.” As discussed with the first 
and second factors supra,  the military judge’s rulings and 
comments did not rise to a level where a reasonable person 
knowledgeable about all the facts would que stion the im-
partiality of the proceedings.  Specifically, t he military 
judge’s rulings were within the range of reasonable options 
available to him . Moreover, he entertained untimely mo-
tions by defense counsel and encouraged a more robust sen-
tencing case on behalf of Appellant. He also did not publicly 
display bias in front of the members , and he properly in-
structed the panel that during their deliberations they 
must disregard any appearance of bias which they may 
have perceived. Further, Appellant’s findings and sentence 
were determined by a panel of members rather than by the 
military judge himself. The ex parte session, which consti-
tutes the bulk of the appearance of bias claim in this case, 
came after the trial was complete. See Butcher, 56 M.J. at 
93 (holding that since military judge’s conduct came late in 
the trial, “the reversal of appellant ’s conviction is not re-
quired to avoid undermining the public’s confidence in the 
judicial process”). In addition, the length of Appellant’s ad-
judged confinement— three years—did not exceed typical 
sentencing parameters considering: (1) the nature and se-
riousness of the offense; (2) the strength of the Govern-
ment’s case against Appellant; and (3)  the fact that he 
faced up to thirty-two years of imprisonment. Thus, consid-
ering the entire trial in the aggregate, it was not an abuse 
of discretion for Col Woodard , quoting Uribe, 80 M.J. at 
450, to conclude that “a decision to [reverse the findings and 
sentence] would increase the risk ‘that the public will lose 
faith in the judicial system.’ ” 
In conclusion, we hold that Col Woodard did not abuse 
his discretion in determining a lack of actual bias. And 
although in the course of our analysis we have assumed  
United States v. Tapp, No. 23-0204/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
 
20 
 
without deciding  that the military judge gave the 
appearance of lacking impartiality, in light of the law and 
the facts we hold that  Col Woodard did not abuse his 
discretion in determining that the military judge’s conduct 
does not require reversal under the Liljeberg factors. 
Accordingly, Appellant is not entitled to relief.  
V. Judgment 
The decision of the United States Navy -Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals is affirmed.  