This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
H.V.Z. 
Appellant 
 
v. 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
and 
 
Michael K. FEWELL, Technical Sergeant 
United States Air Force, Real Party in Interest 
 
No. 23-0250 
Crim. App. No. 2023-03 
 
Argued December 5, 2023—Decided July 18, 2024 
 
Military Judge: Matthew P. Stoffel 
 
For Appellant: Major Michael T . Bunnell (argued); 
Major Marilyn S. P. McCall and Devon A. R. Wells, 
Esq. (on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Colonel Zachary T. Eytalis  (argued); 
Lieutenant Colonel G. Matt Osborn and Mary Ellen 
Payne, Esq. (on brief); Colonel Matthew D. Talcott. 
 
For Real Party in Interest: Captain Samantha M. 
Castanien (argued); Megan P. Marinos,  Esq. (on 
brief).  
 
Amici Curiae for Appellant: Lieutenant Commander 
Philip J. Corrigan , JAGC, USN, Lieutenant 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Commander Kimberly Rios, JAGC, USN, and Lieu-
tenant Titus J. Hattan, JAGC, USN (on behalf of the 
United States Navy Special Victims’ Counsel ) (on 
brief), and Elizabeth G. Marotta, Esq.  (on behalf of 
the United States Coast Guard Special Victims’ 
Counsel Program) (on brief).  
 
Amicus Curiae for Real Party in Interest : Captain 
Arthur L. Gaston III , JAGC, USN, and Lieutenant 
Christopher B. Dempsey , JAGC, USN ( on behalf of 
United States Navy -Marine Corps Appellate De-
fense Division) (on brief). 
 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Chief Judge OHLSON, Judge SPARKS, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge MAGGS filed a sep-
arate dissenting opinion.  
_______________ 
 
 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
Judge HARDY delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The Government charged the accused with sexual as-
sault, domestic violence, and wrongful use of a controlled 
substance. While preparing for his trial, the accused sought 
discovery of the medical and nonprivileged mental health 
records of H.V.Z.  (Appellant), the alleged victim of the  
charged offenses . H.V.Z., through her Special Victims’ 
Counsel (SVC), filed a motion opposing  the disclosure of 
most of those records.  
After concluding that H.V.Z. lacked standing before the 
trial court  to oppose the accused’s discovery motion, the 
military judge ordered the  treatment facility that housed 
H.V.Z.’s records to produce her medical records and rele-
vant, nonprivileged mental health records. Believing that 
the military judge’s order violated her rights under Arti-
cle 6b, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 806b (2018), H.V.Z. petitioned the United States Air 
Force Court of Criminal Appeals (AFCCA) for a writ of 
mandamus blocking the military judge’s order. The AFCCA 
denied issuance of the writ.  
Following the AFCCA’s decision, the Judge Advocate 
General of the Air Force exercised his authority under Ar-
ticle 67(a)(2), UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 867(a)(2) (2018), to certify 
the following four issues to this Court for immediate inter-
locutory review: 
I. Did the military judge err when he determined 
that H.V.Z.’s DoD health record was in the posses-
sion, custody, or control of military authorities 
pursuant to R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A) and R.C.M. 
701(a)(2)(B)? 
II. Did the military judge err when he did not con-
sider H.V.Z.’s written objection to production of 
her DoD health record as he found she did not 
have standing nor a right to be heard? 
III. Whether H.V.Z. must show the military judge 
clearly and indisputably erred for writ to issue un-
der Article 6b(e), UCMJ, or shall ordinary stand-
ards of appellate review apply? 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
IV. Whether this Court should issue a writ of man-
damus? 
H.V.Z. v. United States, 83 M.J. 483 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (dock-
eting notice). 
For the reasons explained below, we begin with  the 
third certified issue and hold that the AFCCA was correct 
in concluding that H.V.Z. bore the burden of showing that 
her right to issuance of the writ was clear and indisputable. 
In applying that standard to the first certified issue, we af-
firm that the military judge did not clearly and indisputa-
bly err in finding that the milita ry treatment facility that 
housed H.V.Z.’s records qualified as a “military authorit[y]” 
under Rule for Courts -Martial ( R.C.M.) 701(a)(2). How-
ever, with respect to the second certified issue, we hold that 
under Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 513(e)(2), the mil-
itary judge was required to provide H.V.Z. with the oppor-
tunity to be heard on the production of her mental health 
records. His failure to do so amoun ted to clear and indis-
putable error. Finally, we decline to answer the fourth cer-
tified issue and instead remand the case to the AFCCA to 
decide in the first instance whether —in light of this opin-
ion—a writ should issue. 
I. Background 
In January 2023, the convening authority referred mul-
tiple charges and specifications against TSgt  Michael K. 
Fewell (the accused and Real Party in Interest) to a general 
court-martial, including: two specifications of sexual as-
sault in violation of Article 120, UCMJ , 10 U.S.C. §  920 
(2018); two specifications of domestic violence in violation 
of Article 128b, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  928b (2018); and two 
specifications of wrongful use of a controlled substance, in 
violation of Article 112a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  912a (2018).  
H.V.Z. is the accused’s ex-wife and the alleged victim of the 
sexual assault and domestic violence offenses.  
After the referral of charges, the accused’s defense coun-
sel sought discovery of  H.V.Z.’s medical records and any 
mental health records not protected by the psychothera-
pist-patient privilege within the Government’s possession. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
After several months of negotiations between the defense 
and trial counsel, the Government declined to produce 
many of the requested records, including any of H.V.Z.’s 
mental health records. The accused then filed a motion be-
fore the trial court seeking an order commanding the Gov-
ernment to produce the health and mental health records 
previously requested by the defense. 
Four days later, H.V.Z. , through her SVC, filed a brief 
opposing the accused’s motion to compel, raising multiple 
arguments why she believed that the accused was not en-
titled to production of her health and mental health rec-
ords. The Government also filed a response to the accused’s 
motion, in which it only opposed the production of H.V.Z.’s 
medical and mental health records from before January 19, 
2020, the date of the earliest alleged offense committed 
against H.V.Z. 
The military judge  issued a written opinion and order 
granting many of the accused’s requests. In his opinion, the 
military judge confirmed that he received H.V.Z.’s written 
opposition to the accused’s motion but  explained that he 
did not consider it because H.V.Z. lacked standing before 
the trial court. As relevant here, th e military judge also 
concluded that: (1) the defense was entitled to the discovery 
of H.V.Z.’s medical records  and relevant, nonprivileged 
mental health records  maintained by the medical  treat-
ment facility located at Luke Air Force Base ;
1 (2) the de-
fense made a valid request for discovery of the information 
in accordance with R .C.M. 701(a)(2)(B); and (3) any such 
records were within the possession, custody, or control of 
military authorities. The military judge separately ordered 
the 56th Medical Group (56 MDG)  located at Luke Air 
Force Base  to provide  the parties with  medical, mental 
health, and Family Advocacy records that pertained to 
H.V.Z., and to work with a medical law attorney to ensure 
 
1 The order also concluded that the defense was entitled to 
discovery of relevant records maintained by the Family Advo-
cacy office located at Luke Air Force Base. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
that all privileged materials  under M.R.E. 513 were re-
dacted prior to production. 
Pursuant to Article 6b(e), UCMJ, H.V.Z. petitioned the 
AFCCA for a writ of mandamus , and requested that the 
AFCCA order an immediate stay and  “ ‘vacate the trial 
court’s decision to order disclosure of [her] extensive medi-
cal records.’ ” In re HVZ, Misc. Dkt. No. 2023-03, at 1 (A.F. 
Ct. Crim. App. May 1 9, 2023) (order). The AFCCA stayed 
the accused’s court-martial and the execution of the mili-
tary judge’s order to the 56 MDG. After receiving briefs in 
response to H.V.Z.’s petition from the Government and the 
accused, and a reply brief from H.V.Z., t he AFCCA issued 
an opinion denying H.V.Z.’s petition for a writ  of manda-
mus for several reasons. In re HVZ, Misc. Dkt. No. 2023-03, 
2023 CCA LEXIS 292, at *11- 12, 2023 WL 4542948, at *5 
(A.F. Ct. Crim. App. July 14, 2023) (unpublished).  
First, the AFCCA concluded that  “the ‘right to be 
treated with fairness and with respect for the dignity and 
privacy of the victim ’ ” in Article 6b(a)(9), UCMJ, did not 
create an independent right for H.V.Z. to be heard at the 
trial level on any and all matters affecting those rights, 
other than during presentencing proceedings in accordance 
with Article 6b(a)(4)(B), UCMJ.  Id. at *11 -12, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *5. The AFCCA therefore affirmed the military 
judge’s refusal to consider H.V.Z.’s response to the ac-
cused’s discovery motion. Id., 2023 WL 4542948, at *5. 
Next, the AFCCA found that the military judge did not 
clearly and indisputably err in concluding that H.V.Z.’s rec-
ords were possessed by a military authority. Id. at *12-13, 
2023 WL 4542948, at *5. R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A)(i) provides an 
accused access to “papers, documents, [and] data . . . if the 
item is within the possession, custody, or control of military 
authorities.” The court was satisfied that these require-
ments were met because H.V.Z.’s records were maintained 
by the 56 MDG—a unit within the United States Air Force. 
Id. at *13, 2023 WL 4542948, at *5.  
The AFCCA’s decision was guided by its application of 
our precedent instructing  that a mandamus petition will 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
only be granted where a petitioner demonstrates  a clear 
and indisputable  right to relief . Id. at *7, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *3 (citing Hasan v. Gross, 71 M.J. 416, 418 
(C.A.A.F. 2012)). Applying that heightened standard, the 
AFCCA denied H.V.Z.’s petition. Id. at *21, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *8.  
II. Discussion 
Our analysis proceeds in four parts, and we address 
each certified issue separately. But we must start with the 
third certified issue because the petitioner’s burden to ob-
tain a writ of mandamus under Article 6 b(e), UCMJ, con-
trols our answer to the remaining issues. 
A. The Petitioner’s Burden Under 
Article 6b(e), UCMJ 
The third certified issue requires us to determine what 
a petitioner seeking a writ of mandamus pursuant to 
Article 6b(e), UCMJ, must establish for a reviewing court 
to grant relief. A petitioner’s burden when seeking a writ 
under Article 6b (e), UCMJ, is a question of law that we 
review de novo. United States v. Evans, 75 M.J. 302, 304 
(C.A.A.F. 2016). We also review questions of statutory 
interpretation de novo. United States v. Sager, 76 M.J. 158, 
161 (C.A.A.F. 2017).  
Article 6b, UCMJ, guarantees certain rights to victims 
of UCMJ offenses and establishes procedures for the vindi-
cation of those rights. When a victim believes that a mili-
tary judge ’s ruling violates her Article 6b rights, Arti-
cle 6b(e)(1), UCMJ, authorizes the victim to immediately 
petition the relevant Court of Criminal Appeals (CCA) for 
a writ of mandamus ordering the trial court to comply with 
Article 6b, UCMJ. Article 6b, UCMJ, does not specify a vic-
tim petitioner’s burden of proof when seeking a writ of 
mandamus from the CCA, but we have held that to prevail 
on a writ of mandamus, a petitioner generally must show 
that: “(1) there is no other adequate means to attain relief; 
(2) the right to issuance of the writ is clear and indisputa-
ble; and (3) the issuance of the writ is appropriate under 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
the circumstances.” Hasan, 71 M.J.  at 418 (citing Cheney 
v. U.S. Dist. Court for D.C., 542 U.S. 367, 380-81 (2004)).  
H.V.Z. argues that because Article  6b(e), UCMJ, does 
not specify the petitioner’s burden or direct the CCAs to 
apply any specific standard of review, the AFCCA erred by 
asking whether the military judge was “clearly and indis-
putably incorrect.” Rather, H.V.Z. contends, the AFCCA 
should have employed an ordinary appellate standard of 
review as Congress directed civilian courts to do under the 
similar Crime Victims’ Rights Act (CVRA). See 18 U.S.C. 
§ 3771(d)(3) (2018) (directing reviewing courts to “apply or-
dinary standards of appellate review”). We disagree. 
When interpreting legislation, we have long presumed 
two things: that Congress knows the law, United States v. 
Kick, 7 M.J. 82, 85 (C.M.A. 1979) , and that Congress se-
lected the language that it intended to apply. United States 
v. Ware, 1 M.J. 282, 285-86 (C.M.A. 1976). In Article 6b(e), 
UCMJ, Congress granted victims of UCMJ offenses the op-
portunity to petition the CCA for a writ of mandamus, but 
it did not dictate a burden of proof that those victims must 
establish to obtain a writ . In the absence of a legislative 
directive establishing otherwise, there is no basis for  this 
Court to deviate from the ordinary burden imposed on writ 
petitioners, which we presume Congress understood and 
intended to have apply. 
The fact that Congress dictated a lower  burden for vic-
tims seeking writs of mandamus under the CVRA does not 
alter our analysis. To the contrary, that Congress included 
such language in the CVRA —but omitted it from Article 
6b, UCMJ—only underscores our duty to refrain from read-
ing a provision into Article 6b, UCMJ, when Congress has 
left it out. Keene Corp. v. United States, 508 U.S. 200, 208 
(1993). We must give effect to, not nullify, Congress’s choice 
to include a lower burden in the CVRA, but not  in Arti-
cle 6b, UCMJ. Gallardo v. Marstiller, 596 U.S. 420, 431 
(2022). 
In 2012, this Court established in Hasan that a peti-
tioner seeking a writ of mandamus from a CCA must show 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
that the military judge clearly and indisputably erred for 
the writ to issue . 71 M.J. at 418. Nothing in the original 
text of Article 6b, UCMJ, enacted in 2013,2 or in any of the 
subsequent amendments to that article suggests that Con-
gress intended any deviation from that standard.  H.V.Z. 
did not ask us to overturn Hasan, and we see no reason to 
question the Court’s reasoning in that case. Thus, the  
AFCCA correctly held that H.V.Z. was required to establish 
a clear and indisputable right to a writ of mandamus.   
B. Military Authorities Under R.C.M. 701 
Guided by  our answer to the preceding question , we 
must now  answer the first certified issue and decide 
whether the military judge committed clear and indisput-
able error when he determi ned that H.V.Z.’s health and 
mental health record s were in the possession, custody, or 
control of military authorit ies. For the reasons expl ained 
below, we hold that he did not.   
“The interpretation of provisions of the R.C.M.  . . . are 
questions of law that we review de novo.” United States v. 
Hunter, 65 M.J. 399, 401 (C.A.A.F. 2008). “To justify rever-
sal of a discretionary decision by mandamus,  the judicial 
decision must amount to more than even gross error; it 
must amount to a judicial usurpation of power, or be char-
acteristic of an erroneous practice which is likely to recur.” 
United States v. Labella, 15 M.J. 228, 229 (C.M.A. 1983) 
(citations omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted).  
As relevant here, R.C.M.  701(a)(2)(A) allows the de-
fense to inspect, “any books, papers, documents, data . . . or 
copies of portions of these items, if the item is in the posses-
sion, custody, or control of military authorities,” and meets 
certain other requirements.  (Emphasis added.) Similarly, 
R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(B) gives the defense access to “the results 
or reports of physical or mental examinations . . . which are 
 
2 National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2014 , 
Pub. L. No. 113–66, § 1701(a)(1), 127 Stat. 672, 952 (2013). 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
 
within the possession, custody, or control of military au-
thorities” and meet certain other requirements.  
H.V.Z. argues that the military judge committed clear 
and indisputable error in concluding that the 56 MDG is a 
military authority for the purposes of  R.C.M. 701 be-
cause—in her view— that term does not include medical 
treatment facilities. Instead, relying primarily on this 
Court’s decision in United States v. Stellato, 74 M.J. 473, 
484 (C.A.A.F. 2015), H.V.Z. asserts that “military authori-
ties” is a term of art that specifically refers to the prosecu-
tion team. 
As an initial matter, H.V.Z.’s reliance on Stellato is mis-
placed because that decision did not limit the scope of “mil-
itary authorities” to include only the prosecution team  as 
she suggests. Stellato concerned R.C.M 701(a)(2)(A)’s ap-
plication when a local sheriff’s department —and not the 
military—was in possession of a piece of relevant evidence. 
Id. at 484. Although the Court agreed that objects retained 
by state law enforcement agencies are generally not in the 
possession, custody, or control of military  authorities, the 
Court nevertheless held that “trial counsel cannot avoid 
R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A)” by leaving evidence with a nonmili-
tary agency and continuing to use it at their own discretion 
during trial  preparations. Id. Contrary to H.V.Z.’s view, 
Stellato did not narrow the definition of “military authori-
ties” but merely clarified that evidence might still be 
within the control or constructive custody of military au-
thorities even if it is not strictly within their possession or 
actual custody.
3 
 
3 The references in Stellato to the “prosecution team” are eas-
ily understood based on the specific facts of that case, where the 
prosecution team was the specific military authority that the ap-
pellant claimed had control of the evidence. As Judge Stucky cor-
rectly noted in his concurrence : “Of course, it matters not 
whether the item is within the possession, custody, or control of 
the prosecution team. The issue is whether it is in the posses-
sion, custody, or control of military authorities.” Stellato, 74 M.J. 
at 492 n.1 (Stucky, J., concurring in the result).  
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
 
Because neither Stellato  nor any of the other authori-
ties cited by H.V.Z. narrowed the definition of “military au-
thorities” in R.C.M  701(a)(2)(A), whether the military 
judge clearly and indisputably erred turns on whether the 
plain meaning of “military authorities” can be construed to 
include the 56 MDG. Considering the deference afforded to 
the military judge in the procedural posture of this case, we 
conclude that it can. 
There appears to be no dispute among the parties that 
the 56 MDG is part of the military. The AFCCA described 
the 56 MDG as “a unit within the United States Air Force” 
In re HVZ , 2023 CCA LEXIS 292, at *13, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *5— a factual finding that is not clearly erro-
neous. The 56 MDG is a medical treatment facility located 
on Luke Air Force Base that serves active duty military 
members, retirees, and their families.
4 The 56 MDG is com-
manded by an Air Force officer and its mission includes 
“military readiness.”
5 
The more difficult question is whether the 56 MDG is a 
military authority for the purposes of R.C.M.  701(a)(2)(A). 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines an “authority” as “[a]n offi-
cial organization or government department with particu-
lar responsibilities and decision -making powers; esp. , a 
governmental agency or corporation that administers a 
public enterprise.” Authority, Black’s Law Dictionary  (11th 
ed. 2019). The 56 MDG —an Air Force unit tasked with 
“providing great healthcare, promoting safety and well-
ness, and military readiness”
6—would seem to fit that def-
inition. H.V.Z. argues that “authorities” should not be con-
strued so broadly but instead should be narrowly 
interpreted to mean only military investigative authorities. 
She warns that to hold otherwise would render all medical 
 
4 56th Medical Group,  https://www.luke.af.mil/Units/56th-
medical-group/ (last visited June 13, 2024). 
5 Id. 
6 Id. 
 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
 
records housed at military medical treatment facilities sus-
ceptible to discovery under R.C.M.  701 without sufficient 
judicial process. 
In the absence of any express limiting language in the 
rule or any limiting guidance from our  precedent, we 
cannot say that the military judge clearly and indisputably 
erred by concluding that the 56 MDG was a “military 
authorit[y]” for the purposes of R.C.M.  701(a)(2)(A). And 
although H.V.Z. raises reasonable concerns about victim 
privacy, we agree with the court below that those concerns 
cannot—at least in this procedural context —overcome the 
absence of any limiting legal authority.
7  
To be clear, nothing in this opinion should be construed 
as definitively hold ing that the 56 MDG is a military au-
thority for the purposes of R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(A). Rather, we 
hold only that the military judge did not clearly and indis-
putably err in finding that the 56 MDG was a military au-
thority in this instance.  
C. H.V.Z.’s Standing to Oppose Discovery 
of Her Mental Health Records 
Next, we turn to the second certified issue and deter-
mine whether the military judge clearly and indisputably 
erred in concluding that H.V.Z. did not have standing to  
oppose the production of her medical and mental  health 
records. Whether a victim has standing to litigate a motion 
to compel her medical and mental health records is a ques-
tion of law  that we review de novo. United States v. 
 
7 The Government argues, and the AFCCA agreed, that 
H.V.Z.’s concerns about victim privacy are overstated because 
both the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996 (HIPAA), Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936, and the rel-
evant DoD regulations set out a process for discovery of patient 
health records. See In re HVZ , 2023 CCA LEXIS 292, at *18, 
2023 WL 4542948, at *7 (“[I]t is not accurate to say that finding 
medical records maintained by an Air Force medical group are 
within the possession, custody, or control of military authorities 
means they are accessible ‘without process.’  ”). We need not 
weigh in on that debate to resolve this issue. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
 
Gilbreath, 74 M.J. 11, 15 (C.A.A.F. 2014); see also LRM v. 
Kastenberg, 72 M.J. 364, 369 (C.A.A.F. 2013). But as we 
have established, our ultimate decision in reviewing 
H.V.Z.’s mandamus petition asks whether the military 
judge clearly and indisputably erred in denying an alleged 
victim the right to be heard at trial . For the reasons ex-
plained below, we conclude that he did. 
Before this Court, H.V.Z. makes various arguments in 
support of her view  that she had standing to oppose the 
accused’s motion to compel discovery of her medical and 
mental health records. First, relying on her argument that 
her records held by the 56 MDG are not “under [the] control 
of the Government ,” H.V.Z. asserts that R.C.M. 
703(g)(3)(C)(ii) and R.C.M. 703(g)(3)(G) grant her the right 
to oppose the accused’s discovery motion and to seek appro-
priate relief. Next, H.V.Z. argues that even if R.C.M. 
703(g)(3) does not apply, the statutory right of alleged vic-
tims under Article 6b(a)(9) to be treated with fairness and 
with respect for their dignity and privacy  grants her the 
right to be heard and to oppose the accused’s motion.  Fi-
nally, H.V.Z. argues that general principles of fairness and 
due process should grant her the right to protect her pri-
vate medical and mental health records from disclosure  
even in the absence of any statute or rule expressly  grant-
ing her standing to do so. In this opinion we need not—and 
do not—address these arguments because there is a much 
more straightforward reason why the military judge 
clearly and indisputably erred by concluding that H.V.Z. 
did not have standing to oppose the accused’s motion  to 
compel. 
Before the trial court, the accused filed a motion to com-
pel the production of H.V.Z.’s  “medical records and non -
privileged materials within mental health records. ” De-
fense Motion to Compel Discovery of Evidence at 1, United 
States v. Fewell (U.S. Dep’t of the Air Force, Trial Judiciary 
Apr. 28, 2023) (attachment to certificate for review, H.V.Z. 
v. United States and Fewell, No. 23 -0250 (C.A.A.F. Sept. 
11, 2023) ) [hereinafter Motion to Compel ] (emphasis 
added). In that motion, the accused requested  that the  
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
14 
 
military judge “order the government to immediately se-
cure and produce” the requested records, and provided the 
trial court with a draft order should the motion be granted. 
Id. at 14. The proposed draft would have ordered the 56 
MDG to produce H.V.Z.’s records, including those related 
to: (1) “Dates and times of visits to mental health provid-
ers”; (2) “Content of c urrent and past lists of prescription 
medications”; (3) Current and past medical diagnoses, in-
cluding mental health diagnoses” ; (4) “Any treatment or 
treatment plan  for such diagnosis or diagnoses ”; and ( 5) 
“Any and all medical records.” Id. at 36. 
The accused’s motion to compel expressly raised the is-
sue of the production and admissibility of H.V.Z.’s mental 
health records before the trial court. In addition to request-
ing that the court secure the records and produce the m to 
the parties, the motion argued that the requested mental 
health records were both relevant and necessary to the 
preparation of the accused’s defense. Because the accused 
anticipated that the Government would request in camera 
review of the records prior to any production , the mot ion 
argued that in camera review was not appropriate. And be-
cause the accused’s counsel knew that H.V.Z.’s SVC in-
tended to oppose the motion to compel, the accused 
preemptively asserted that H.V.Z. had no standing to do so. 
When a party seeks an interlocutory ruling from a mil-
itary judge that places the production or admission of men-
tal health records of a  patient other than the accused in 
dispute, the President has promulgated specific procedures 
in M.R.E. 513(e) to protect the patient’s privacy interests. 
The procedures in M.R.E.  513(e)(1) and M.R.E.  513(e)(2) 
apply to all instances in which a party seeks the production 
or admission of a patient’s mental health records or com-
munications, while the stricter procedures in 
M.R.E. 513(e)(3) only apply when the moving party seeks 
production or admission of mental health records that are 
protected from disclosure by the psychotherapist -patient 
privilege in M.R.E. 513(a) . Compare M.R.E. 513(e)(1) (“In 
any case in which the production or admission of records or 
communications of a p atient other than the accused is in 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
15 
 
dispute . . . .”), and M.R.E. 513(e)(2) (“Before ordering the 
production or admission of  evidence of a patient’s records 
or communication  . . . .”), with M.R.E. 513(e)(3) (address-
ing “the production or admissibility of protected records or 
communications”) (emphasis added). In this case, because 
the accused only sought production of H.V.Z.’s nonprivi-
leged mental health records , only the procedures in 
M.R.E. 513(e)(1) and M.R.E. 513(e)(2) applied. 
As relevant here, M.R.E.  513(e)(1) requires the party 
seeking the ruling from the military judge to file a written 
motion at least five days prior to entry of pleas specifically 
describing the evidence to be produced and stating the pur-
pose for which it is sought . M.R.E. 513(e)(1)(A). The rule 
also requires the moving party to serve the motion on the 
opposing party and the military judge and to notify the pa-
tient or her representative that the motion has been filed 
and that the patient has the opportunity to be heard on the 
motion. M.R.E. 513(e)(1)(B). The record establishes that 
the accused filed the requisite written motion and served it 
on the Government and the military judge. The record fur-
ther supports the conclusion  that counsel for the accused 
at least notified H.V.Z.’s SVC of the motion. See Motion to 
Compel at 1 (notifying the military judge  that “Victim’s 
Counsel has forecast that it intends to oppose the Defense’s 
motion”); VC Response to Defense Motion to Compel Dis-
covery at 10, United States v. Fewell (U.S. Dep’t of the Air 
Force, Trial Judiciary May 2, 2023) (attachment to certifi-
cate for review, H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-
0250 (C.A.A.F. Sept. 11, 2023)) [hereinafter SVC Response] 
(mentioning “the parties ’ informal discussions regarding 
the appropriate means of handling these records ”). In any 
event, H.V.Z. has not complained that the accused failed to 
provide her with sufficient notice. 
More importantly for this case, M.R.E.  513(e)(2) 
demands that prior to ordering the production of a patient’s 
mental health records , the military judge must  conduct a 
closed hearin g and the patient “ must be afforded a 
reasonable opportunity  to attend the hearing and be 
heard.” (Emphasis added.) The rule further explains that 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
16 
 
the victim’s “right to be heard under this rule includes the 
right to be heard through counsel, including Special  
Victims’ Counsel under section 1044e of title 10,  United 
States Code. ” M.R.E. 513(e)(2). The President’s repeated 
use of the word “must” in M.R.E.  513(e)(2) indicates that 
these processes are mandatory. 8 In her response to the 
accused’s motion to compel (that the military judge did not 
consider), H.V.Z. correctly cited M.R.E.  513(e)(2) and 
asserted that before ordering production of evidence under 
M.R.E. 513, the military judge  must conduct a closed 
hearing and provide H.V.Z. with an opportunity to be 
heard. SVC Response at 3-4. 
Once a party—in this case the accused —sought a ruling 
from the military judge seeking the production of H.V.Z.’s 
mental health records , the mandatory procedural protec-
tions guaranteed by M.R.E. 513(e) should have been trig-
gered. Mellette, 82 M.J. at 379 (“M.R.E. 513(e) establishes 
a procedure to determine the admissibility of patient rec-
ords or communications.”).  Those protections included 
H.V.Z.’s right to be heard on the production and admission 
of her mental health records under M.R.E.  513(e)(2). The 
military judge’s refusal to consider H.V.Z.’s motion violated 
the plain language of M.R.E. 513(e)(2) and deprived H.V.Z. 
of the protections guaranteed to all mental health patients 
by the President.  
Given the plain language of M.R.E.  513(e), we believe 
that H.V.Z. had a clear and indisputable right to be heard 
with respect to the accused’s motion to compel. As we ex-
plained above,  the procedural protections in M.R.E.  
513(e)(1) and M.R.E. 513(e)(2) apply in “any case” in which 
the production or admission  of “records or communica-
tions” of a patient other than  the accused is a matter in 
dispute. The President’s use of the broad phrase “records 
 
8 Because M.R.E. 513 (e)(1) refers to any case in which the 
production of the victim’s mental health records “is a matter in 
dispute,” military judges need not comply with these procedural 
requirements when neither the opposing party nor the patient 
opposes the production or admission of the patient’s records. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
17 
 
or communications” in these subsections of the rule stands 
in stark contrast to narrower language that defines the 
scope of the psychotherapist -patient privilege in M.R.E. 
513(a).  
Indeed, this Court’s decision in Mellette narrowly con-
struing the psychotherapist -patient privilege turned  pri-
marily on M.R.E.  513(a)’s protection only of “confidential 
communications” between a patient and a psychotherapist. 
82 M.J. at 378. The Court specifically noted that the Pres-
ident elected not to use broader language in M.R.E.  
513(a)—like  the broader language in M.R.E. 513(e)(1) and 
M.R.E. 513(e)(2)—that would have included  all patient 
mental health records  within the psychotherapist -patient 
privilege. Id. But just because a mental health record is not 
privileged under M.R.E. 513(a), does not mean that it is ex-
cluded from the procedural protections provided by 
M.R.E. 513(e)(1) and M.R.E. 513(e)(2). As the Court held in 
Mellette, even if the patient’s medical records are not priv-
ileged under M.R.E. 513(a), the production or admission of 
those records is  still “subject to the procedural require-
ments of M.R.E. 513(e).” Id. at 381. 
Notably, the accused has made statements in his writ-
ten filings in this case that appear to recognize  that 
M.R.E. 513(e)(2) grants named victims the right to be 
heard when a party seeks production of their medical rec-
ords. In his motion to compel, the accused implicitly recog-
nized that M.R.E. 513 provides standing to a named victim 
to object or to be heard in response to a discovery motion 
for her mental health records. See Motion to Compel at 12 
(noting that unlike  M.R.E. 513, the other provisions cited 
by H.V.Z. “do not provide standing to a named victim,  ei-
ther to object or ‘to be heard’ ”). And in his brief before this 
Court, the accused stated: “Certain other provisions, read 
in conjunction with Article 6b, UCMJ, require the military 
judge to allow the named victim to be heard. See, e.g., Mil. 
R. Evid. . . . 513(e)(2) (noting the patient whose records are 
at issue has the right to be heard) .” Answer on Behalf of 
Real Party in Interest  at 29, H.V.Z. v. United States and 
Fewell, No 23-0250 (C.A.A.F. Sept. 25, 2024). 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Opinion of the Court 
18 
 
M.R.E. 513(e)(2) granted H.V.Z. the right to be heard in 
response to the accused’s motion to compel the seizure and 
production of her nonprivileged mental health records . By 
denying H.V.Z. that right, the military judge committed a 
clear and indisputable error. To be clear, beyond our rul-
ings on the first and third certified issues, we offer no opin-
ion on the merits of the military judge’s ruling with respect 
to the accused’s motion to compel. We hold only that he was 
required by the plain language of M.R.E.  513(e) and our 
ruling in Mellette to grant H.V.Z. the opportunity to be 
heard.
9 
D. Issuance of a Writ of Mandamus 
Finally, we turn to the fourth certified issue—whether 
this Court should issue a writ of mandamus. Because Arti-
cle 6b, UCMJ, expressly grants the authority to issue the 
writ to the CCAs, we believe the AFCCA is better suited to 
address that question. Accordingly, we reiterate that the 
military judge’s denial of H.V.Z.’s right to be heard under 
M.R.E. 513(e)(2) was a clear and indisputable error and re-
mand the case to the AFCCA to decide —consistent with 
this opinion—whether H.V.Z. should prevail on her writ of 
mandamus. 
III. Conclusion 
For the abovementioned reasons, we affirm the decision 
of the United States Air Force Court of Criminal Appeals  
on the first and third certified issues , reverse its decision 
on the second certified issue, and remand the case for fur-
ther consideration in light of this opinion. 
 
9 Nothing in this opinion should be interpreted as abrogating 
the authority of military judges to manage discovery under 
R.C.M. 701 and R.C.M. 703  when the production of mental 
health records is in dispute. We hold only that M.R.E. 513(e) es-
tablishes mandatory minimum procedures to protect the privacy 
rights of patients with respect to the production or admission of 
their mental health records. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting. 
Military Rule of Evidence (M.R.E.) 513(e)(2) provides 
that “[b]efore ordering the production . . . of a patient’s rec-
ords . . . the military judge must conduct a hearing” and 
that the “patient must be afforded a reasonable oppor-
tunity to attend the hearing and be heard.” The Court holds 
that this rule required the military judge to allow  Appel-
lant, H.V.Z., to contest the production of her nonprivileged 
mental health records. The Court remands the case to the 
United States Air Force Court of C riminal Appeals 
(AFCCA) for further consideration. 
I disagree with the Court’s action because, in my view, 
it is improper under the applicable standard of review. In 
this case, H.V.Z. is seeking a writ of mandamus. Our prec-
edent has established that  to succeed on a petition for a 
writ of mandamus,  the “[a]ppellant must show [in part] 
that . . . the right to issuance of the writ is clear and indis-
putable.” Hasan v. Gross, 71 M.J. 416, 418 (C.A.A.F. 2012). 
Here, H.V.Z. did not show that M.R.E. 513(e)(2) gave her a 
clear and indisputable right to a writ of mandamus for a 
simply stated reason: H.V.Z. did not cite  M.R.E. 513(e)(2) 
or make any argument about this rule in her briefs before 
this Court or the AFCCA. I therefore respectfully dissent. 
At the request of Real Party in Interest, Technical Ser-
geant Michael K. Fewell ( i.e., the accused), t he military 
judge in this ongoing court-martial ordered the 56th Medi-
cal Group at Luke Air Force Base to produce H.V.Z.’s med-
ical, mental health, and family advocacy  records, after re-
dacting any privileged communications from them.  The 
military judge concluded that these records were discover-
able under Rule for Courts -Martial (R.C.M.) 701(a)(2)(B), 
which provides in part:  
[U]pon request of the defense, the Government 
shall permit the defense to inspect the results or 
reports of physical or mental examinations . . . 
which are within the possession, custody, or con-
trol of military authorities . . . if 
(i) the item is relevant to defense preparation. 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
2 
 
Although H.V.Z. objected to the production order, the mili-
tary judge did not consider her  objection because the mili-
tary judge concluded that she lacked standing. 
H.V.Z. sought review of the military judge’s order and 
findings by petitioning the AFCCA for a writ of mandamus 
under Article 6b (e), Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 806b(e) (2018). H.V.Z. argued that the 
production order violated her right to privacy under both 
Article 6b(a)(9), UCMJ, and the Fourth Amendment of the 
United States Constitution. H.V.Z. also contended that the 
documents were not discoverable under R.C.M. 
701(a)(2)(B) for two reasons. First, she argued that the mil-
itary judge had failed to make a determination about 
whether the records were relevant to defense preparation.  
Second, she averred that her records were not within the 
possession, custody, or control of the Government  because 
trial counsel and other officials could not freely review her 
records; they could access the records only if they complied 
with federal privacy laws . H.V.Z. further argued  that be-
cause the medical records were not within  the possession, 
custody, or control of military authorities , R.C.M. 
703(g)(3)(C)(ii) applied to the production of her records and 
this rule required the military judge to provide her an op-
portunity to object before issu ing a subpoena for the rec-
ords. Importantly, however, H.V.Z. did not cite or make any 
argument with respect to M.R.E. 513(e) (2) in either the pe-
tition for relief  or the reply that she submitted to  the 
AFCCA. 
The AFCCA denied relief, reasoning that H.V.Z. had 
“fail[ed] to demonstrate the military judge was clearly and 
indisputably incorrect” in his ruling. In re HVZ, Misc. Dkt. 
No. 2023 -03, 2023 CCA LEXIS 292,  at *12, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *5 (A.F. Ct. Crim. App. July 14, 2023) (un-
published). The AFCCA rejected H.V.Z.’s privacy argument 
under Article 6b, UCMJ, reasoning that the statute  “does 
not create the right to be heard by the trial court on any and 
all matters affecting those rights.”  Id. at *12, 2023 WL 
4542948, at *5. The AFCCA considered H.V.Z.’s arguments 
with respect to R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(B) and R.C.M. 
703(g)(3)(C)(ii), but determined that she had not met her 
burden to demonstrate  that she was clearly and 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
3 
 
indisputably entitled to relief under these rules. Id. at *13, 
*18, 2023 WL 4542948, at * 5, *7. The AFCCA reasoned  
that “it is possible for non-privileged but sensitive personal 
records to be in the possession of military authorities .” Id. 
at *17, 2023 WL 4542948, at * 7. The AFCCA did not ad-
dress the issue of whether H.V.Z. was entitled to object un-
der M.R.E. 513(e)(2), presumably because H.V.Z. did not 
make any argument about that rule. 
Before this Court, H.V.Z. did not cite M.R.E.  513(e)(2) 
in either her fifty -five-page initial brief  or her twenty -
seven-page reply brief. Indeed, out of all the briefs and ami-
cus curiae briefs filed in this Court, only one even mentions 
M.R.E. 513(e)(2). The Real Party in Interest  notes the ex-
istence of the rule but asserts—c orrectly—that it is not “the 
basis for Appellant’s perceived violation of her rights.” And 
at oral argument, H.V.Z.’s counsel made no argument re-
lated to M.R.E. 513(e)(2) until the provision was raised sua 
sponte in questions from the Court. 
Under these circumstances, I cannot agree that H.V.Z. 
has shown that M.R.E. 513(e)(2) entitled her to a clear and 
indisputable right to the writ of mandamus. Showing a 
right to a writ of mandamus  is a demanding burden. 
Cheney v. U.S. Dist. Ct. for D.C., 542 U.S. 367, 381 (2004) . 
A petitioner cannot meet this burden through an argument 
that the  petitioner does not even make.  In re MaxPower 
Semiconductor, Inc., 13 F.4th 1348, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2021)  
(declining to issue a writ of mandamus based on a theory 
that the dissent offered sua sponte and that relied on cases 
not cited by the petitioner); see also In re Itron, Inc., 883 
F.3d 553, 570 n.1 (5th Cir. 2018) (Dennis, J., dissenting) 
(explaining that a “court may not grant the drastic and ex-
traordinary relief of mandamus based on arguments that 
it raises sua sponte”). In my view, the Court should express 
no opinion on the potential import of M.R.E.  513(e)(2) be-
cause H.V.Z. did not preserve or  present any argument 
about that rule. Instead, the Court should wait until argu-
ments concerning the rule are properly presented and fully 
briefed. 
Finally, I have carefully considered the arguments that 
H.V.Z. actually made before the AFCCA and that she now 
makes before this Court. I agree with the AFCCA’s 
H.V.Z. v. United States and Fewell, No. 23-0250/AF 
Judge MAGGS, dissenting 
4 
 
reasoning that H.V.Z. has not shown that Article 6b, 
UCMJ, established a clear and indisputable right to be 
heard at trial on the production motion. The language of 
Article 6b, UCMJ, does not expressly provide this right and 
no precedent has addressed the issue . Similarly, I agree 
with the AFCCA’s reasoning that H.V.Z. cannot show that 
she has a clear and in disputable right to the writ of man-
damus under R.C.M. 701(a)(2)(B) or R.C.M. 703(g)(3)(C)(ii) 
because it is not clear and indisputable  that records held  
by the 56th Medical Group at Luke Air Force Base are not 
within the possession, custody, or control of the Govern-
ment. I therefore would affirm the decision of the AFCCA. 