This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
 
 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
 
UNITED STATES 
Appellee 
 
v. 
 
Sean M. SWISHER, Lance Corporal 
United States Marine Corps, Appellant 
 
No. 24-0011 
Crim. App. No. 202100311 
 
Argued April 17, 2024—Decided July 11, 2024 
 
Military Judge: Eric A. Catto 
 
For Appellant: S. Marshall Griffin Jr. , Esq. (ar-
gued); Lieutenant Colonel Matthew E. Neely, USMC 
(on brief). 
 
For Appellee: Major Candace G. White, USMC  (ar-
gued); Colonel Joseph M. Jennings, USMC, Lieuten-
ant Commander James P. Wu Zhu, JAGC, USN, and 
Brian K. Keller, Esq. (on brief). 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court, in which Judge MAGGS, Judge HARDY, and 
Judge JOHNSON joined. Judge SPARKS filed a sep-
arate dissenting opinion. 
_______________ 
 
 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
 
Chief Judge OHLSON delivered the opinion of the 
Court. 
We granted review in this case to determine whether 
the United States Navy -Marine Corps Court of Criminal 
Appeals (CCA) abused its discretion when performing its 
sentence appropriateness review under Article 66(d)(1), 
Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. 
§ 866(d)(1) (2018).  Specifically, we must determine 
whether the lower court misapprehended the law when, in 
the course of conducting a sentence appropriateness re-
view, it “decline[d] to compare” a civilian coactor’s sentence 
with Appellant’s sentence. United States v. Swisher, No. 
NMCCA 202100311, 2023 CCA LEXIS 339, at *25-26, 2023 
WL 5274010, at *9 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 16, 2023) (en 
banc) (unpublished). We hold that the CCA did abuse its 
discretion because it did not decide whether the cases were 
closely related as required under applicable precedent. Ac-
cordingly, the CCA decision is reversed as to sentence and 
the case is remanded  for a new sentence appropriateness 
review. 
I. Background 
On December 1, 2019, in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, 
Appellant and a civilian, Mr. Simmons, sexually assaulted 
the same young woman at the same time and in the same 
manner. Ultimately, the perpetrators were held criminally 
responsible for their misconduct —Mr. Simmons  in state 
court and Appellant in the military justice system. 
Mr. Simmons agreed to plead guilty in South Carolina 
state court to criminal sexual conduct in the third degree 
in exchange for a recommended sentence of probation with 
sex offender registration .
1 Following this plea, the state 
 
1 Criminal sexual conduct in the third degree is a felony with 
a maximum punishment of ten years, and it is defined as follows: 
(1) A person is guilty of criminal sexual conduct in 
the third degree if the actor engages in sexual bat-
tery with the victim and if any one or more of the 
following circumstances are proven: 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
 
court sentenced Mr. Simmons  to a five -year suspended 
prison sentence and probation for three years. 
Appellant, in contrast, contested his charges of one 
specification of attempted sexual assault, one specification 
of wrongful use of cocaine, two specifications of sexual as-
sault, and two specifications of aiding and abetting sexual 
assault, in violation of Articles 80, 112a, and 120, UCMJ, 
10 U.S.C. §§ 880, 912a, 920 (2018).2 At a general court-mar-
tial with enlisted representation, Mr. Simmons testified for 
the Government against Appellant, who was convicted of  
all specifications except for the aiding and abetting sexual 
assault specifications . After electing military judge sen-
tencing, Appellant received a sentence of a dishonorable 
discharge, confinement for fifty-four months, and reduction 
to E-1.3 The convening authority took no action on the sen-
tence and the military judge then entered judgment. 
 
 . . . . 
(b) The actor knows or has reason to know                   
that the victim is mentally defective, mentally 
incapacitated, or physically helpless and ag-
gravated force or aggravated coercion was not 
used to accomplish sexual battery. 
S.C. Code Ann. § 16-3-654(1)(b) (2015). A sexual battery means, 
in relevant part, “sexual intercourse, cunnilingus, [or] fellatio.” 
S.C. Code Ann. § 16-3-651(h) (2015). 
2 The Article 120(b)(3)(A) offense of sexual assault occurs 
when a servicemember “commits a sexual act upon another per-
son when the other person is incapable of consenting to the sex-
ual act due to . . . impairment by any . . . intoxicant . . . and that 
condition is known or reasonably should be known by the per-
son.” The maximum punishment for this offense is “[f]orfeiture 
of all pay and allowances . . . and confinement for 30 years” and 
includes a mandatory minimum of a dishonorable discharge. 
Manual for Courts-Martial, United States pt. IV, para. 60 .d.(2) 
(2019 ed.). 
3 The military judge merged the Article 80 and the Article 
120 charges because of unreasonable multiplication of charges, 
and for this merged offense, the military judge sentenced Appel-
lant to fifty-four months of confinement. For the wrongful use of 
cocaine offense, the military judge sentenced Appellant to two 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
 
On appeal, the CCA initially affirmed the findings and 
sentence. See Swisher, 2023 CCA LEXIS 339, at *2, 2023 
WL 5274010, at *1. However, the CCA subsequently 
granted Appellant’s motion for en banc reconsideration and 
withdrew its prior decision. See id.  at *3, 2023 WL 
5274010, at *1. Upon en banc review, the CCA set aside 
and dismissed with prejudice the attempted sexual assault 
specification for failure to state an offense, affirmed the re-
maining findings, and affirmed the sentence after reassess-
ment. Id. at *26-27, 2023 WL 5274010, at *10. 
When conducting its appellate review, the CCA rejected 
Appellant’s argument that his sentence was “highly dispar-
ate when compared to the sentence awarded to his alleged 
co-actor.” Brief for Appellant at 97, United States v. 
Swisher, No. NMCCA 202100311  (N-M. Ct. Crim. App.  
May 11, 2022). Specifically, the lower court stated: “We de-
cline to compare Mr. [Simmons’s] case with Appellant’s 
sentence for an analysis of appropriateness” because “[Mr. 
Simmons’s] sentence was for different crimes and was ad-
judicated by a civilian jurisdiction. ” Swisher, 2023 CCA 
LEXIS 339, at * 25-26, 2023 WL 5274010, at * 9. The CCA 
further stated that it was “unaware of any precedent that 
requires us to find parity between a military court-martial 
sentence and a sentence awarded by a st ate or local juris-
diction.” Id. at *26, 2023 WL 5274010, at *9. In a footnote, 
the CCA explained: 
In his motion for en banc reconsideration, Appel-
lant takes issue with this conclusion and cites 
United States v. Sothen , 54 M.J. 294 (C.A.A.F. 
2001) and United States v. Behunin , 83 M.J. 158 
(C.A.A.F. 2023) for the proposition that we are re-
quired to compare a court-martial sentence with a 
sentence awarded by a state or local jurisdiction 
in closely related cases . . . . We disagree. While 
our Court in Sothen chose to compare appellant’s 
court-martial conviction with his co -conspirator’s 
state court convicti on, there was no requirement 
 
months of confinement. The military judge directed that these 
sentences of confinement run concurrently. 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
 
to do so. Appellant’s reliance on dicta in Sothen  
and a single footnote in Behunin, 83 M.J. at 158 
n.2 (which in turn cites back to Sothen ) does not 
support his argument. 
Id. at *26 n.73, 2023 WL 5274010, at *9 n.73. 
We then granted review of the following issue: 
Did the lower court err by applying the wrong 
legal standard to its sentence appropriateness 
analysis? 
United States v. Swisher, 84 M.J. 169 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (or-
der granting review). As will be explain ed, we answer the 
granted issue in the affirmative and remand for further 
proceedings. 
II. Standard of Review 
“ ‘Our review of decisions by the Courts of Criminal Ap-
peals on issues of sentence appropriateness is limited to the 
narrow question of whether there has been an obvious mis-
carriage[] of justice or abuse[] of discretion.’ ” United States 
v. Behunin, 83 M.J. 158, 161 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (alterations in 
original) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Sothen, 54 M.J. 294, 296 (C.A.A.F. 2001)). 
There is an abuse of discretion, in relevant part , when a 
“court’s decision is influenced by an erroneous view of the 
law.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting 
United States v. Ayala, 81 M.J. 25, 27-28 (C.A.A.F. 2021)). 
III. Analysis 
Article 66(d)(1) provides, in part, that CCAs “may af-
firm only  . . . the sentence or such part or amount of the 
sentence, as the Court finds correct in law and fact and de-
termines, on the basis of the entire record, should be ap-
proved.” This language empowers the CCAs to review cases 
for sentence appropriateness. See Sothen , 54 M.J. at 296. 
“[A CCA’s] power to review a case for sentence appropriate-
ness . . . includes but is not limited to considerations of uni-
formity and evenhandedness of sentencing decisions.” Id. 
The CCAs typically have “discretion to consider and 
compare” other “sentences when [they are] reviewing a 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
 
case for sentence appropriateness and relative uniformity.” 
United States v. Wacha, 55 M.J. 266, 267 (C.A.A.F. 2001). 
As we have stated, “generally speaking ‘neither Article 
66[(d)(1)] nor our precedents requires [the CCAs] to engage 
in sentence comparison with specific cases.’ ” Behunin, 
83 M.J. at 161-62 (alterations in original) (quoting United 
States v. Noble, 50 M.J. 293, 294 (C.A.A.F. 1999) ). Im-
portantly, however, “this general rule is subject to one ex-
ception—the CCAs ‘are required to engage in sentence com-
parison . . . in those rare instances in which sentence 
appropriateness can be fairly determined only by reference 
to disparate sentences adjudged in closely related cases.’ ” 
Id. at 162 (alteration in original) (quoting Sothen, 54 M.J. 
at 296).
4  
It is in this context that our Court has spelled out the 
analytical approach a CCA must employ when confronted 
with a claim that the sentences in two cases are disparate. 
As we held in United States v. Lacy:  
     At a Court of Criminal Appeals, an appellant 
bears the burden of demonstrating that any cited 
cases are “closely related” to his or her case and 
that the sentences are “highly disparate.” If the 
appellant meets that burden, or if the court raises 
the issue on its own motion, then the Government 
must show that there is a rational basis for the 
disparity. 
50 M.J. 286, 288 (C.A.A.F. 1999). As can be seen then, in a 
case such as the one presented here, our precedent requires 
a CCA to  decide at the outset of its analysis whether an 
appellant has borne the burden of showing that the appel-
lant’s case and another case are “closely related.”5 And yet, 
the CCA did not do so here.  
 
4 Neither party has challenged this holding as articulated in 
Behunin and Sothen, and thus it remains binding precedent.  
5 If the cases are closely related, the CCA must then proceed 
to determine whether the appellant has shown that the sen-
tences imposed in each case are highly disparate , and if so, 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
 
In declining to compare the two cases, the lower court 
cited the fact that Mr. Simmons’s  sentence was “adjudi-
cated by a civilian jurisdiction.” Swisher, 2023 CCA LEXIS 
339, at * 26, 2023 WL 5274010, at * 9. However, the mere 
fact that the sentence in Appellant’s case was the product 
of a court-martial proceeding and the sentence in Mr. Sim-
mons’s case was the product of a civilian criminal proceed-
ing is not necessarily dispositive of the issue of whether the 
two cases are “closely related.” We have made it clear that 
civilian sentences may  serve as a basis for sentence com-
parison. Sothen, 54 M.J. at 296- 97. (Nothing “preclude[s] 
consideration of cases involving military and civilian co-ac-
tors.” Id. at 297.6) Thus, when a CCA confronts the issue of 
whether the sentence in a court-martial case is inappropri-
ate in the light of a sentence imposed in a civilian case, that 
court must conduct an initial assessment of whether the 
cases are closely related.  Therefore, because the CCA did 
not decide whether Appellant’s case and Mr. Simmons’s  
case were closely related, we conclude that the lower court 
abused its discretion because it s decision was “influenced 
by an erroneous view of the law .” Ayala, 81 M.J. at  27-28 
(citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Having determined that the CCA abused its discretion, 
we now must decide what remedy should be afforded Ap-
pellant. For the reasons stated below, we conclude that the 
correct approach is for us to remand this case to the lower 
court so that it may perform another sentence appropriate-
ness review. 
First, under similar circumstances, we remanded a case 
in the past. See United States v. Baier, 60 M.J. 382, 385 
(C.A.A.F. 2005) (remanding case for a new Article 66 
 
whether there was a rational basis for this disparity . Lacy, 50 
M.J. at 288. 
6 Nevertheless, the fact that a closely related case involved a 
civilian conviction and sentence rather than a military convic-
tion and sentence may be weighed when determining whether 
the sentences were truly disparate and/or whether there was a 
rational basis for the disparity. 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
 
sentence appropriateness review “using the correct stand-
ard”). Second, the authority to conduct a sentence appro-
priateness review lies squarely with the CCAs rather than 
with this Court. Third, both parties agree that a remand is 
the appropriate remedy. At oral argument Appellant asked 
for this Court “to remand [the case] back to the Navy -Ma-
rine Corps Court of Criminal Appeals for consideration.” 
Oral Argument at 8:29- 35, United States v. Swisher 
(C.A.A.F. Apr. 17, 2024) (No. 24-0011). Similarly, the Gov-
ernment’s brief states, “If this Court finds that the lower 
courts have no discretion to decline to determine if a civil-
ian conviction is ‘closely related,’ it should remand to the 
lower court for a new sentence appropriateness analysis.” 
Brief for Appellee a t 25 , United States v. Swisher, No. 
24˗0011 (C.A.A.F. Mar. 18, 2024) ; see also Oral Argument 
at 30:50-31:00 (stating that if this Court disagrees that the 
case should be affirmed, “the appropriate remedy would be 
to remand the case for the CCA to exercise its Article 66 
discretionary review”). In light of these points, we deem a 
remand of this case to be the proper result.
7 
IV. Conclusion 
The decision of the United States Navy -Marine Corps 
Court of Criminal Appeals  is affirmed as to findings and  
set aside as to sentence. The record is returned to the Judge 
 
7 In remanding this case, we are mindful of the fact that, as 
noted by Appellant: (a) we have held that “ cases are closely re-
lated if they fit within at least one of .  . . three categories,” and 
one of those categories  is when the individuals were “  ‘coactors 
involved in a common crime,’ ” Behunin, 83 M.J. at 162 (quoting 
Lacy, 50 M.J. at 288); and (b) in its brief before this Court, the 
Government concedes that “Appellant and Mr. Simmons [were] 
co-actors here.” Brief for Appellee at 23. However, we underscore 
that CCAs have “broad discretion” to decide whether individuals 
are coactors, Behunin, 83 M.J. at 162, that courts of appeal are 
not compelled to accede to the concessions of a party,  United 
States v. Budka, 74 M.J. 219, 220 (C.A.A.F. 2015) (summary dis-
position), and that such a determination is necessarily fact 
driven. Under these circumstances, we conclude that it is inap-
propriate for us to evaluate in the first instance the question of 
whether the two cases are closely related. 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
 
Advocate General of the Navy for remand to the lower court 
for a new sentence appropriateness review consistent with 
this opinion. 
 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting. 
I write separately because I respectfully disagree with 
the majority’s conclusion that a Court of Criminal Appeals 
(CCA) is required to conduct a formal assessment of 
whether cases are closely related when a conviction in a 
civilian court is involved.  
This Court has repeatedly recognized that the CCAs 
were granted their unusual sentence appropriateness 
powers to facilitate uniformity of sentencing within the 
unique structure of the military justice system.  
     The military justice system is highly 
decentralized. Military commanders stationed at 
diverse locations throughout the world have broad 
discretion to decide whether a case should be 
disposed of through administrative, nonjudicial, 
or court-martial channels. If the case results in a 
finding of guilty, a court-martial has discretion to 
impose any authorized punishment that is below 
the maximum for the offense. After trial, the 
commander who convened the court- martial has 
virtually unfettered discretion, as a matter of 
command prerogative, to modify the sentence in 
whole or in part, so long as the severity is not 
increased. 
     Congress, recognizing that the decentralized 
exercise of such broad discretion is likely to 
produce disparate results, has provided the 
Courts of Criminal Appeals not only with the 
highly discretionary power to determine whether 
a sentence is correct in law and fact, but also with 
the highly discretionary power to determine 
whether a sentence “should be approved.” . . .  
     Under Article 66(c), Congress has furthered 
the goal of uniformity in sentencing in a system 
that values individualized punishment by relying 
on the judges of the Courts of Criminal Appeals to  
utilize the experience distilled from years 
of practice in military law to determine 
whether, in light of the facts surrounding 
[the] accused’s delict, his sentence was 
appropriate. In short, it was hoped to 
attain relative uniformity rather than an 
arithmetically averaged sentence.  
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
2 
 
United States v. Lacy , 50 M.J. 286,  287 (C.A.A.F. 1999) 
(alteration in original) (citations omitted); see also United 
States v. Boone, 49 M.J. 187, 191-92 (C.A.A.F. 1998) (noting 
that, after World War II, when Congress decided “to 
improve the administration of justice in the Armed Forces 
of the United States ,” it recognized a need to establish 
appellate courts that “would have the high responsibility of 
ensuring uniformity and evenhandedness, values that 
could not be assured if final decision making were left at 
the local command level”); United States v. Henry, 42 M.J. 
231, 234 (C.A.A.F. 1995) (agreeing with the appellant’s 
assertion that, when Congress enacted Article 66, Uniform 
Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) , it intended to establish 
uniformity of sentencing throughout the armed forces. 
“The Board [of Review] may set aside, on the basis of the 
record, any part of a sentence either because it is illegal or 
because it is inappropriate. It is contemplated that thi s 
power will be exercised to establish uniformity of sentences 
throughout the armed forces.” (alteration in original) 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 
491 (1949)); United States v. Olinger, 12 M.J. 458, 460 
(C.M.A. 1982) (recognizing that , in enacting the UCMJ , 
“Congress gave the Boards of Review the power to ‘set 
aside, on the basis of the record, any part of a sentence, 
either because it is illegal or because it is inappropriate, ’ ” 
and that this power was granted in order to establish 
uniformity of sentences (citation omitted)). 
This Court has also emphasized that sentence 
appropriateness review at the appellate level is unique to 
the military justice system. There simply is no civilian 
analog. “Article 66(c) of the UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  866, 
provides the Courts of Criminal Appeals with broad 
discretion to determine whether a sentence ‘should be 
approved,’ a power that has no direct parallel in the federal 
civilian sector.” United States v. Sothen , 54 M.J. 294, 296 
(C.A.A.F. 2001). “The power to determine whether a 
sentence should be approved has no direct parallel in the 
federal civilian sector, which relies on sentencing 
guidelines.” Lacy, 50 M.J. at 287-88. The overarching goal 
was to ensure that military members were treated 
similarly t o one another, not similarly to their civilian 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
3 
 
counterparts. As recognized by the Supreme Court in 
Parker v. Levy , “[t]he differences . . . first between the 
military community and the civilian community, and 
second between military law and civilian law, continue in 
the present day under the Uniform Code of Military 
Justice. That Code cannot be equated to a civilian criminal 
code.” 417 U.S. 733, 749 (1974). 
Up to now , there has been no requirement that CCAs 
compare military and civilian sentences and, given the 
overarching purpose of the sentence appropriateness 
review power, I see no reason to impose such a requirement 
now.  
In general, “neither Article 66[(d)(1)] nor our precedents 
requires [the CCAs] to engage in a sentence comparison 
with specific cases.” United States v. Behunin, 83 M.J. 158, 
161-62 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (alterations in original) (internal 
quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States v. Noble, 
50 M.J. 293, 294 (C.A.A.F. 1999)). The lower courts are only 
required to conduct a sentence comparison between specific 
cases “in those rare instances in which sentence 
appropriateness can be fairly determined only by reference 
to disparate sentences adjudged in closely related cases.” 
Lacy, 50 M.J. at 288 (internal quotation marks omitted) 
(quoting United States v. Ballard, 20 M.J. 282, 283 (C.M.A. 
1985)). Mr. Simmons was tried and convicted within the 
civilian court system of the state of South Carolina. 
Nothing in our case law or Article 66, UCMJ , at all 
suggests that the lower courts need to ensure that there is 
uniformity in sentencing between the military and that 
state, or any state. The two systems and societies ar e too 
different to directly compare. Civilian prosecutors pursue 
different interests than military commanders. A civilian 
prosecutor may choose to dispose of a case for any number 
of reasons, not the least of which might be mere efficiency. 
Most notably, there is no parallel in the civilian courts to 
the commander’s need to preserve good order and 
discipline.  
In Sothen, this Court determined that Article 66, 
UCMJ, “does not preclude consideration of cases involving 
military and civilian co -actors.” 54 M.J. at 297. However, 
not precluding, or preventing, review is not the same thing 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
4 
 
as requiring it. Sothen does not establish that a CCA must 
conduct a comparison between military and civilian cases 
when undertaking a sentence appropriateness review, 
even if they involve the same crime. Our existing law is 
clear. The lower courts may compare the sentences of 
civilian and military defendants if they choose to, but they 
are not required to do so.  
In addition, I question the premise that the lower courts 
are obligated to compare military to civilian sentences 
simply because the defendants were coactors. Lacy  offers 
three examples of potentially closely related cases, “ e.g., 
coactors involved in a common crime, servicemembers 
involved in a common or parallel scheme, or some other 
direct nexus between the servicemembers whose sentences 
are sought to be compared.” 50 M.J. at 288. However, the 
language used in the opinion indi cates these were not 
meant a s strict categories but rather circumstances that 
could result in closely related cases. The abbreviation “e.g.” 
means “for example.” Merriam -Webster Dictionary, 
https://www.meriam-webster.com/dictionary/e.g. (last 
visited July 2 , 2024 ). The phrasing used in the third 
example also suggests the list only contemplated situations 
in which both cases involved servicemembers—“some other 
direct nexus between servicemembers” —and not a 
comparison with civilian defendants ; see also Behunin, 83 
M.J. at 162 (interpreting the first example in Lacy  as 
requiring that “the servicemembers were coactors involved 
in a common crime” (emphasis added)  (citation omitted) 
(internal quotation marks omitted)). 
Sentence appropriateness review is a power exclusive to 
the CCAs and this Court should not intervene unless 
absolutely necessary. Hence the high standard of review, 
limiting this Court to preventing “obvious miscarriages o f 
justice or abuses of discretion.” Lacy , 50 M.J. at 288 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United States 
v. Dukes, 5 M.J. 71, 73 (C.M.A. 1978)). In addition, in Lacy, 
this Court explicitly stated that “we have not required the 
courts below to articulate their reasons” for 
determinations, including whether cases are comparable, 
“and do not do so today.” Id. Here, the lower court was not 
completely silent as to why it chose not to conduct a formal 
United States v. Swisher, No. 24-0011/MC 
Judge SPARKS, dissenting 
5 
 
sentence appropriateness review. It noted that Mr. 
Simmons’s “sentence was for different crimes and was 
adjudicated by a civilian jurisdiction.” United States v. 
Swisher, No. NMCCA 202100311, 2023 CCA LEXIS 339, at 
*26, 2023 WL 5274010, at *9 (N-M. Ct. Crim. App. Aug. 16, 
2023) (en banc) (unpublished). The CCA’s informal 
recognition of these key distinguishing factors was not an 
obvious miscarriage of justice or abuse of discretion. 
Neither our case law nor the original intent behind 
sentence approp riateness review require any sentence 
comparison when a civilian defendant is involved. Given 
the historical foundations of the lower courts’ sentence 
appropriateness powers, I am hard pressed to understand 
how requiring them to engage in a formal , closely related 
analysis in this context furthers the goal of 
evenhandedness and sentence consistency within the 
military justice system. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.  