This opinion is subject to revision before publication. 
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS 
FOR THE ARMED FORCES 
_______________ 
UNI
TED STATES 
Appellee 
v. 
M
ark J. GRIJALVA, Machinery Technician 
Third Class 
United States Coast Guard, Appellant 
No
. 23-0215 
Crim. App. No. 1482 
A
rgued February 6, 2024—Decided June 26, 2024 
Mi
litary Judges: Paul R. Casey and Diane M. Croff 
F
or Appellant:  Lieutenant Schuyler B. Millham  
(argued).  
F
or Appellee: Lieutenant Elizabeth Ulan  (argued); 
John Nolan, Esq. (on brief). 
J
udge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court, in 
which Judge SPARKS and Judge JOHNSON joined. 
Judge HARDY filed a separate opinion concurring in 
the judgment. Chief Judge OHLSON filed a dissent-
ing opinion.  
_______________ 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
2 
Judge MAGGS delivered the opinion of the Court. 
The “preemption doctrine” generally prohibits using Ar-
ticles 133 and  134, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. §§  933-934 (2018), to charge conduct 
covered by Articles 80 through 132, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. 
§§ 880-932 (2018). See United States v. Avery, 79 M.J. 363, 
366 (C.A.A.F. 2020) ; Manual for Courts -Martial, United 
States pt. IV, para. 91.c.(5)(a) (2019 ed.) (MCM). Appellant 
asserts that this doctrine requires us to dismiss a specifi-
cation alleging that  he violated Article 134, UCMJ , by 
broadcasting intimate visual images of a civilian without 
her consent . He argues that preemption applies  because 
Article 117a, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  917a (2018), covers  the 
same conduct. For reasons explained below, we agree with 
Appellant. 
I. Background 
B.C., a civilian, stored various personal photographs in 
her account with Snapchat, a social media platform . In 
February 2019, Appellant gained access to this account by 
guessing B.C.’s password. Appellant discovered nude  im-
ages of B.C. stored in the account. Appellant electronically 
shared some of these nude images with other people in ex-
change for money. O ne recipient of the images was  a ser-
vicemember.  
Several charges against Appellant were subsequently 
referred to a general court-martial. At issue in this appeal 
is Specification 2 of Charge III (hereinafter referred to as 
Specification 2), which alleged that Appellant had violated 
Article 134, UCMJ, by:  
knowingly, wrongfully, and without the explicit 
consent of B.C. broadcast[ing]  an intimate visual 
image of B.C., who is identifiable from the visual 
image or from information displayed in connection 
with the visual image, when he knew or reasona-
bly should have known that the visual image was 
made under circumstances in which B.C. retained 
a reasonable expectation of privacy regarding any 
broadcast and when he knew or reasonably should 
have known that the broadcast of the visual image 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
3 
was likely to cause ha rm, harassment, or emo-
tional distress for B.C., or to harm substantially 
B.C. with respect to her safety, business, calling, 
career, reputation, or personal relationships, an 
act which is of a nature to bring discredit upon the 
armed forces. 
Appellant moved during trial to have this specification 
dismissed under the preemption doctrine, arguing that Ar-
ticle 117a, UCMJ, covered the offense of broadcasting inti-
mate images  without the consent of the person depicted  
and that the same conduct therefore could not be  charged 
under Article 134, UCMJ . The military judge denied the 
motion in a written ruling. A general court-martial consist-
ing of officer and enlisted members subsequently found Ap-
pellant guilty of Specification 2, among other offenses. The 
military judge sentenced Appellant to three months of con-
finement, reduction to the pay grade of E-3, and a bad-con-
duct discharge. The United States Coast Guard Court of 
Criminal Appeals affirmed  the findings but reduced the 
sentence because of unreasonable post -trial delay. United 
States v. Grijalva, 83 M.J. 669, 677 (C.G. Ct. Crim. App. 
2023). We granted review of the question “ [w]hether the 
unenumerated Article 134, UCMJ, offense charged in Spec-
ification 2 of C harge III is preempted by A rticle 117a, 
UCMJ, which C ongress enacted to address the wrongful 
broadcast or distribution of intimate visual images. ” 
United States v. Grijalva, 84 M.J. 103 (C.A.A.F. 2023) (or-
der granting review). 
II. Standard of Review 
Whether Articles 80 through 132, UCMJ, preempt a 
specification alleging a violation of Article 134, UCMJ, is a 
question of law that this Court reviews de novo.  Avery, 79 
M.J. at 366 (citing United States v. Wheeler, 77 M.J. 289, 
291 (C.A.A.F. 2018)). 
III. Discussion 
To answer the granted question, we must apply prece-
dent concerning both the preemption doctrine and the First 
Amendment’s guarantee of the freedom of  speech. We 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
4 
briefly summarize the applicable principles before turning 
to our analysis.  
A. Article 134, UCMJ, and the Preemption Doctrine 
Specification 2 alleges an offense under the second 
clause of Article 134, UCMJ, which provides: 
     Though not specifically mentioned in this chap-
ter, . . . all conduct of a nature to bring discredit 
upon the armed forces  . . . shall be taken cogni-
zance of by a general, special, or summary court-
martial, according to the nature and degree of the 
offense, and shall be punished at the discretion of 
that court. 
(Emphasis added.) This general language covers a broad 
range of conduct that, in the words of the President, might 
“injure the reputation of ” the armed forces. MCM pt. IV, 
para. 91.c.(3). The President has sought to identify some of 
this conduct by enumerating various offenses that might 
be charged under Article 134, UCMJ. See MCM pt. IV, pa-
ras. 92- 108 (enumerating offenses ranging from “ animal 
abuse” to “straggling”). Other conduct, although not enu-
merated, may also be charged as a violat ion of the second 
clause of Article 134 , UCMJ. See MCM pt. IV, para. 
91.c.(6)(a). 
The scope of Article 134, UCMJ, however, is not unlim-
ited. The initial phrase of the article expressly restricts its 
reach only to conduct  “not specifically mentioned in this 
chapter.” This Court has interpreted this phrase as prohib-
iting the charging of conduct as an offense under Article 
134, UCMJ, if Congress has already codified the conduct as 
an offense  in Articles 80 through 132 , UCMJ . Avery, 79 
M.J. at 366. For example, i n United States v. Norris, 2 
C.M.A. 236, 23 7, 8 C.M.R. 36, 37  (1953), the government 
charged the accused with larceny in violation of Article 
121, UCMJ, 50 U.S.C. § 715 (1952). The accused attempted 
to plead guilty to a lesser offense  of “wrongful taking” un-
der Article 134, UCMJ, that had almost the same elements 
as “wrongful appropriation” under Article 121, UCMJ, but 
differed in that it did not require  proof of a specific intent 
to deprive the rightful owner of the property. Id. at 238, 8 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
5 
C.M.R. at 38. The law officer advised the court-martial that 
it could not find the accused guilty of an offense other than 
larceny or wrongful appropriation under Article 121, 
UCMJ. Id., 8 C.M.R. at 38. This Court held that the law 
officer’s advice was correct, explaining: 
Congress has, in Article 121, covered the entire 
field of criminal conversion for military law [by de-
fining the offenses of larceny and wrongful appro-
priation]. We are not disposed to add a third con-
version offense to those specifically defined. It 
follows that there is no offense known as “wrong-
ful taking” requiring no element of specific intent, 
embraced by Article 134 of the [UCMJ]. 
Id. at 239-40, 8 C.M.R. at 39-40. 
This Court determines whether a particular article has 
“covered the entire field,” and thus preempts charging sim-
ilar conduct under Article 134, UCMJ, by considering two 
questions: “The primary question is whether Congress in-
tended to limit prosecution for wrongful conduct within a 
particular area or field to offenses defined in specific arti-
cles of the Code; the secondary question is whether the of-
fense charged is composed of a residuum of elements of a 
specific offense.” United States v. Wright, 5 M.J. 106, 110-
11 (C.M.A. 1978).  This Court has  held that the intent of 
Congress may be discerned “through direct legislative lan-
guage or express legislative history.” United States v. An-
derson, 68 M.J. 378, 387 (C.A.A.F. 2010). 
B. Article 134, UCMJ, and the First Amendment 
The act of distributing nonobscene visual images is a 
form of speech. New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747, 764- 65 
(1982). We thus must consider the relationship between 
the First Amendment’s protection of speech  and the con-
duct alleged in Specification 2. This is a complicated issue 
because t he United States  Supreme Court has stated: 
“While the members of the military are not excluded from 
the protection granted by the First Amendment, the differ-
ent character of the military community and of the military 
mission requires a different application of those protec-
tions.” Parker v. Levy, 417 U.S. 733, 758 (1974). Consistent 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
6 
with this view, t he Supreme Court has held that the first 
clause of Article 134, UCMJ, which addresses conduct that 
is contrary to good order and discipl ine, is not void for 
vagueness and that the government can use the first clause 
of Article 134, UCMJ, to punish some speech that might 
otherwise be protected in civilian life. Id. at 755, 760-61. In 
reaching these conclusions , the Supreme Court  relied on 
holdings of this Court that had “narrowed the very broad 
reach of the literal language” of the first clause of Article 
134, UCMJ, such that it only applies “to conduct that is 
‘directly and palpably —as distinguished from indirectly 
and remotely—prejudicial to good order and disciplin e.’ ” 
Id. at 753-54 (quoting United States v. Sadinsky, 14 C.M.A. 
563, 565, 34 C.M.R. 343, 345 (1964)).  
In United States v. Wilcox, 66 M.J. 442, 443-44, 446-47 
(C.A.A.F. 2008), this Court applied the principles of Parker 
in considering the application of the First Amendment to a 
specification alleging that a servicemember’s speech in a 
civilian context was service discrediting and therefore vio-
lated the second clause of Article 134, UCMJ. T his Court 
held that if the g overnment attempts to use the second 
clause of Article 134, UCMJ, to punish “speech that would 
be impervious to criminal sanction in the civilian  world,” 
the government must prove “a direct and palpable connec-
tion between [the] speech and the military mission or mili-
tary environment.” Id. at 447-48. The Court explained that 
this requirement exists to strike “the proper b al-
ance . . . between the essential needs of the armed services 
and the right to speak out as a free American .” Id. at 447 
(citation omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
C. Analysis of Specification 2 in this Case 
Appellant contends that the preemption doctrine 
requires this Court to dismiss Specification  2 because 
Congress has addressed the conduct at issue  in Article 
117a(a), UCMJ . To assess this argument, we must first 
compare the elements of Article 117a(a) , UCMJ,  to the 
language of Specification 2. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
7 
Article 117a(a), UCMJ, is a long and complicated provi-
sion that states in relevant part: 
Any person subject to this chapter— 
(1) w
ho knowingly and wrongfully broad-
casts . . . an intimate visual image of another
person . . . who—
(A) i
s at least 18 years of age . . . ;
(B) is identifiable from the intimate visual
image . . . ; and
(C) does not explicitly consent . . . ;
(2) w
ho knows or reasonably should have
known that . . . the person depicted . . . re-
tained a reasonable expectation of pr i-
vacy . . . ;
(3) w
ho knows or reasonably should have
known that the broadcast . . . is likely—
(A) t
o cause harm . . . ; or
(B) to
 harm substantially the depicted per-
son with respect to that person’s health,
safety, business, calling, career, financial
condition, reputation, or personal relation-
ships; and
(4)
w
hose conduct . . . had a reasonably direct
and palpable connection to a military mission
or military environment,
is guilty of wrongful distribution of intimate vis-
ual images. 
Specification 2 alleges a violation of the second clause 
of Article 134 , UCMJ , but its wording , as quoted above,  
closely tracks the wording of Article 117a(a), UCMJ. Spec-
ification 2 avers that Appellant “knowingly [and] wrong-
fully . . . broadcast[ed] an intimate visual image of B.C. ”; 
that B.C. “is identifiable from the intimate visual image ”; 
that the broadcast was done “without the explicit consent 
of B.C.”; that Appellant “knew or reasonably should have 
known that the visual image was made under circum-
stances in which B.C. retained a reasonable expectation of 
privacy”; and that Appellant “knew or reasonably should 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
8 
have known that the broadcast . . . was likely to cause harm 
. . . or to harm substantially B.C. with respect to her safety, 
business, calling, career, reputation, or personal relation-
ships.” 
Despite these similarities, the requirements of Article 
117a(a), UCMJ, facially appear to differ from the require-
ments of Specification  2 in tw o ways. First, Article 
117a(a)(1)(A), UCMJ, expressly requires proof that the per-
son depicted is at least eighteen years of age, while Speci-
fication 2 does not expressly allege B.C.’s age. Second, Ar-
ticle 117a(a)(4), UCMJ, expressly requires proof of “a 
reasonably direct and palpable connection to a military 
mission or military environment,”  while Specification 2 
does not expressly allege such a connection. 
The Government argues that the se two elemental dif-
ferences, coupled with evidence of the legislative intent of 
Article 117a, UCMJ, are enough to exclude this case from 
the preemption doctrine. In support of this argument, t he 
Government cites United States v. Kick , 7 M.J. 82, 84-85, 
87 (C.M.A. 1979), a case in which this Court upheld a spec-
ification alleging negligent homicide in violation of Article 
134, UCMJ, even though the negligent homicide specifica-
tion lacked only the intent element required for either mur-
der under Article 118, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. §  918 (1976), or 
manslaughter under Article  119, UCMJ, 10 U.S. C. § 919 
(1976). Relying on this Court’s statement in Anderson, 68 
M.J. at 387, that the intent of Congress can be discerned  
through legislative history, the Government also cites var-
ious statements made by members of Congress prior to the 
enactment of Article 117a, UCMJ. The Government argues 
based on these statements that Congress never intended to 
“cover the entire field” of Appellant’s conduct with Article 
117a, UCMJ. Instead, t he Government contends that this 
legislative history reveals that Congress intended Article 
117a, UCMJ, to address only the wrongful broadcast of in-
timate photographs in situation s where a military 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
9 
connection exists, such as the distribution of intimate pho-
tographs of a servicemember to other servicemembers.1  
Upon closer inspection, w e cannot accept the Govern-
ment’s arguments because each of the two apparent differ-
ences between Article 117a(a), UCMJ,  and Specification 2 
is illusory. Consider first the express requirement in A rti-
cle 117a(a)(1)(A), UCMJ, that the victim be at least eight-
een years of age. It is true that Specification 2 does not ex-
pressly allege that B.C. is  at least eighteen years of age. 
But that is not the end of the inquiry. This Court has held 
that “the essential elements of a crime need not be ex-
pressly alleged so long as they may be found by reasonable 
construction of other language in the . . . specification.” 
United States v. Brecheen , 27 M.J. 67, 68 (C.M.A. 1988). 
Rule for Courts-Martial 307(c)(3), similarly provides that a 
specification may allege elements of a “charged offense ex-
pressly or by necessary implication.” In this case, Specifi-
cation 2 expressly alleged that Appellant distributed pho-
tographs of B.C. without her “explicit consent .” We find 
that these words, when construed in the context of the 
other words of Specification 2, implied that B.C. was a per-
son old enough either to consent or to not consent to the 
distribution of her intimate images and thus that she was 
at least eighteen years old.
2 We therefore see no material 
difference between what the Government would have had 
1 The Government, however, concedes in its brief that the 
military connection element of Article 117a (a)(4), UCMJ, could 
be met when there is a civilian victim. In addition, this Court 
recently held that the military connection element could be met 
if a servicemember received the intimate images. United States 
v. Hiser, 82 M.J. 60, 66 (C.A.A.F. 2022). In this case, as noted 
above, one servicemember actually did receive the intimate im-
ages of B.C. 
2 The use of the words “without the explicit consent of B.C.” 
in Specification 2 distinguishes it from child pornography of-
fenses under Article 134, UCMJ, which do not require a showing 
of a lack of consent and apply only when the victim is a “minor.” 
See MCM pt. IV, para s. 95.b.(3), 95.c.(4) . For purposes of child 
pornography offenses, “[m]inor” is defined as “any person under 
the age of 18 years.” MCM pt. IV, para. 95.c.(7). 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
10 
to prove under Article 117a(a)(1)(A), UCMJ , and what the 
Government alleged in Specification 2.3 
Our analysis of t he requirement under Article 
117a(a)(4), UCMJ,  that the Government must prove “a 
reasonably direct and palpable connection to a military 
mission or military environment” is similar. It is true that 
Specification 2 expressly allege s only that Appellant’s 
conduct was “service discrediting” and does not expressly 
allege that it had “a reasonably direct and palpable 
connection to a military mission or military environment.” 
But again, that cannot be the end of our inquiry . Under 
Wilcox, the Government was required to prove such a 
military connection if Specification 2 alleged conduct 
“implicating the First Amendment” in the civilian context. 
66 M.J. at 447-48.  
In some cases, the question whether the First Amend-
ment would or would not protect speech in a civilian con-
text is not complicated. In Wilcox, for example, the accused 
made statements “on issues of social and political concern” 
that even if distasteful were at “ ‘the core of what the First 
Amendment is designed to protect.’ ” Id. at 446-47 (quoting 
Virginia v. Black, 538 U.S. 343, 3 65 (2003)). But whether 
the First Amendment would allow the government to pun-
ish the conduct alleged in Specification 2 in the civilian 
world—the wrongful broadcast of intimate visual images—
is a more complex issue. 
The Supreme Court, as explained above, has held that 
the act of distributing nonobscene visual images is a form 
of protected speech. Ferber, 458 U.S. at 764-65. Even so, a 
3 In reaching this conclusion, we acknowledge that Specifica-
tion 2 would have been clearer on this point if it had expressly 
alleged that B.C. was at least eighteen years old. By way of com-
parison, Article 117a(a), UCMJ, expressly requires the govern-
ment to prove that the victim is at least eighteen years old, even 
though it also expressly requires the government to prove that 
the victim did not exp licitly consent. Our task, however, is not 
to critique the drafting of Specification 2 but instead to deter-
mine its reasonable meaning. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
11 
statute might limit such speech in a civilian context , con-
sistent with the First Amendment , if the limits were not 
overbroad, if the limits were not void for vagueness, if the 
limits passed strict scrutiny, and so forth. See, e.g., Ashcroft 
v. Free Speech Coal ition, 535 U.S. 234 ( 2002) (addressing 
these issues in the majority and concurring opinions when 
assessing the constitutionality of punishing the distribu-
tion of virtual child pornography).  In this case,  Appellant 
was not charged with violating a statute that specifically 
addressed the broadcast of intimate images. Instead, he 
was charged with violating  the broad language of the sec-
ond clause of Article 134, UCMJ. The details of his offense 
must be discerned from the words of Specification 2. These 
words, however,  are not sufficient for a complete First 
Amendment analysis. For example, Specification  2 does 
not define the term “intimate image,” making it impossible 
to decide whether the term would be overb road if it ap-
peared in a statute addressing speech in a civilian context. 
We interpret Wilcox to require the Government to prove 
a direct and palpable connection to the military mission or 
environment not only when it is clear that the First 
Amendment would protect speech in a civilian context, but 
also in cases, as here, whe re a court cannot determine 
whether the speech would be protected. Appellant’s con-
duct is, at minimum, speech “implicating the First Amend-
ment.” Wilcox, 66 M.J. at 447. Accordingly, in this case, we 
find that the Government was required to prove such a con-
nection under Article 134, UCMJ,  even though Specifica-
tion 2 did not expressly state this requirement . Thus, the 
apparent difference between Article 117a(a)(4), UCMJ, and 
the language of Specification 2 is illusory.
4 
4 Although we do not rest our decision on this point, we note 
that Congress may have intended to require the Government to 
prove a direct and palpable connection to the military mission or 
environment in Article 117a(a)(4), UCMJ, to comply with the re-
quirements of Wilcox. See Letter from Stephen E. Boyd, Assis-
tant Att’y Gen., Dep’t of Justice, to Rep. Mac Thornberry, Chair-
man, H. Comm. on the Armed Services, & Sen . John McCain, 
Chairman, S. Comm. on the Armed Services (Nov. 8, 2017) , 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
12 
For these reasons,  the elements of Article 117a(a) , 
UCMJ, and Specification 2 are essentially the same. This 
case therefore differs from precedents like Kick , upon 
which the Government relies, where at least one element 
was different. 7 M.J. at 85. In this instance, we see no need 
to delve into legislative history to ascertain anything 
further about the intent of Congress. The  preemption 
doctrine applies in this situation  because the conduct 
alleged in Specification 2 was, in the words of the  initial 
phrase of Article 134, UCMJ,  “specifically mentioned in 
this chapter.” 
Put another way, the primary question in applying the 
preemption doctrine is “whether Congress intended to limit 
prosecution for wrongful conduct within a particular area 
or field to offenses defined in specific articles of the Code.” 
Wright, 5 M.J. at 110-11. Here, we see no congressional in-
tent to allow  conduct already punishable by Article 117a , 
UCMJ, to also be punishable by Article 134 , UCMJ. The 
secondary question is “whether the offense charged is com-
posed of a residuum of elements of a specific offense and 
asserted to be a violation of . . . Article[] . . . 134.” Id. at 111. 
We answer this question in the affirmative because, as ex-
plained, the elements are implicitly the same. Accordingly, 
while the Government might have charged the conduct al-
leged in Specification 2 under Article 117a, UCMJ, the 
Government did not do so, and the Government could not 
charge the conduct under Article 134, UCMJ.
5 
https://www.justice.gov/ola/page/file/1010611/dl (recommending 
that, to avoid First Amendment concerns in accordance with  
Wilcox, a draft version of Article 117a, UCMJ, should be revised 
to limiting its application to the distribution of visual images 
with “ ‘a reasonably direct and palpable  connection’ ” to the 
“ ‘military mission or military environment’ ”). 
5 We express no opinion on whether the Government  could 
have proved “a reasonably direct and palpable connection to a 
military mission or military environment”  in this case . See 
Hiser, 82 M.J. at 66 (addressing this requirement). That issue 
was not presented to the court -martial and therefore is not be-
fore this Court. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 21-0215/CG 
Opinion of the Court 
13 
IV. Conclusion 
The granted issue is answer ed in the affirmative. The 
decision of the United States Coast Guard Court of Crimi-
nal Appeals is set aside as to Specification 2 of Charge III. 
Specification 2 of Charge I II is dismissed.  The decision is 
affirmed as to the remaining findings. The record of trial is 
returned to the Judge Advocate General of the Coast Guard 
for remand to the  United States  Coast Guard Court of 
Criminal Appeals either to reassess the sentence based on 
the affirmed findings or to order a sentence rehearing. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment. 
In the military justice system, the preemption doctrine 
exists to prevent the government from eas ing its 
evidentiary burden at trial by eliminating vital elements 
from congressionally established, enumerated offenses and 
charging the remaining elements as a novel offense under 
Article 134, Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ), 10 
U.S.C. § 934 (2018). United States v. Avery , 79 M.J. 363, 
366 (C.A.A.F. 2020) . Because preemption is a question of 
statutory interpretation, when asking whether an 
Article 134 offense is preempted, our precedent directs us 
to determine whether the charged offense is “ composed of 
a residuum of elements” from an enumerated a rticle. Id. 
(internal quotation marks omitted) (citation omitted). This 
makes sense because it is well established that comparing 
elements is the sole method for determining whether 
offenses charged under two statutes should be considered 
the same offense.  United States v. Dixon , 509 U.S. 688, 
703-04 (1993). 
Although comparing the elements in this manner would 
seem to be sufficient for finding preemption, our case law 
places an additional restriction on the scope of the preemp-
tion doctrine. Under our precedent, an enumerated article 
will only preempt a n Article 134 offense if “Congress in-
tended to limit prosecution for . . . a particular area of mis-
conduct to offenses defined in [those] specific articles of the 
Code.” Avery, 79 M.J. at 366 (alterations in original) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted) (citations omitted). To satisfy 
this requirement, our precedent states that Congress must 
“indicate through direct legislative language or express leg-
islative history that particular actions or facts are limited 
to the express language of an enumerated article, and may 
not be charged under Article 134, UCMJ.” United States v. 
Anderson, 68 M.J. 378, 387 (C.A.A.F. 2010). 
As the Government conceded at oral argument,  the 
prosecution in this case took an enumerated UCMJ offense, 
dropped an element that the Government doubted it could 
prove beyond a reasonable doubt, and charged the remain-
ing elements as a novel offense under Article 134, UCMJ. 
Oral Argument at 2 5:20-26:05, United States v. Grijalva  
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
2 
(C.A.A.F. Feb. 06, 2024) (No. 23 -0215). Exploiting Arti-
cle 134, UCMJ, in this way  is contrary to t he plain lan-
guage of the a rticle, prohibited by the President in the 
Manual for Courts- Martial, and inconsistent with Su-
preme Court precedent. Nevertheless, this Court has long 
ignored those limitations and imposed a congressional -in-
tent requirement that—as Chief Judge Ohlson correctly 
points out in his dissent—authorized the Government to do 
exactly what it attempted to do in this case. 
I agree with the majority that Appellant’s Article  134 
offense was preempted, but I take a different approach to 
reach that conclusion. The congressional-intent prong of 
this Court’s preemption doctrine is entirely judge-made 
law with no basis in the Constitution, the UCMJ , or the 
Manual for Courts-Martial. It demands an analysis of leg-
islative history—a disfavored and unreliable form of statu-
tory interpretation. When our predecessor court articu-
lated the doctrine, it offered no legal or practical 
justification for it and did not suggest that it was based on 
any military necessity. For these reasons, I would discard 
the congressional-intent prong of this Court’s preemption 
doctrine and decide preemption cases solely on whether the 
charged Article 134 offense is composed of a residuum of 
elements from an enumerated UCMJ offense. 
I. Foundations of the Modern 
Preemption Doctrine 
In the military justice system, the preemption doctrine 
reflects the view that it is improper for the g overnment to 
use Article 134, UCMJ, to charge servicemembers with 
lesser versions of the enumerated UCMJ offenses. Con-
gress codified this view —which  long predates the estab-
lishment of the modern military justice system—in  the text 
of Article 134, UCMJ, and the President reinforced the doc-
trine in the Manual for Courts- Martial. This Court’s pre-
decessor first recognized the preemption doctrine in United 
States v. Norris, stating: “We cannot grant to the services 
unlimited authority to eliminate vital elements from . . . of-
fenses expressly defined by Congress and permit the re-
maining elements to be punished as an offense under Arti-
cle 134.” 2 C.M.A. 236, 239, 8 C.M.R. 36, 39 (1953).  
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
3 
A. Article 134, UCMJ 
Despite its otherwise broad scope, Article 134, UCMJ, 
expressly limits its own application to offenses “not specif-
ically mentioned in this chapter .” This restriction is not 
new. As Colonel William Winthrop explained over a cen-
tury ago in reference to the analogous language in the Gen-
eral Article’s direct predecessor in the Articles of War: “The 
construction of these words has uniformly been that they 
are words of limitation, restricting the application of the 
Article to offences not named or i ncluded in the Articles 
preceding; the policy of the provision being,  . . . to provide 
a general remedy for wrongs not elsewhere provided for. ” 
William Winthrop, Military Law and Precedents 725 (2d 
ed., Government Printing Office 1920) (1895) (internal quo-
tation marks omitted) (citation omitted). Winthrop further 
explained that the limitation “embraces not only offen ces 
wholly distinct from and outside of” the other enumerated 
articles, but also “acts which, while of the same general na-
ture as those included in certain specific Articles, are want-
ing in  some single characteristic which distinguishes the 
latter.” Id. (emphasis added). 
It has thus been long understood that the plain lan-
guage of the General Article should prevent the Govern-
ment from doing exactly what it did here: dropping an ele-
ment from an enumerated UCMJ offense and charging the 
resulting lesser offense under Article 134, UCMJ. Notably, 
Article 134, UCMJ, makes no reference to congressional in-
tent, clear statements, or legislative history . It simply ex-
cludes all conduct “specifically mentioned” in the other pro-
visions of the UCMJ.  
B. Manual for Courts-Martial 
Echoing the statutory text of the General Article , the 
President has explained that “Article 134 makes punisha-
ble acts in three categor ies of offenses not specifically cov-
ered in any other article of the UCMJ . . . . If any conduct of 
this nature is specifically made punishable by another ar-
ticle of the UCMJ, it must be charged as a violation of that 
article.” Manual for Courts -Martial, United States pt. IV, 
para. 91.c.( 1) (2019 ed.) ( Manual or MCM) (emphasis 
added). T he President has thus reaffirmed exactly what 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
4 
Winthrop explained so long ago:  that “[t]he preemption 
doctrine prohibits application of Article 134 to conduct cov-
ered by Articles 80 through 132.” MCM pt. IV, para.  
91.c.(5)(a). 
Consistent with the plain language of Article  134, 
UCMJ, the President’s explanation of the preemption doc-
trine in the Manual  also makes no mention of c ongres-
sional intent. The President’s legally binding orders to the 
field do not limit the application of the preemption doctrine 
to only those instances where Congress has expressed—ei-
ther through direct legislative language or express legisla-
tive history—an intention that  an enumerated article cover 
a class of offenses in a complete way . To the contrary, the 
President has ordered that any conduct made punishable 
by another article of the UCMJ “must be charged as a vio-
lation of that article.” MCM pt. IV, para. 91.c.(1). 
C. United States v. Norris 
This Court’s preemption-doctrine precedent originates 
with our predecessor court’s ruling in Norris, 2 C.M.A. 236, 
8 C.M.R. 36. There, the recently established court con-
cluded that the government could not charge a service-
member with “wrongful taking” under Article 134, UCMJ 
(unlawfully taking with an intent to temporarily  deprive), 
when Congress had criminalized larceny under Article 121, 
UCMJ, 50 U.S.C. § 715 (1952) (unlawfully taking with an 
intent to permanently  deprive). 2 C.M.A. at 239 -40, 8 
C.M.R. at 39-40. Citing Winthrop  for the proposition that 
the General Article should generally be limited to those 
crimes not specifically delineated by the punitive articles, 
the court held that  the government lacks the authority to 
eliminate vital elements from the enumerated UCMJ of-
fenses and charge the remaining elements as an Article 
134 offense. 2 C.M.A at 239, 8 C.M.R. at 39. 
Cases immediately following Norris cited the case for 
the proposition that conduct that amounts to an offense 
punishable under other articles of the UCMJ should not be 
punishable under Article  134, UCMJ. See, e.g. , United 
States v. Johnson, 3 C.M.A. 174, 178, 11 C.M.R. 174, 178, 
(1953) (holding that “all specific instances ‘in which any 
member of the armed forces is through his own fault not at 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
5 
the place where he is required to be at a prescribed time’ 
are punishable under the provisions of Articles 85, 86, or 
87”); United States v. Rios, 4 C.M.A.  203, 206-07, 15 C.M.R. 
203, 206-07 (1954) (rejecting the g overnment’s contention 
that it could charge larceny from the person as a “specially-
tailored” offense under Article 134, UCMJ, rather than an 
instance of robbery under Article 122, UCMJ , 50 U.S.C. 
§ 716 (1952)); United States v. Hallett , 4 C.M.A. 378, 382,
15 C.M.R. 378, 382 (1954) (holding that offenses which are
“assimilable to misbehavior before the enemy” must be
prosecuted under Article 99, UCMJ , 50 U.S.C. § 693
(1952)). Consistent with the court’s holding in Norris, these
cases found preemption by relying not on  legislative his-
tory, but on the statutory text of the enumerated articles.
II
. Introduction of the Congressional-
Intent Requirement 
Despite the solid statutory and regulatory foundation 
undergirding the Norris court’s view of the preemption doc-
trine, our predecessor court soon began distorting Norris’s 
straightforward holding by adding a vague congressional - 
intent requirement. For example, in United States v. Tout-
ges, our predecessor concluded that the appellant’s convic-
tion for assaulting a superior officer not in the execution of 
his office under Article 134, UCMJ, was not preempted by 
the enactment of Article 90, UCMJ, 10 U.S.C. § 890 (Supp. 
IV 1953-1957) (assaulting a superior officer in  the execu-
tion of his office). 13 C.M.A. 425, 426- 27, 32 C.M.R. 425, 
426-27 (1963). Although the case appeared to fall squarely
within the holding in Norris, the court declined to apply the
preemption rule from Norris on the basis that it could not
find any indication of c ongressional intent to preempt the
field of assault charges against commissioned officers.  13
C.M.A. at 427, 32 C.M.R. at 427.
Over time, our pre decessor court reiterated and rein-
forced this new congressional-intent requirement. As it 
stated nearly a decade later in United States v. Maze: 
[U]nder Norris, more must be shown than that the
offense alleged under Article 134 includes all but
one element of an offense under another article.
The additional showing needed to impose a limi-
tation on the scope of the first and second parts of
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
6 
Article 134 is a legislative intent to cover a class 
of offenses in a complete way. 
21 C.M.A. 260, 262- 63, 45 C.M.R. 34, 36 -37 (1972), over-
ruled on other grounds by United States v. Fosler, 70 M.J. 
225 (C.A.A.F. 2011). And in United States v. Bonavita, the 
court unequivocally stated: “The preemption doctrine is op-
erative only where Congress intends to limit specific mis-
conduct to a specific statute. ” 21 C.M.A. 407, 408, 45 
C.M.R. 181, 182  (1972). In these later preemption cases, 
the court never offered any explanation or justification for 
the limitation, and instead implied that it was always part 
of the original ruling in Norris. Given that neither the text 
of Article 134, UCMJ, nor the President’s description of the 
preemption doctrine in the Manual supports the inclusion 
of a congressional- intent requirement, it is not clear why 
our predecessor reinterpreted Norris in this manner.  
Our predecessor court’s decisions are even more baffling 
when one considers the Supreme Court’s contemporaneous 
treatment of c ongressional intent  in similar situations . 
Contrary to our predecessor court, the Supreme Court —
when choosing between two alternative interpretations of 
a criminal statute —requires a clear indication of 
congressional intent to select the harsher  interpretation. 
For instance, in United States v. Universal C.I.T. Credit 
Corp., the Supreme Court held that when the “allowable 
unit of prosecution” for a criminal offense is in dispute, “it 
is appropriate, before we choose the harsher alternative, to 
require that Congress should have spoken in language that 
is clear and definite.” 344 U.S. 218, 221- 22 (1952)  
(emphasis added). Similarly, in  Whalen v. United States, 
the Supreme Court held that “where two statutory 
provisions proscribe the ‘same offense,’ they are construed 
not to authorize cumulative punishments in the absence of 
a clear indication of contrary legislative intent.” 445 U.S. 
684, 692 (1980). 
Applying the same reasoning to the military justice sys-
tem’s preemption doctrine, the Supreme Court would pre-
sumably conclude that —to whatever extent congressional 
intent is relevant at all—there would need to be a clear in-
dication that Congress intended for Article 134, UCMJ, not 
to be preempted. This Court’s preemption doctrine takes 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
7 
the opposite approach, creating a presumption that, absent 
express language from Congress to the contrary,  the gov-
ernment may exploit the harsher alternative and lower its 
burden of proof by charging lesser versions of enumerated 
offenses under Article 134, UCMJ. 
III. Stare Decisis 
The congressional-intent prong of our preemption doc-
trine contradicts the plain language of Article 134, UCMJ, 
disregards the President’s explanation in the Manual, and 
is inconsistent with analogous Supreme Court precedent. 
Nevertheless, because the congressional-intent require-
ment has been part of our precedent for over sixty years, I 
must consider the stare decisis factors before discarding it. 
In my view, the stare decisis factors weigh in favor of aban-
doning the congressional-intent requirement. 
In evaluating the application of stare decisis, this Court 
considers: “ ‘whether the prior decision is unworkable or 
poorly reasoned; any intervening events; the reasonable ex-
pectations of servicemembers; and the risk of undermining 
public confidence in the law.’ ” United States v. Blanks, 77 
M.J. 239, 242 (C.A.A.F. 2018)  (quoting United States v. 
Quick, 74 M.J. 332, 336 (C.A.A.F. 2015)).  
First, for all the reasons explained above, I believe that 
the addition of the congressional-intent requirement to our 
Court’s preemption doctrine was poorly reasoned. Our pre-
decessor court never explained or justified it, and the re-
quirement contradicts the text of Article 134, UCMJ, and 
the Manual for Courts-Martial. Furthermore, the doctrine 
has proven to be unworkable. No one knows what a clear 
statement of congressional intent in favor of preemption 
would look like because the Court has never found one .
1 
Since the adoption of the congressional-intent require-
ment, I do not believe that either our predecessor court or 
1 Although the majority found the necessary congressional 
intent in this case, it did so because “the elements of Article  
117a(a), UCMJ, and Specification 2 are essentially the same.” 
United States v. Grijalva, __ M.J. __, __ (12) (C.A.A.F. 2024). The 
majority therefore “[saw] no need to delve into legislative history 
to ascertain anything further about the intent of Congress.” Id.  
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
8 
this Court has ever found preemption. Over the past sixty 
years, our preemption doctrine has functioned not as a le-
gitimate test, but as a n irrebuttable presumption that 
novel Article 134 charges are never preempted by an enu-
merated article. 
Second, there have been significant intervening events 
since our predecessor first articulated the congressional-in-
tent requirement, including the embrace  of the Supreme 
Court’s elements test from Blockburger v. United States,  
284 U.S. 299 (1932), and the evolution of the Supreme 
Court’s guidance regarding congressional intent and legis-
lative history. In 1993, the Supreme Court made clear that 
the Blockburger “same-elements” test is the sole method for 
determining whether offenses charged under two statutes 
should be considered the same offense.  Dixon, 509 U.S. at 
703-04. After Dixon, there is no basis for considering con-
gressional intent in addition to comparing elements to de-
termine if the charged Article 134 offense is composed of a 
residuum of elements of an enumerated  offense. Further-
more, the preemption doctrine’s reliance on congressional 
intent is at odds with current views on the value of legisla-
tive history as a tool of statutory interpretation . As this 
Court has explained: 
     We acknowledge the Supreme Court ’s recent 
reminders that “legislative history is not the law,” 
Azar v. Allina Health Servs., 139 S. Ct. 1804, 1814 
(2019) (internal quotation marks omitted) (cita-
tion omitted), and that using legislative history to 
determine legislative intent is “a relic from a by-
gone era of statutory construction.” Food Mktg. 
Inst. v. Argus Leader Media, 139 S. Ct. 2356, 2364 
(2019) (internal quotation marks omitted) (cita-
tion omitted). 
Avery, 79 M.J. at 368 n.8. Both legal developments call the 
continued validity of our congressional-intent requirement 
into question. 
Third, there are no reliance issues. Abandoning the con-
gressional-intent requirement offers servicemembers pro-
tection from government overreach. In addition, dispensing 
with the requirement will make the law more knowable. As 
currently articulated, our preemption doctrine requires a 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
9 
servicemember to comb through legislative history —a dif-
ficult and indeterminate task for lawyers and an impossi-
ble one for the average nonlawyer servicemember —to de-
termine whether a novel Article 134 offense is preempted. 
Abandoning the congressional- intent requirement would 
allow servicemembers to rely on the statutory text and the 
guidance in the Manual  to know that they cannot be 
charged with lesser versions of the enumerated offenses 
under Article 134, UCMJ. 
Finally, the Government’s charging decision in this 
case—dropping an unprovable  element and charging the 
lesser offense as a novel Article 134 offense—reeks of pros-
ecutorial overreach and would likely strike the public as 
fundamentally unfair. The unique grounds on which the 
majority found preemption in this case are unlikely to oc-
cur again in future cases. Strengthening the Court’s 
preemption doctrine to prevent this practice would not risk 
undermining the public’s confidence in the law. 
IV. Conclusion 
It bears repeating what happened in this case. 
Appellant engaged in exactly the type  of conduct—
broadcasting intimate visual images of another without 
that person’s consent—that Congress made criminal  under 
Article 117a, UCMJ. But Congress only criminalized that 
conduct if it “ had a reasonably direct and palpable 
connection to a military mission or military environment.” 
Article 117a(a)(4), UCMJ. Fearing it could not prove that 
element, the Government dropped the direct-and-palpable-
connection element and charged the remaining elements as 
a novel Article 134 offense to ease its evidentiary burden at 
trial—exactly what the preemption doctrine is intended to 
prevent. Nevertheless, because this Court has repeatedly 
refused to find preemption absent a clear showing of 
congressional intent, the Government, the military judge, 
the convening authority, and the Coast Guard Court of  
Criminal Appeals all beli eved that this charging scheme 
was permissible. 
This case should demonstrate the folly of our preemp-
tion doctrine. If our existing  doctrine does not allow us to 
find preemption here, then when would we ever find it?  I 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Judge HARDY, concurring in the judgment 
10 
would therefore abandon our congressional-intent require-
ment and simply ask whether the novel Article 134 offense 
was composed of a residuum of elements from an enumer-
ated offense —in this case Article 117a, UCMJ. Because 
there is no dispute that it was, I believe that Specification 
2 of Charge III was preempted.  
I therefore agree with the majority that the decision of 
the United States Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals 
should be set aside as to Specification 2 of Charge III, that 
Specification 2 of Charge III should be dismissed, and that 
the remaining findings should be affirmed . I also agree 
with the majority’s decision to remand the case to the 
United States Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals so 
that it may either reassess the sentence based on the af-
firmed findings or order a sentence rehearing. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting. 
Consistent with the unanimous opinion of the United 
States Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals and with 
this Court’s precedents, I conclude that Appellant’s convic-
tion under Article 134, Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ), 10 U.S.C. § 934 (2018), for broadcasting intimate 
visual images of a civilian without her consent  should be 
affirmed. The majority states that the preemption doctrine 
is applicable here because it “see[s] no congressional intent 
to allow conduct already punishable by Article 117a, 
UCMJ, [10 U.S.C. § 917a (2018)], to also be punishable by 
Article 134, UCMJ.” United States v. Grijalva, __ M.J. __, 
__ (12) (C.A.A.F. 2024). However, this statement by the ma-
jority inverts the law as established by this Court. Specifi-
cally, our long-standing precedent holds that the burden 
lies with an appellant  to produce clear evidence through 
“direct legislative language or express legislative history” 
that Congress intended for a particular enumerated article 
to occupy the field, thereby preventing the charging of cer-
tain conduct under Article 134. United States v. Anderson, 
68 M.J. 378, 387 (C.A.A.F. 2010) (emphasis added); see also 
United States v. Kick , 7 M.J. 82, 85 (C.A.A.F. 1979) (“[I]t 
must be shown that Congress intended the other punitive 
article to cover a class of offenses in a complete way.”) . 
Here, since Appellant has failed to meet this burden , the 
preemption doctrine does not apply. Because the majority 
holds to the contrary, I respectfully dissent.  
This Court has adopted a two -prong test to determine 
when the preemption doctrine applies. First, Congress 
must have indicated through “direct legislative language or 
express legislative history that particular actions or facts 
are limited to the express language of an enumerated arti-
cle” rather than being chargeable under Article 134. Ander-
son, 68 M.J. at  387. This is a difficult standard for an ap-
pellant to meet , and this Court has been “extremely 
reluctant” to conclude that Congress intended to preempt 
an offense “in the absence of a clear showing of a contrary 
intent either in the language of the[] codal provisions or 
their legislative history.” Kick, 7 M.J. at 85. Only after ad-
dressing this “primary question” will this Court reach the 
second prong and consider whether the charged offense is 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
2 
“composed of a residuum of elements of a specific offense.” 
United States v. McGuinness, 35 M.J. 149,  152 (C.M.A. 
1992) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting United 
States v. Wright, 5 M.J. 106, 110-11 (C.M.A. 1978)).  
Here, Appellant cannot point to clear evidence of “direct 
legislative language or express legislative history” indicat-
ing that Congress intended to limit the prosecution of Ap-
pellant’s misconduct to the provisions of Article 117a. In-
deed, the statutory language and the legislative history 
tend to indicate the contrary.  To begin with, the language 
of Article 117a indicates that Congress did not intend to 
“occupy the field” with this provision because the final ele-
ment is restrictive. It states that a servicemember cannot 
be prosecuted unless his conduct has a “reasonably  direct 
and palpable connection to a military mission or military 
environment.” Article 117a(a)(4), UCMJ. As a result, Arti-
cle 117a does not reach those scenarios where there is  no 
military nexus . However, Congress presumably did not 
mean to let such wrongful conduct by servicemembers go 
unpunished. Therefore, in my view, the idea that Congress 
intended to occupy the field with Article 117a is counterin-
tuitive in light of the restrictive manner in which the legis-
lation ultimately was worded.  
Moreover, the legislative history fails to support Appel-
lant’s position.
1 Sponsors of the original bill that eventu-
ally became Article 117a emphasized th at the statute was 
“designed to protect our servicemen and women” from the 
wrongful broadcast of intimate images, and the fact that 
the new legislation would provide commanders with an 
“additional” tool to combat this problem.  See 163 Cong. 
Rec. H4478, H4480 (daily ed. May 23, 2017) (statement of 
1 Consistent with our decision in United States v. Avery, I not 
only acknowledge but embrace  “the Supreme Court’s recent 
reminders that ‘legislative history is not the law,’ ” 79 M.J. 363, 
368 n.8 (C.A.A.F. 2020) (citation omitted), “and that using 
legislative history to determine legislative intent is ‘a relic from 
a bygone era of statutory construction. ’ ” Id. (citation omitted). 
The only reason I address legislative history in the instant case 
is because our precedent requires it. 
United States v. Grijalva, No. 23-0215/CG 
Chief Judge OHLSON, dissenting 
3 
Rep. Martha McSally) (emphasis added); see also 163 Cong. 
Rec. H3053-54 (daily ed. May 2, 2017) (statement s of Rep. 
Martha McSally, Rep. Jackie Speier, and Rep. Sheila Jack-
son Lee). Appellant’s efforts to point to other passages in 
the legislative history that are more supportive of his own 
position are unavailing because that language does not rise 
to the level of “clear” evidence. Therefore, since Appellant 
has failed to demonstrate that Congress intended for Arti-
cle 117a to “occupy the field” for the nonconsensual broad-
casting of consensual intimate images, I conclude that the 
preemption doctrine does not apply and Appellant’s convic-
tion under Article 134 should be upheld.
2     
Because, contrary to the majority, I would answer the 
granted issue in the negative and affirm the decision of the 
United States Coast Guard Court of Criminal Appeals , I 
respectfully dissent. 
2 In light of this determination, it is not necessary to examine 
the second prong of the test to determine whether the Article 134 
specification was  “composed of a residuum of elements ” con-
tained in Article 117a.  McGuinness, 35 M.J. at 152 (citation 
omitted) (internal quotation marks omitted).  