ClinicalTrials.gov record NCT04033003
Record version 11, submitted 2024-05-12

Brief title: Group Antenatal Care and Delivery Project
Official title: Group Antenatal Care to Promote a Healthy Pregnancy and Optimize Maternal and Newborn Outcomes: A Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial
Lead sponsor: University of Michigan

Status and dates
  Overall status: COMPLETED
  Study start: 2019-07-29 (ACTUAL)
  Primary completion: 2022-08-18 (ACTUAL)
  Study completion: 2023-06-26 (ACTUAL)

Design
  Study type: INTERVENTIONAL
  Phase: NA
  allocation: RANDOMIZED
  interventionModel: SINGLE_GROUP
  primaryPurpose: TREATMENT
  maskingInfo:
    masking: NONE
  Enrollment: 1761 (ACTUAL)

Brief summary
  Antenatal care (ANC) has the potential to play a pivotal role in ensuring positive pregnancy outcomes for both mothers and their newborns. A critical component of all ANC is teaching women to recognize the major complications that account for the majority of preventable maternal and newborn deaths. Antenatal care provides an opportunity to promote a healthy lifestyle, to integrate positive health behaviors, and to develop a trusting relationship with a provider and the health system. While group ANC has been delivered and studied in high-resource settings for over a decade, it has only recently been introduced as an alternative to individual care in sub-Saharan Africa.
  
  The goal of this research is to improve health literacy and reduce preventable maternal and newborn morbidities and mortality within highly vulnerable, low and non-literate populations that assume a disproportionate burden of poor pregnancy outcomes globally. This research examines a bold, new approach to ANC that takes provision of care out of clinic exam rooms into small groups of women grouped by gestational age in low resource settings with low and non-literate populations. Group ANC has the potential to shift the current clinical practice paradigm of antenatal care for highly vulnerable women to improve maternal and newborn outcomes both globally and domestically.
  
  The investigators hypothesize that pregnant women randomized into group ANC will exhibit increased health literacy through: 1) increased birth preparedness and complication readiness (BPCR), including recognition of danger signs and knowledge of how to respond to such signs; 2) higher rates of care-seeking behaviors, including seeking care for problems identified during pregnancy, higher facility delivery rates, and increased attendance at postnatal and postpartum care; and 3) better clinical outcomes for themselves and their newborns than women who received the routine, individual ANC.

Detailed description
  We are at a critical time to examine new, innovative strategies to promote healthy pregnancy and optimize maternal and newborn outcomes. Generating successful strategies will require careful examination of existing service delivery models, challenging the current structure of care provision. One aspect of care, recently identified by the World Health Organization, which merits further research, is group antenatal care (ANC).
  
  Since ANC is widely available and attended by the majority of pregnant women in Ghana without the expected impact on birth outcomes, it is vital to examine the way antenatal health messages are delivered. Pregnant women must receive health information that is accurate and easy to understand for them to make informed choices to improve their health and the health of their baby. A critical component of all ANC is teaching women to recognize the major complications that account for the majority of preventable maternal and newborn deaths. Antenatal care provides an opportunity to promote a healthy lifestyle, to integrate positive health behaviors, and to develop a trusting relationship with a provider and the health system. Interactions during ANC provide the opportunity to identify and treat numerous problems, as well as providing a setting to improve women's health literacy. Patients must receive health messages in a manner that allows them to process and evaluate the information and ultimately use it to impact their own health.
  
  The effectiveness of ANC depends on the multidimensional concept of health literacy. Initially considered only as a patient's ability to read and understand written information, it is now more broadly defined as a person's ability to acquire or access information, understand it, and use the information in ways that promote and maintain good health. Despite a burgeoning emphasis on health literacy in high resource countries, there are a dearth of studies examining interventions to improve health literacy in low-resource settings. Even fewer studies have examined maternal health literacy, defined as the "cognitive and social skills which determine the motivation and ability of women to gain access to, understand, and use information in ways that promote and maintain their health and that of their children''. New approaches to improve health literacy are sorely needed in countries where women and newborns continue to die from preventable causes.
  
  Antenatal care has been delivered the same way for decades. Clinics and hospitals in low-resource countries are notorious for providing ethnocentric care, privileging northern medical values at the expense of traditional and community values. Yet health literacy is affected by the cultural context in which learning takes place, including, but not limited to, belief systems, traditions, understanding, and communication styles. Transmitting health information in a clinical setting often fails to take into account the social and economic circumstances of patients, therefore not achieving the expected impact on health behaviors. This divide has contributed to a lack of progress in reaching the most vulnerable populations. If pregnant women do not receive health messages in a comprehensible way, they cannot effectively maximize the benefits of the health system. Substantially improving women's ability to understand and utilize health information is of utmost importance if we are to reach the global targets of 70 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births by 2030 and a neonatal mortality rate of 12 per 1000 live births set by WHO/USAID.
  
  The investigators hypothesize that pregnant women randomized into group ANC will exhibit increased health literacy through:
  
  1. Increased BPCR, including recognition of danger signs and knowledge of how to respond to such signs
  2. Higher rates of care-seeking behaviors, including seeking care for problems identified during pregnancy, higher facility delivery rates, and increased attendance at postnatal and postpartum care
  3. Better clinical outcomes for themselves and their newborns than women who received the routine, individual ANC.
  
  The intervention consists of nine meetings; one individual meeting and eight group meetings. At the initial ANC visit, women are assigned to a small groups with up to14 women of similar gestational age. Women meet individually with the midwife and the standard history and physical exam as well as lab tests are completed; group visits start at the second ANC visit. Prior to the start of each group, blood pressure, weight, and a urinalysis are measured for each woman. The midwife, health facility staff member, and patients then sit in circle facing one another for a 60-90 minute facilitated discussion. The health facility staff member will assist the midwife with group activities. The model uses strategies such as story-telling, peer support, and demonstration and teach-back to enhance its effectiveness. Health literacy is incorporated as an integral part of clinical practice within the model - not as an add-on to care.

Arms and interventions
  Arm: Group ANC (EXPERIMENTAL)
    Intervention groups consist of up to 14 women of similar gestation age (10 to 20 weeks) for nine meetings. The first meeting is an individual meeting with the midwife and the standard history and physical exam as well as lab tests are completed. Group meetings are held once a month until 28 weeks of pregnancy, then every 2 weeks until 34 weeks of pregnancy, and the remaining group meetings are once a week. Prior to the start of each group, blood pressure, weight, and a urinalysis are measured for each woman.
  Arm: Stand ANC (NO_INTERVENTION)
    Individual standard antenatal care delivered at health facilities in Ghana
  Intervention: BEHAVIORAL Group ANC

Outcome measures
  [Primary outcome] Change in Ability to Identify Danger Signs in Pregnancy
    Description: Ability to identify danger signs in pregnancy will be measured utilizing a self-report, open ended, question that asks participants to identify warning signs that may occur during pregnancy (e.g. headache, vision changes, fever, vaginal bleeding, swollen face, etc.). There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure Birth Preparedness and Complication Readiness (BPCR).
      
      The measure used in this study is an open-end question: What are the danger signs during pregnancy? Things that might mean there is a problem with you or the baby. Fourteen possible correct responses; raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 14. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T1. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 Baseline (at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Primary outcome] Change in Birth Preparedness and Complication Readiness
    Description: Change in the ability to identify a strategy for birth preparedness and complication readiness (BPCR) will be measured using a binary response (yes/no) to a question that ask participants if they have: (1) saved money, (2) identified birth facility for delivery, (3) identified emergency transportation to the facility, and (4) identified a blood donor. There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure BPCR. The measure used in this study is an open-end question: What are some things a woman can do to prepare for birth? Eleven possible correct responses; raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 11. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T1. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Primary outcome] Change in Ability to Identify Newborn Danger Signs
    Description: Ability to identify newborn danger signs will be measured utilizing a self-report, open ended, question that asks participants to identify newborn danger signs that may occur after delivery (e.g. poor suck, jaundice, difficulty/fast breathing, and convulsions). Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T1.
      
      There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure Birth Preparedness and Complication Readiness (BPCR). The measure used in this study is an open-end question: What are the danger signs for your newborn? Things that might mean there is a problem. Thirteen possible correct responses; raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 13. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Primary outcome] Attendance of ANC Visits
    Description: Attendance of 4 or more ANC visits will be gleaned from data reported on the participant's ANC/health card.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery)
  [Primary outcome] Place of Delivery
    Description: Place of delivery will be measured using a self-report question (facility delivery, home delivery).
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery)
  [Primary outcome] Attendance at Postpartum Check-ups for Mother
    Description: Attendance of postpartum check-ups will be gleaned from information on the participant's ANC/health card.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery)
  [Primary outcome] Attendance at Postnatal Check-up for Newborn
    Description: Attendance of postnatal checkup will be gleaned from information on the participant's ANC/health card using a measure of 3 visits before 6 weeks for newborns.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery)
  [Primary outcome] Birth Outcome
    Description: Birth outcomes will be self-reported and measured as stillbirth, live birth, early neonatal mortality.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery)
  [Primary outcome] Change in Health Literacy
    Description: Change in Health Literacy will be measured using the Maternal Health Literacy Scale. Change over time will be analyzed using between group analysis and calculating the difference in the mean from T0 to T2.
      
      Maternal Health Literacy (MaHeLi) scale is a validated measure that consists of 12 yes-or-no questions to assess maternal health literacy among the participants. Raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 12. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T2 (6 - 12 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Ability to Identify Postpartum Danger Signs for Mother
    Description: Ability to identify danger signs after delivery will be measured utilizing a self-report, open ended, question that asks participants to identify warning signs that may occur after delivery (e.g. increased bleeding or large clots; weakness/fainting; fever; pain in abdominal or breast; painful urination, etc.). Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 (baseline) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery).
      
      There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure postpartum danger signs. The measure used in this study is an open-end question: What are the danger signs for you, the mother, after the baby is born? Fourteen possible correct responses; raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 14. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T1. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Ability to Identify the Recommended Action Steps When a Problem is Identified
    Description: Ability of mother to identify recommended action steps in response to danger signs that may occur before or after delivery. There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure this outcome, therefore the measure used in this study is the question: What do you think you would do if you have any of these (danger signs)? Responses are coded as Go to hospital or health facility CHECKED (1) or Go to hospital or health facility NOT CHECKED (0). Reported results are the sum of individual responses; higher score "Go to hospital checked" means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Knowledge of Family Planning Methods
    Description: Knowledge of family planning methods will be measured by self-report using a question that asks participants to identify all the methods of family planning they know. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at baseline and 3rd trimester.
      
      There is no validated or standardized instrument to measure this outcome, therefore the measure used in this study is an open-end question that asks participants to identify all the methods of family planning they know. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 (baseline) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery). There are eleven possible correct responses; raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 11. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T1. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Intent to Use Family Planning
    Description: Intent to use family planning methods will be measured by self-report using a binary (yes/no) question that asks participants, "Do you intend to use family planning after delivery?". Responses are coded as yes = 1 or no = 0. A higher number equals those who indicated yes to their intent to use family planning after delivery. Change over time will be analyzed using between group analysis and calculating the difference in the mean from T0 (baseline) to T1( 34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery).
    Time frame: T0 (Baseline at recruitment) and T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Uptake of Family Planning
    Description: Uptake of family planning will be measured by self-report using a binary (yes/no) question that asks participants if they are currently using any family planning method. Responses are coded as yes = 1 or no = 0. A higher number equals those who indicated "yes" to currently using family planning. Change over time will be analyzed using between group analysis and calculating the difference in the mean from T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery), T3 (5 - 8 months postpartum), and T4 (11 - 14 months postpartum).
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks after delivery), T3 (5 - 8 months postpartum), and T4 (11 - 14 months postpartum)
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Interpersonal Violence
    Description: Experiences of physical, sexual, and emotional violence were measured using an investigator-derived questionnaire that asks participants if they experienced violence in the past year, and if resources and support are available to them. Raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 9. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Change will be measured by calculating the difference in the mean at T0 and T4. Higher score means higher rates of reported sexual and emotional violence and lower access to resources and support.
      
      Change over time will be analyzed using between group analysis and calculating the difference in the mean from T0 (baseline) to T4 (11 - 14 months postpartum)
    Time frame: T0 (baseline) and T4 (11 - 14 months postpartum)
  [Secondary outcome] Experience of ANC Care
    Description: Experience of ANC care is measured using a twenty-one item investigator-derived questionnaire that asks participants about their experience regarding respectful care, satisfaction with care, and experience such as privacy and treatment with health system during their ANC visits. Raw item scores are a sum of individual responses; scores range from 0 to 21. Reported results are the average of all individual scores within the study arm. Higher score means a better outcome.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 postpartum)
  [Secondary outcome] Completion of IPTp2 Malaria Prophylaxis During Pregnancy
    Description: Data gleaned from the participant's ANC/health record will be used to measure affirmative completion of IPTp2 malaria prophylaxis during pregnancy.
    Time frame: T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Completion of Least Two Tetanus Toxoid Vaccines During Pregnancy
    Description: Data gleaned from the participant's ANC/health record will be used to measure if the participant received least two tetanus toxoid vaccines during pregnancy.
    Time frame: T1 (34 weeks gestation - 3 weeks postdelivery)
  [Secondary outcome] Newborn Weight
    Description: Newborn weight in grams; these data will be retrieved from the participant's ANC/health card and measured as newborn weight.
    Time frame: T2 (6-12 weeks postpartum)
  [Secondary outcome] Mother's Hemoglobin at Delivery in Grams Per Deciliter (g/dl).
    Description: Mother's hemoglobin at delivery; these data will be retrieved from the participant's ANC/health card and measured as hemoglobin in grams per deciliter (g/dl).
    Time frame: T2 (6 - 12 weeks postpartum)

Eligibility
  Sex: FEMALE  Minimum age: 15 Years
  Inclusion Criteria:
  
  * willingness to participate in the study
  * less than 20 weeks' gestation 3) able to speak Dangme, Ga, Akan, Ewe, or English
  * over the age of 15 years
  
  Exclusion Criteria:
  
  * No history of medical problems that would indicate the participant might be considered "high risk" (e.g., hypertension, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus) and thus requiring a more individualized approach to care.
