A189204
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/19/dept._of_human_services_v._j._c._r.-w..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10953537/dept-of-human-services-v-j-c-r-w/
Caption: Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
Date: 2026-08-19

No. 782 August 19, 2026 297
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of K. F. R., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
v.
J. C. R.-W.,
Appellant.
Jackson County Circuit Court
25JU03935; A189204
Charles G. Kochlacs, Judge.
Argued and submitted June 17, 2026.
Elena C. Stross, Deputy Public Defender, argued the 
cause for appellant. Also on the briefs was Shannon Storey, 
Chief Defender, Juvenile Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
Patricia G. Rincon, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Paul L. Smith, Solicitor General.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and Leith, 
Senior Judge.
POWERS, J.
Reversed.
298 Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
 POWERS, J.
 In this juvenile dependency case, mother appeals 
from a judgment asserting dependency jurisdiction over 
her child, K, who was 14 years old at the time of the juris -
diction trial. In three assignments of error, she challenges 
each of the two individual bases on which the juvenile court 
asserted dependency jurisdiction over the child, both related 
to domestic violence within the household, as well as the 
ultimate ruling to assert dependency jurisdiction over K. As 
explained below, even assuming that there was sufficient 
evidence to establish a generalized harm resulting from the 
repeated incidents of domestic violence in the home, there is 
no evidence addressing the reasonable likelihood that the 
harm will occur, let alone sufficient evidence for the juvenile 
court to conclude that the Oregon Department of Human 
Services (ODHS) had proved by a preponderance of the evi-
dence that the threat was current and nonspeculative or 
that there was a reasonable likelihood of specific harm to 
K’s welfare. Accordingly, we reverse.
 Because mother challenges the sufficiency of the 
evidence, the question before us is purely legal. We “view 
the evidence, as supplemented and buttressed by permis -
sible derivative inferences, in the light most favorable to 
the juvenile court’s disposition and assess whether, when so 
viewed, the record was legally sufficient to permit the out -
come.” Dept. of Human Services v. T. L. H. S. , 292 Or App 
708, 709, 425 P3d 775 (2018).
 Although ODHS has been involved with the family 
in the past, this is the first time the juvenile court has deter-
mined K to be within its jurisdiction. The current involve -
ment was precipitated by an incident in June 2025 in which 
the Ashland Police Department responded to a call regard -
ing a domestic disturbance in the home between mother and 
her husband, W.1 Father died when K was four years old, 
and mother and K moved around “a lot.” In 2017, mother 
married W, and the couple had their “ups and downs.” After 
 1 At the jurisdictional trial, W described his relationship with K as “good 
friends,” rather than stepfather and stepson, and explained that he loves K and 
would do anything for him. Mother and W have been together since 2016. W has 
no legal relationship to K and is not a party to this case.
Cite as 352 Or App 297 (2026) 299
the June incident, the police department made a cross report 
to ODHS. ODHS began to investigate and then filed for and 
obtained a protective custody order in August 2025. K was 
placed in his own home with mother.
 ODHS filed a dependency petition in which it 
alleged, in part, that mother’s “chaotic lifestyle interferes 
with her ability to safely parent the child, placing the child 
at risk of harm,” “[t]he child has been exposed to domestic 
violence by the mother, placing the child at risk of harm,” 
and “mother’s substance abuse impairs her ability to safely 
parent the child, placing the child at risk of harm.” The 
jurisdictional trial was held over three days in October.
 Mother, W, and K lived together in a 600 square 
foot house. There is no dispute that there had been domes -
tic violence between mother and W over the course of their 
relationship. Sergeant Vanderlip of the Ashland Police 
Department was one of the responding officers for the June 
incident. He testified that, from 2021 to the present, he had 
personally responded to situations with mother and W nine 
times for “domestic investigations” or reports of disorderly 
conduct, and that each of those times both mother and W 
were intoxicated. When asked about K’s demeanor when he 
responded to the June incident, Vanderlip observed that K 
“showed that he’s used to this” and thought that K seemed 
“a little bit more scared than times in the past, because 
[Vanderlip thought] this got a little bit more serious, physi-
cally, than some of the other times that [he had] responded.” 
Although Vanderlip believed that mother and W had likely 
been involved in a mutual physical altercation, he ultimately 
arrested mother because he believed her to be the primary 
aggressor.
 Mother testified that there was “domestic violence” 
in the relationship, which she described as “argumentative-
ness, being loud, yelling, and not really being—not being 
kind” and not using her skills “to deescalate a situation.” 
Mother has filed for divorce twice in Oregon—once in 2022 
and again in 2024. Mother has also filed for protective orders 
against W in which she made allegations of abuse, and W 
has filed for a restraining order against mother. Mother 
and W have both been arrested at times throughout their 
300 Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
relationship. According to mother, W has a long-standing 
problem with drinking alcohol. Mother denied having a 
problem with alcohol, but admitted to using it as a coping 
mechanism for the stressors in her life. She had stopped 
drinking alcohol and had at least four months of sobriety by 
the time of the trial.
 Mother denied that exposing K to the domestic vio -
lence between her and W was detrimental to K; however, she 
acknowledged that “without proper intervention” it could 
be detrimental. Mother testified that she has discussions 
with K about how he is feeling, including “the concept of the 
interplay between trauma and how people can be triggered 
* * * and what positive communication looks like.” She told 
the juvenile court that K knows that he has the ability to 
speak up if he does not feel safe. She explained that they do 
activities together like taking the dogs for a walk or cook -
ing—“things that show him that people have the capacity to 
get better.” Mother did not feel like the daily rhythm of life 
in the home was chaotic. In addition, when questioned about 
the domestic violence allegation in the dependency petition, 
she acknowledged that her history with W was not positive, 
but maintained that she did not “believe that it rises to the 
level such that [her] son is going to—is going to be exposed to 
it in a way that will cause him irreparable emotional harm.” 
According to mother, K has a B average in school, he has 
friends, and he does various extracurricular activities. K has 
a cell phone and has the ability to call law enforcement, a 
family friend, neighbors, his friends, and the father of one of 
his friends if he feels unsafe, and if things get uncomfortable 
or loud in the home, he can go to his room if he wants to.
 Three of the witnesses at trial were ODHS employ -
ees. ODHS child welfare worker Jaggers testified that she 
has had training on the effects that childhood exposure to 
domestic violence can have on a child. She explained that 
her training taught her that “[e]xposure to domestic violence 
can impact a child’s ability to develop and maintain healthy 
relationships in the future” and that it “can also impact their 
brain development.” She assisted the caseworker on this 
case once or twice and she interviewed K at his home while 
another caseworker interviewed mother and W in a different 
Cite as 352 Or App 297 (2026) 301
room. K told Jaggers that his mother and W drink alcohol 
and use marijuana; he talked about domestic violence and 
described seeing bruises and scratches but did not see the 
acts that created those injuries. When asked whether K 
described whether he felt comfortable being in the home or 
wanting to stay in the home, Jaggers responded, “He did.”
 ODHS child protective services caseworker Thomas 
testified. When asked if she had training regarding how 
domestic violence affects a child in the home, she replied 
that she did and explained, “Just what’s required of us, 
essentially how being exposed to physical and verbal alter -
cations for long periods of time can have traumatic effects 
on kids. Isolation, social-isolation, traumas, PTSD [or post-
traumatic stress disorder], sometimes night terrors, you 
know, things of that nature.” Thomas was also questioned 
about the specific jurisdictional allegations. As relevant to 
the issues raised on appeal, she was asked what the basis 
of her knowledge was for the allegation that that child has 
been exposed to domestic abuse by the mother, placing the 
child at risk of harm. She explained:
“[I]n this current situation, there’s a police report that 
states that a neighbor heard [K] screaming, get off my 
mom. And for the past eight years, according to criminal 
records and civil records and eCourts, there has been mul -
tiple incidents of domestic violence in the home where [K] 
has witnessed that and has talked about that.
 “And so it’s all documented, showing years, showing a 
pattern of this behavior that [K] has been present.”
 Later, after describing the underlying reasons for 
the other jurisdictional allegations and services offered, 
Thomas was asked how, taking all of these conditions 
together, K is under a current risk of harm if ODHS is not 
involved. She answered,
 “Well, again, this is a pattern of behavior. So the agency 
would like to say that [mother] is on a path to recovery, but 
we still have no acknowledgement of substance use issues. 
We still have no acknowledgement for her role in some of 
the domestic violen[ce] situations that took place through -
out the last eight years. I don’t feel like we’re any further 
than we were at the start of this case.”
302 Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
Thomas also explained that ODHS believed it was in K’s best 
interest for the agency to have legal custody of K because 
they “believe that there’s still an active—active safety 
threat.” Thomas had not spoken with K; that is, although 
she had attempted to speak with K, K did not want to talk to 
her. Mother “was not interested” in talking to Thomas about 
K and did not provide updates.
 The third ODHS employee to testify was Warne, 
who is a permanency caseworker, and the assigned ongo -
ing caseworker for K. Warne had completed all of the train-
ing for her position, which included some specific training 
regarding the effects that domestic violence might have on a 
child or a child who is exposed to it. She explained that some 
of the effects on a child could be emotional and psychologi -
cal stress, withdrawal, difficulties in school, and difficulties 
“with relationships ongoing.”
 Warne was able to have a conversation with K in 
early October after mother encouraged him to speak to 
Warne. She and K talked about school, his friends, what he 
likes to do, and how he felt about what had been happening 
in the home since ODHS became involved. K told her that 
everything was going well; he also indicated that things had 
gotten better since ODHS had been involved.
 At the end of the trial, ODHS asked the juvenile 
court for permission to amend the petition to add an allega-
tion stating, “[t]he mother was subjected to domestic violence 
by her domestic associate, and the mother isn’t able to pro-
tect the child from exposure to this violence.” The juvenile 
court permitted ODHS to add that allegation. Ultimately, 
the juvenile court asserted dependency jurisdiction over 
K based on two bases: (1) “[t]he child has been exposed to 
domestic violence by the mother, placing the child at risk 
of harm,” (basis 4B) and (2) “[t]he mother was subjected to 
domestic violence by her domestic associate, and the mother 
is unable to protect the child from exposure to this violence, 
or the risk of exposure to this violence,” (basis 4D). The court 
concluded that ODHS had not proved jurisdictional bases 
4A (chaotic lifestyle) and 4C (substance abuse).
 The juvenile court noted that, in its view, allegations 
4B and 4D were “slam dunks” and that there was “clear proof” 
Cite as 352 Or App 297 (2026) 303
that “there’s been domestic violence going on for many, many 
years.” The court observed that mother “shows no insight 
into the domestic violence that’s going on.” It continued:
 “The current risk of harm, that is nonspeculative to 
me, is that there’s really no end in sight to the domestic 
violence. Things might have gotten better after [ODHS] 
intervention and [K] moving to Santa Barbara for a bit. We 
know for a fact that he’s been hearing the fighting, seeing 
the bruises. Vanderlip has gone to the house nine times. 
He’s quite familiar with the family. He heard [K] saying 
get off my mom. So I believe that.”
 “* * * * *
 “Also this notion that [K,] he can protect himself by 
being able to call the police, by calling [the family friend 
who is the safety service provider] that’s also really unper-
suasive. So the domestic violence has to occur, or about to 
occur to the extent of, well, he’s expected to call the cops, 
call a lady that lives potentially 10 hours of travel time 
away. I don’t think that that ameliorates the risk of harm 
which is basically perpetual witnessing. I mean, he’s seen 
the bruises, witnessing—hearing domestic violence while 
in the next room.
 “I believe that, based on those findings and all the other 
evidence, so it’s not limited to what I just commented on, 
but the whole—the entirety of the evidence, to me proves 
there is a nexus between risk-causing conduct. The risk 
is present at the time of the hearing. It’s nonspeculative. 
Therefore, B and D have been proven in all respects.”2
 On appeal, mother contends that, although ODHS’s 
theory of harm was that witnessing domestic violence could 
lead to negative outcomes for K, now or later in life, both the 
evidence and the theory of harm were insufficient to autho-
rize dependency jurisdiction. She asserts that ODHS did 
not present any evidence that K was currently experienc -
ing any of the potential harms that can occur from children 
 2 We note that the juvenile court appears to have mistakenly found that 
Vanderlip had testified that he heard K say “get off my mom.” The testimony 
was that a neighbor who called for emergency services reported hearing a child 
making that statement, and that is the call that prompted Vanderlip to respond 
to the family home. Mother and W testified that that overheard statement was a 
reference to the ashes of mother’s mother and was made by mother to W. The juve-
nile court, however, found mother’s and W’s explanations to be “unpersuasive.”
304 Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
witnessing domestic violence, nor did ODHS present any evi-
dence of the likelihood of the harms it did identify happen -
ing to any child. In mother’s view, ODHS’s theory rose and 
fell on the simple possibility of those negative effects and 
that witnessing domestic violence was not good. According 
to mother, the likelihood and severity of harm demonstrated 
by the evidence was both speculative and of insufficient type, 
degree, and duration to authorize dependency jurisdiction.
 In response, ODHS contends that the evidence in 
the record was sufficient for the juvenile court to determine 
that the exposure to domestic violence in the household pre-
sented a current, nonspeculative risk to K. In particular, 
ODHS points to mother’s lack of insight, failure to engage 
in treatment, and testimony by ODHS caseworkers that 
domestic violence can cause trauma, PTSD, emotional and 
psychological stress, and it can negatively impact a child’s 
ability to develop healthy relationships and could result in 
withdrawal and isolation. The difficulty with ODHS’s argu-
ments, however, is that those generalities alone do not meet 
the burden required for dependency jurisdiction.
 The juvenile court is authorized to assert depen -
dency jurisdiction over a child when the child’s condition and 
circumstances expose the child to a current threat of serious 
loss or injury that will likely be realized. ORS 419B.100(1)
(c); Dept. of Human Services v. A. L., 268 Or App 391, 397-98, 
342 P3d 174 (2015). ODHS bears the burden of proof. Id. That 
burden includes demonstrating a nexus between the child’s 
allegedly risk-causing conditions and circumstances, and a 
threat of harm to the child of the type, degree, and duration 
as to justify juvenile court intervention into the constitu -
tionally protected family sphere. Dept. of Human Services 
v. S. D. I., 259 Or App 116, 121, 312 P3d 608 (2013). Proof 
of harm or risk at some point in the past is insufficient; the 
threat must be current at the time of trial. State v. S. T. S., 
 236 Or App 646, 654, 238 P3d 53 (2010). Nor can the risk 
be speculative; there must be a reasonable probability that 
the risk will be realized. Dept. of Human Services v. J. H. , 
292 Or App 733, 738, 425 P3d 791 (2018).
 As the parties appear to recognize, there is no per se 
rule that domestic violence in a home automatically means 
Cite as 352 Or App 297 (2026) 305
that ODHS has carried its burden to prove a nonspeculative 
risk of harm to a child. We previously explained,
“a child’s exposure to domestic violence does not necessar-
ily create a risk of serious loss or injury to a child sufficient 
to warrant juvenile court intervention. See Dept. of Human 
Services v. K. C. F., 282 Or App 12, 20, 383 P3d 931 (2016) 
(reversing the juvenile court’s assumption of jurisdiction 
where [ODHS] presented evidence that the children were 
exposed to and affected by the father’s emotional abuse 
of the mother, but the record lacked evidence of a present 
risk of serious harm to them). ‘[T]he state must establish 
both that the child is at risk of a certain severity of harm 
and that there is a reasonable likelihood that’ the risk will 
occur. S. D. I., 259 Or App at 121.”
Dept. of Human Services v. D. W. M., 296 Or App 109, 121, 
437 P3d 1186 (2019) (second brackets in original). Having 
reviewed the evidentiary record, we conclude that ODHS did 
not offer specific enough evidence that the domestic violence 
K witnessed presented a nonspeculative risk of harm to K.
 ODHS’s evidence was lacking as to the specific 
harm to K. We explained in S. D. I. that ODHS “must estab-
lish both that the child is at risk of a certain severity of 
harm and that there is a reasonable likelihood that the 
risk will be realized.” 259 Or App at 121. “[A] court cannot 
take jurisdiction over a child based solely on a risk of some 
harm; the type, degree, and duration of the harm must be 
such that exposure to a reasonable likelihood of that harm 
justifies juvenile court jurisdiction.” Id. (emphasis omitted). 
Here, even assuming that there was sufficient evidence 
to establish a generalized risk of harm resulting from the 
repeated incidents of domestic violence in the home, ODHS 
presented no evidence addressing the reasonable likelihood 
that the harm will occur to K, let alone sufficient for the 
juvenile court to conclude that the agency had proved by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the threat was current 
and nonspeculative or that there was a reasonable likeli -
hood of harm to K’s welfare.3
 3 Indeed, one of the problems with generalized evidence of harm is that it 
becomes difficult to determine when that generalized harm will occur without 
establishing a per se rule of harm, rather than the individualized evidence that 
is necessary to support the assertion of dependency jurisdiction. As we observed 
in T. L. H. S.:
306 Dept. of Human Services v. J. C. R.-W.
 The testimony by Thomas described above regard -
ing the current risk of harm to K is indicative of the lack 
of development throughout the record. She explained that 
K was at a current risk of harm because of the “pattern of 
behavior” and that there was still an “active safety threat.” 
At no point during her testimony, or testimony by any of the 
other ODHS caseworkers, was there evidence of the specific 
risk of harm to K or testimony connecting any of the expo -
sure to domestic violence that K experienced to any type, 
degree, or duration of harm.
 To the extent that ODHS points to testimony by 
ODHS caseworkers in which they explain how domestic 
violence can cause trauma, PTSD, and emotional and psy -
chological stress, or impact a child’s brain development and 
ability to develop healthy relationships in the future, or 
result in withdrawal and isolation, a review of the record 
reveals that that generalized testimony is insufficient. First, 
none of those caseworkers testified to those potential harms 
being present in this case for K. Rather, the testimony came 
in response to ODHS’s attorney asking the caseworkers to 
talk about their own training, not about the type of domes -
tic violence that was in K’s home or the risk of particular 
harms that K was exposed to as a result of the domestic 
violence in his home. More importantly, there is insufficient 
evidence for the juvenile court to conclude that the exposure 
to domestic violence that K experienced presented a risk of 
serious psychological or emotional harm that is reasonably 
likely to occur, let alone the degree or duration of that type 
of harm.4
“When [ODHS] fails to identify a specific type of harm, and instead relies on 
an amorphous risk of unspecified harm loosely tied to multiple allegations, 
it hinders parents’ ability to fully respond to the state’s case. It hinders the 
juvenile court in making appropriate fact findings and assessing whether 
[ODHS] has proven its case. And it makes it difficult for us to review whether 
there is any evidence to support the alleged nexus between the parent’s con-
duct and the specific harm at issue, as well as whether there is any evidence 
of a reasonable likelihood of that specific harm occurring or whether it is 
speculative.”
292 Or App at 716 (citations omitted).
 4 ODHS also points out that K spent a lot of time in his bedroom, arguably 
to avoid the domestic violence in the home. Although that may be a permissible 
inference—K was avoiding domestic violence—that fact is not sufficient evidence 
to support a conclusion of any specific type of harm to K or the degree of harm.
Cite as 352 Or App 297 (2026) 307
 Although the record here contains ample evidence 
to support the juvenile court’s findings that there has been 
ongoing domestic violence in this household between mother 
and W and that mother lacks insight as to the potential 
effects that it has on K, ODHS did not meet its burden to 
show how the circumstances gave rise to a threat of a seri -
ous loss or injury to K. We do not mean to suggest by our 
conclusion that exposure to verbal and physical altercations 
between adults in a child’s home can never lead to a threat 
of serious emotional or psychological harm to that child. “In 
order to establish such a circumstance, however, [ODHS] 
must offer evidence, not only argument or conclusory state-
ments” of the current threat of serious loss or injury that is 
likely to be realized. J. H., 292 Or App at 742.
 In short, we ultimately agree with mother’s argu -
ment that ODHS failed to produce legally sufficient evi -
dence to prove a present risk of serious harm to K that is 
reasonably likely to occur.
 Reversed.
