A182743
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/19/state_v._cortez-orta.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10953530/state-v-cortez-orta/
Caption: State v. Cortez-Orta
Date: 2026-08-19

278 August 19, 2026 No. 780
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
ALFONSO CORTEZ-ORTA,
Defendant-Appellant.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
20CR49536; A182743
Shelley D. Russell, Judge.
Argued and submitted January 21, 2026.
David Sherbo-Huggins, Deputy Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant. Also on the brief was Ernest G. 
Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission.
Michael A. Casper, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
POWERS, J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 352 Or App 278 (2026) 279
 POWERS, J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment of convic -
tion for numerous sex crimes committed against his step -
daughters, N and C, challenging his convictions for three 
counts of first-degree rape, ORS 163.375 (Counts 1-3), and 
one count of first-degree sexual abuse, ORS 163.427 (Count 
8). Defendant assigns error to the jury instructions given 
regarding those counts, arguing that the trial court erred 
by failing to instruct the jury that each of those counts 
required a causal connection between the use of forcible 
compulsion and the charged sexual act. Defendant asserts 
that he preserved that issue below but alternatively asserts 
that it was a plain error. We conclude that the issue is not 
preserved, and, assuming without deciding that the trial 
court committed plain error, we decline to exercise our dis -
cretion to correct under plain error review. Accordingly, we 
affirm.
STATUTORY DEFINITIONS 
AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
 The background of the applicable criminal statutes 
and the procedural history frame our discussion regarding 
preservation. Defendant’s assignment of error is limited to 
four convictions: three for first-degree rape and one for first-
degree sexual abuse. For purposes of the charges at issue, 
those crimes are defined as follows:
 “(1) A person who has sexual intercourse with another 
person commits the crime of rape in the first degree if:
 “(a) The victim is subjected to forcible compulsion by 
the person.”
ORS 163.375.
 “(1) A person commits the crime of sexual abuse in the 
first degree when that person:
 “(a) Subjects another person to sexual contact and:
 “* * * * *
 “(B) The victim is subjected to forcible compulsion by 
the actor[.]”
280 State v. Cortez-Orta
ORS 163.427. Both crimes, as charged, required proof of 
“forcible compulsion,” which, in this case means to compel 
by “physical force.” ORS 163.305(1)(a).1
 The Oregon Supreme Court has explained that, in 
order to prove forcible compulsion, the state must prove that 
the act or acts constituting forcible compulsion “resulted 
in the sexual contact that is the focus of the charge, in the 
sense that it compelled the victim to submit to or engage 
in the contact.” State v. Marshall, 350 Or 208, 227, 253 P3d 
1017 (2011). In other words, the physical force must have 
caused the sexual contact to be able to occur.
 The jury was given the following instructions 
regarding the charges at issue in this appeal:
 “ RAPE IN THE FIRST DEGREE (as Charged in 
Counts 1-5)
 “Oregon law provides that a person commits the crime 
of rape in the first degree if the person knowingly has sex -
ual intercourse with another person and the person know -
ingly subjects the other person to forcible compulsion.
 “In this case, to establish the crime of rape in the first 
degree, the state must prove beyond a reasonable doubt the 
following elements:
 “(1) The act occurred on or between January 1, 2019 and 
March 6, 2019;
 “(2) [Defendant] knowingly had sexual intercourse with 
[N]; and
 “(3) [Defendant] knowingly subjected [N] to forcible 
compulsion.”
“* * * * *
 “ SEXUAL ABUSE IN THE FIRST DEGREE
 “(Forcible Compulsion)
 “Oregon law provides that a person commits the crime of 
sexual abuse in the first degree when the person knowingly 
subjects another person to sexual contact and the person 
knowingly subjects the other person to forcible compulsion.
 1 Forcible compulsion can also mean to compel by threats. ORS 163.305(1)(b). 
The theory of the crimes in this case, however, did not include forcible compulsion 
by threats.
Cite as 352 Or App 278 (2026) 281
 “In this case, to establish the crime of sexual abuse in 
the first degree, the state must prove beyond a reasonable 
doubt the following elements:
 “(1) The act occurred on or about * * * August 13, 2019;
 “(2) [Defendant] knowingly subjected [C] to sexual 
contact;
 “(3) [Defendant] knowingly subjected [C] to forcible 
compulsion.”
(Bold and uppercase in original.)
 The jury was additionally provided with the follow-
ing definitions of forcible compulsion and “knowingly and 
with knowledge”:
 “ Forcible compulsion—to compel by either (a) phys -
ical force or (b) a threat, express or implied, that places 
a person in fear of immediate or future death or physical 
injury to self or another person.”
 “* * * * *
 “ KNOWINGLY AND WITH KNOWLEDGE
 “A person acts ‘knowingly’ or ‘with knowledge’ if that 
person acts with an awareness that his conduct is of a par-
ticular nature.
 “In counts 1 through 5 when used in the phrase ‘know-
ingly engaged in sexual intercourse with [N]’, ‘knowingly’ 
means that the defendant acts with an awareness that he 
engaged in sexual intercourse with [N]. When used in the 
phrase ‘knowingly subjected [N] to forcible compulsion,’ 
knowingly means that the defendant acts with awareness 
that he subjected [N] to forcible compulsion when he sub -
jected her to sexual intercourse.
 “* * * * *
 “In counts 7 through 9 when used in the phrase ‘know-
ingly subjected [C] to sexual conduct by touching her vag -
inal area, mouth, genital area, a sexual or intimate part 
of [C],’ ‘knowingly’ means that the defendant acts with 
an awareness that he touched [C’s] vaginal area, mouth, 
or genital area, and that those body parts are sexual or 
intimate parts of [C’s] body. When used in the phrase 
‘knowingly subjected [C] to forcible compulsion,’ knowingly 
282 State v. Cortez-Orta
means that the defendant acts with awareness that he sub-
jected [C] to forcible compulsion when he subjected her to 
sexual contact.”
(Bold and uppercase in original; brackets omitted.)
 As noted earlier, defendant challenges his convic -
tions for three counts of first-degree rape and one count of 
first-degree sexual abuse. 2 On appeal, defendant asserts 
that the trial court erred by omitting from the jury instruc-
tions a direction that the jury must find a causal connection 
between the use of force and the sexual contact, and there -
fore argues that the jury instructions were incomplete for 
omitting a necessary element of the crimes. He maintains 
that he preserved that argument, but in the alternative, 
requests plain error review. The state asserts that defen -
dant failed to preserve the argument below, and that any 
error was not plain or was harmless under the particular 
facts of this case.
PRESERVATION
 We start with preservation and conclude that defen-
dant did not preserve the argument he now urges on appeal. 
In general, “a party must provide the trial court with an 
explanation of [their] objection that is specific enough to 
ensure that the court can identify its alleged error with 
enough clarity to permit it to consider and correct the error 
immediately, if correction is warranted.” State v. Wyatt, 331 
Or 335, 343, 15 P3d 22 (2000).
 At the close of evidence, and prior to closing argu -
ments, the court engaged in a lengthy discussion with the 
parties regarding the jury instructions. Due to the volume of 
charges and the various theories relating to different counts, 
the court felt it necessary to clarify how the phrase “knowingly 
and with knowledge” was used in relation to each element of 
each count. The court decided to put a proposal together and 
get it to the parties that evening before reconvening in the 
 2 Defendant was also convicted of an additional count of first-degree rape 
(Count 6) and found guilty of 30 counts of third-degree sexual abuse (Counts 
10-39). The court merged a number of the sexual abuse counts, and defendant 
does not assign error to any of those convictions. The jury additionally acquitted 
him of two other counts of first-degree rape (Counts 4 and 5) and two other counts 
of first-degree sexual abuse (Counts 7 and 9).
Cite as 352 Or App 278 (2026) 283
morning to discuss any further changes that needed to be 
made. As part of that discussion, the court was looking at 
how “knowingly” was defined in relation to the forcible com -
pulsion element, and the following exchange occurred:
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I do think—if I can just jump 
in for a second—
 “THE COURT: Mm-hmm (affirmative).
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: The forcible compulsion lan-
guage, I think it should mention that the forcible compul -
sion was to further the sexual contact.
 “THE COURT: Well, in the forcible compulsion defini-
tion—well, okay, we’re not quite there yet but let me—
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Okay. That might solve the 
problem then.
 “THE COURT: All right. Well, let’s—all right. Let’s 
just move to definitions. So forcible compulsion, to compel—
so to compel a person to engage in sexual intercourse by 
either physical threat or—or physical force or a threat—
 “[PROSECUTOR]: I don’t think that’s—
 “THE COURT: Is that what you’re asking for?
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: I—I am. I don’t think we 
need to put in a threat. It would confuse the jury since 
there’s no allegations of threatening behavior. There’s alle-
gations of threatening behavior for disclosing, but all the 
allegations were simply the use of force.”
 The conversation turned to whether the definition 
of forcible compulsion should include the various statutory 
definitions of how it could be completed, and whether a the-
ory of forcible compulsion via threats applied in the case. 
The discussion never returned to whether the instructions 
needed to include a causation element between the forcible 
compulsion and the sexual acts. Defendant had no objec -
tion to the instructions for the rape or sexual abuse counts, 
and agreed that they looked correct as drafted. The follow -
ing morning, defendant agreed that the court’s proposed 
changes to the definition of “knowing and with knowledge” 
were fine. There were no further objections to any of the jury 
instructions.
284 State v. Cortez-Orta
 On appeal, defendant asserts that the instructions 
for both first-degree rape and first-degree sexual abuse 
were incomplete because they did not include an instruction 
regarding the causal connection between forcible compul -
sion and the sexual act. He asserts that counsel’s comment 
to the trial court that “the forcible compulsion language, I 
think it should mention that the forcible compulsion was to 
further the sexual contact” was sufficient to preserve the 
issue for appeal. We disagree with defendant’s preservation 
argument.
 Although defendant did raise the issue of the link 
between forcible compulsion and the sexual contact, he did 
not object to the presentation of the elements of the crimes 
at issue, did not propose any particular changes to the defi-
nition of forcible compulsion apart from the debate over 
whether to include threats or not, and had no objection to 
the court’s expansive explanation of what “knowing or with 
knowledge” meant in relation to each of the elements of the 
crimes. When given the opportunity to raise any additional 
problems with the instructions, both at the end of the discus-
sion one day and in the morning the following day, defendant 
did not raise the issue he now urges on appeal. Accordingly, 
we conclude that defendant’s argument is unpreserved, and 
therefore turn to whether we review for plain error.
PLAIN ERROR
 “Generally, an issue not preserved in the trial 
court will not be considered on appeal.” Wyatt , 331 Or at 
341. However, we have discretion to correct a “plain” error. 
ORAP 5.45(1). An error is “plain” when it is an error of law, 
the legal point is obvious and not reasonably in dispute, and 
the error is apparent on the record without our having to 
choose among competing inferences. State v. Vanornum, 354 
Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013). Whether an error is “plain” 
is a question of law. State v. Gornick , 340 Or 160, 167, 130 
P3d 780 (2006). If we conclude that a plain error occurred, 
the next question is whether it was harmless, as we cannot 
reverse a judgment based on harmless error. State v. Ortiz, 
372 Or 658, 671, 554 P3d 796 (2024) (“Under Article VII 
(Amended), section 3, of the Oregon Constitution, an appel-
late court may not reverse a criminal defendant’s conviction 
Cite as 352 Or App 278 (2026) 285
based on an error—whether preserved or unpreserved—
that is harmless.”). An error was harmless if there is “little 
likelihood” that it affected the verdict. State v. Davis, 336 Or 
19, 32, 77 P3d 1111 (2003). Finally, if an error is both plain 
and not harmless, we must decide whether to exercise our 
discretion to correct it. Ortiz, 372 Or at 672.
 Assuming without deciding that what occurred 
here was plain error, we conclude that this is not a case in 
which we would exercise our discretion to correct the error.3 
The Supreme Court has identified a nonexclusive list of 
factors that may be relevant in deciding whether to exer -
cise our discretion to correct a plain error: “the competing 
interests of the parties; the nature of the case; the gravity 
of the error; the ends of justice in the particular case; how 
the error came to the court’s attention; and whether the pol-
icies behind the general rule requiring preservation of error 
have been served.” Ailes v. Portland Meadows, Inc., 312 Or 
376, 382 n 6, 823 P2d 956 (1991). Those factors are not a 
complete or necessary checklist; however, they are some of 
the permissible considerations. Id. In deciding whether to 
exercise discretion to remedy an instructional error, we may 
also consider whether the parties agreed to a particular jury 
instruction or possibly made strategic choices not to object. 
State v. Wiltse, 373 Or 1, 18, 559 P3d 380 (2024).
 3 In Marshall, the Supreme Court noted the causal connection between forc -
ible compulsion and the sexual contact that comprised the charge, and that the 
state must prove that the forcible compulsion compelled the victim to submit to or 
engage in the contact. 350 Or at 227. Additionally, prior to the trial in this mat -
ter, the Uniform Criminal Jury Instructions (UCrJI) for both first-degree rape 
and first-degree sexual abuse were amended to clarify that the state must prove 
that the defendant subjected the victim to forcible compulsion “and that forcible 
compulsion resulted in” the sex act in question. See UCrJI 1603 (Rape in the First 
Degree); UCrJI 1611 (Sexual Abuse in the First Degree). For unknown reasons, 
the trial court in this case used the outdated version of the UCrJIs that did not 
include the final clause.
 In a recent nonprecedential memorandum disposition, we concluded that jury 
instructions that omitted the causal connection between forcible compulsion and 
the sexual conduct at issue were erroneous, and we reversed and remanded the 
defendant’s convictions. State v. Sanchez, 337 Or App 797 (2025) (nonprecedential 
memorandum disposition). That opinion, of course, is not binding given its non -
precedential nature. Additionally, there is no indication that Sanchez involved 
preservation issues, and therefore was not reviewed in a plain error posture. 
Finally, other factual differences make Sanchez readily distinguishable from 
this matter, regardless of Sanchez being nonprecedential.
286 State v. Cortez-Orta
 Here, although out-of-date uniform instructions 
were being used, defendant did not object to the final set 
of jury instructions, and he did not raise an objection to 
the instructions regarding the elements of first-degree 
rape or first-degree sexual abuse as proposed by the court. 
Additionally, causation between the use of forcible com -
pulsion and the sex acts in question was not an issue that 
was actively disputed at trial. Defendant maintained that 
he never touched the girls sexually and argued that N and 
C were not credible in their reports of abuse. See id. at 23 
(concluding that the gravity of the error weighed against 
reversal when the erroneous jury instruction related to an 
issue that the defendant did not actively dispute at trial). No 
argument was raised that, if the acts occurred, they were 
not completed via physical force, or that any physical force 
exerted did not compel the victims to submit to the acts. 
Finally, in discussing the causal relationship between a sex-
ual act and forcible compulsion in Marshall, the Supreme 
Court noted that the only logical reading of the term forcible 
compulsion was that what was “compelled” was the physical 
contact that was the other element of the crime. Marshall, 
350 Or 217-18 (“The question then is: compelled by physi -
cal force to do what ? Given the wording of the statute, the 
only possible answer to the question of what is compelled 
is: to submit to or engage in the physical contact that is the 
other element of the crime * * *.” (Brackets, quotation marks, 
footnote, and ellipses omitted.)). In the context of the ele -
ments of the crimes at issue here and the definition of what 
“knowing” meant in relation to each of those elements, we 
conclude that it is highly unlikely that the jury would not 
make the same linguistic connection that was identified by 
the Supreme Court, that what was forcibly compelled was 
the sex act at the center of each charge. Because we con -
clude that it is unlikely that an additional instruction on the 
causal relationship between the acts and the forcible com -
pulsion would have made a difference in the jury’s verdict, 
we conclude that any error was not grave, and therefore we 
do not exercise our discretion to correct any error.
 Affirmed.
