A184322
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/19/state_v._deangelo.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10953529/state-v-deangelo/
Caption: State v. Deangelo
Date: 2026-08-19

No. 776 August 19, 2026 251
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
ANGEL DEANGELO,
Defendant-Appellant.
Lincoln County Circuit Court
24CR09945; A184322
Joseph C. Allison, Judge pro tempore.
Argued and submitted December 4, 2025.
Matthew Blythe, Deputy Public Defender, argued the 
cause for appellant. Also on the brief was Ernest G. Lannet, 
Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
Jordan R. Silk, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. On the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General, 
and Leigh A. Salmon, Assistant Attorney General.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
SHORR, P. J.
Reversed and remanded.
252 State v. Deangelo
 SHORR, P. J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment of conviction 
for violating a court’s stalking protective order (SPO), ORS 
163.750. In his sole assignment of error, defendant argues 
that the trial court erred in overruling his objection to argu-
ments made by the prosecutor during rebuttal closing argu-
ment.1 At trial, defendant argued that he did not violate the 
SPO when he saw B at their workplace because B was not 
scheduled to work that day and he had texted his manager 
to ask if she was present. 2 During the state’s rebuttal clos-
ing argument, the prosecutor mentioned the text messages, 
saying “[t]hey talked about a text, why wouldn’t you produce 
a text?” Defendant objected, arguing that that comment 
improperly shifted the state’s burden of proof, but the trial 
court allowed the prosecutor to proceed. We conclude that 
the trial court erred in overruling the objection because the 
prosecutor’s argument improperly and unfairly suggested to 
the jury that defendant had the burden to produce the text 
messages and corroborate his account of what happened. 
Additionally, we conclude that the error was not harmless. 
Thus, we reverse and remand defendant’s conviction.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
 Generally, we review a trial court’s decision to over-
rule an objection to closing arguments for abuse of discretion. 
State v. Starr, 337 Or App 682, 686, 564 P3d 933, rev den, 374 
Or 143 (2025). However, we review whether a prosecutor mis-
stated the law during closing arguments for legal error. Id. If 
“an argument was improper, properly challenged, and likely 
to prejudice the jury unfairly, upon review, we must reverse.” 
State v. Totland, 296 Or App 527, 531, 438 P3d 399, rev den, 
365 Or 502 (2019) (internal quotation marks and brackets 
omitted). We state the facts consistently with that standard.
 1 The trial court did not explicitly overrule the objection, instead saying “[g]o 
ahead, Counsel” when the defense objected. However, it is clear from the court’s 
later statement referring to their response to the objection as a “ruling” that that 
statement functioned as an overruling of the defense objection.
 2 To be convicted of violating a court’s stalking protective order, it must be 
proven that the defendant, after being served with the order, “engaged intention-
ally, knowingly or recklessly in conduct prohibited by the order.” ORS 163.750 
(1)(a), (b). The state in this case charged defendant with “recklessly” engaging in 
conduct prohibited by the order.
Cite as 352 Or App 251 (2026) 253
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
 Defendant did odd jobs for a bar and grill. A bar -
tender at the same establishment, B, had an SPO against 
defendant. The owner of the bar and grill, Portune, was 
aware of the order and thus scheduled them to work at differ-
ent times. Often, defendant would text Portune before going 
to the bar, and she would let him know if B was present.
 One night, B was at the bar for a social event, rather 
than work. Portune testified that defendant had texted her 
to ask if B was there. After reviewing the security cameras, 
she texted back that B was not present. However, B was 
present. Defendant arrived through the back gate, close to 
where B was on the back patio. They made eye contact and 
defendant smiled at B. B left and called the nonemergency 
dispatch line to report a violation of the SPO.
 At trial, defendant argued that he did not recklessly 
engage in conduct prohibited by the SPO as charged by the 
state because Portune told him that B was not at the bar. 
ORS 163.750(1)(b). On re-cross examination of Portune, 
the prosecutor asked if Portune could clarify when she had 
texted defendant that he could come over. Portune said she 
did not know exactly when she had texted, and she had not 
brought her cellphone with her to the courtroom. In rebuttal 
closing argument, the prosecution brought up Portune’s tes-
timony concerning the text messages:
 “[PROSECUTOR]: There was no text. They talked 
about a text, why wouldn’t you produce a text? Isn’t that 
the easiest thing in the world to produce? It’s not even like 
you have to produce a phone call. We have to show court—
phone number—
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Your Honor, objections, 
shifting burden.
 “THE COURT: Go ahead, Counsel.
 “[PROSECUTOR]: Texts are easy. I bet that each of 
you has a text in your phone right now. ‘I didn’t see one.’ 
Even if there was one, I promise you there is nothing in 
that Court Order that allows him to be in her visual or 
physical presence so long as Ms. Portune says it’s okay.”
254 State v. Deangelo
 Later in rebuttal, the prosecutor returned to the 
issue of the text messages without objection: “How do we 
know Defendant was reckless? Well, the Defense says—well, 
Ms. Portune, she texted him to say that it—it was okay to 
show up. Again, no text.”
 When considering the objection out of the pres -
ence of the jury, the court noted that the prosecutor’s argu-
ment was “certainly on the line of what was appropriate” 
but decided that it was a valid argument because it was 
questioning the credibility of the witness. The jury found 
defendant guilty of violating the SPO. Defendant appealed, 
arguing that the prosecutor’s comments concerning the text 
messages improperly shifted the burden of proof.
ANALYSIS
 Defendant assigns error to the trial court’s over -
ruling of his objection to the prosecutor’s statements about 
the text messages. Defendant argues that this case is “func-
tionally indistinguishable” from State v. Mayo, 303 Or App 
525, 537-38, 465 P3d 267 (2020), where this court found a 
prosecutor’s suggestions that the defendant failed to pro -
vide corroborating evidence about his ignorance of the pres-
ence of methamphetamine in his bag to be impermissible. 
Defendant notes that, as the defendant did in Mayo, he pre-
sented evidence that he did not have the culpable mental 
state for the charged crime. Id. at 527. Defendant argues 
that the prosecutor’s comments suggested that defendant 
had the burden to produce other corroborating evidence, and 
thus impermissibly shifted the burden of proof. Additionally, 
defendant argues that while the comments about the texts 
concerned Portune’s testimony, they were clearly directed at 
defendant as well. Defendant contends that when the prose-
cutor said “[t]hey talked about a text…” the prosecutor’s use 
of the word “they” treated Portune and defendant as a unit 
and thus implicated the defense.
 The state responds that the prosecutor’s statements 
were permissible because they were relying on “evidence in 
the record to call into question the credibility of [Portune’s] 
account of what occurred” rather than commenting on defen-
dant’s failure to produce evidence. Starr, 337 Or App at 688. 
Cite as 352 Or App 251 (2026) 255
The state argues that the comments focused on Portune’s 
assertions that she did not have her cellphone with her, 
an item that most people always have on their person. It 
argues that when the prosecutor said it would be “easy” to 
“produce” a text, the prosecutor meant it would be easy for 
Portune to pull her phone out, except Portune claimed she 
left her phone at home. Alternatively, the state argues that 
Mayo and related cases are plainly wrong and should be 
overruled.
 The law presumes that every defendant charged 
with a crime is innocent and requires the state to prove every 
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. Mayo, 303 
Or App at 530. “In arguing that the state has met its burden 
to prove all elements of a crime beyond a reasonable doubt, a 
prosecutor may attempt to persuade the jury that it should 
believe one version of the events and not another.” Totland, 
296 Or App at 530-31 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
However, a prosecutor is prohibited from “inappropriately 
characteriz[ing] the jury’s factfinding function in a manner 
that raises some realistic possibility of confusing the jurors 
about the ultimate standard or burden of proof.” Id.
 In accordance with those fundamental principles, 
the state is usually not allowed to comment on a defen -
dant’s failure to present evidence. State v. Irish, 340 Or App 
341, 346, 571 P3d 195 (2025). A prosecutor may comment 
on a defendant’s failure to present evidence in three cir -
cumstances: (1) when the defendant raises an affirmative 
defense, (2) when the defendant raises an issue on which the 
defendant bears the initial burden of production, but fails to 
present evidence, and (3) when a defendant points out that 
the state has failed to present certain evidence, so long as 
the state’s response comports with the proper allocation of 
proof and the record establishes that the missing evidence is 
available to the defendant. State v. Spieler, 269 Or App 623, 
642, 346 P3d 549 (2015). The state does not argue that any 
of those three circumstances were present.
 We are not persuaded by the state’s argument that 
the prosecutor was simply challenging Portune’s credibil -
ity. We agree with defendant that the prosecutor’s com -
ments improperly implied that defendant had some burden 
256 State v. Deangelo
to produce additional documentary evidence corroborating 
Portune’s oral testimony that she texted with defendant. See 
State v. Strain, 374 Or 783, 799-800, 583 P3d 1002 (2026) 
(noting that defense counsel may have impermissibly sug -
gested in closing argument that certain text messages did 
not exist but further concluding that the prosecutor then 
improperly shifted the burden of proof in rebuttal closing to 
defendant when it questioned why defendant had not cross-
examined a witness to obtain additional evidence). 3 The 
prosecutor did not rely on evidence in the record when she 
specifically questioned why no text messages were produced 
when it would have been “the easiest thing in the world to 
produce.” Cf. Starr, 337 Or App at 688 (holding that it was 
permissible for the prosecutor to state, while relying on an 
inventory report in the record showing that no Xanax was 
found in the defendant’s car, that there was no evidence of 
Xanax despite the defendant’s testimony to the contrary). 
The prosecutor’s statements impermissibly shifted the bur-
den of proof in a manner that raised the possibility of confus-
ing the jury as to the applicable burden of proof. See Mayo , 
303 Or App at 537 (impermissible for the prosecutor to sug-
gest that the defendant had to produce evidence to prove 
that his version of events was true); See Irish , 340 Or App 
at 348 (impermissible for a prosecutor to question why the 
defendant did not establish how much Ativan he consumed 
or elicit expert testimony concerning Ativan’s effects).
 The state alternatively urges us to overrule Mayo . 
But the state has not met its significant burden to show 
that Mayo is “plainly wrong,” which is “a rigorous standard 
grounded in presumptive fidelity to stare decisis.” State v. 
Civil, 283 Or App 395, 406, 388 P3d 1185 (2017). Indeed, 
the state has not even demonstrated that Mayo is wrong, 
much less plainly so. Although the state contends that Mayo 
is inconsistent with Oregon Supreme Court precedent, that 
court has recently rejected that argument See Strain , 374 
Or at 793 (rejecting the argument that cases such as Mayo 
 3 We need not decide here whether the prosecutor’s comment in rebuttal clos-
ing that “there was no text,” standing alone, would be improper. The prosecutor 
went beyond that and argued that the defense had the burden to produce such a 
text because it would have been easy to do so. That comment clearly and improp -
erly shifted the burden of proof to defendant.
Cite as 352 Or App 251 (2026) 257
and Spieler have created rules concerning when a prosecu -
tor may comment on a defendant’s failure to present evi -
dence that are inconsistent with Supreme Court case law).
 Finally, we consider whether the prosecutor’s 
improper argument was likely to prejudice the jury unfairly 
and whether the trial court’s error in failing to strike the 
prosecutor’s comment was harmless. Starr, 337 Or App at 
692. Under Article VII (Amended), section 3, of the Oregon 
Constitution, we must affirm despite error if there is “lit -
tle likelihood that the particular error affected the verdict.” 
State v. Davis, 336 Or 19, 32, 77 P3d 1111 (2003). This court’s 
“harmless-error analysis concerns ‘the possible influence of 
the error on the verdict rendered, not whether this court, 
sitting as a factfinder, would regard the evidence of guilt 
as substantial and compelling.’ ” Starr, 337 Or App at 691 
(quoting Davis, 336 Or at 32).
 Here, the prosector’s rebuttal closing argument was 
likely to prejudice the jury unfairly and the trial court’s error 
in not addressing the improper argument was not harmless. 
As discussed above, the prosecutor’s argument improperly 
suggested that defendant bore the burden of proof. It is a 
“fundamental and longstanding” right of a defendant that 
the state, and not the defendant, must prove every element 
of a crime beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Federico , 375 
Or 473, 492, ___ P3d ___ (2026) (citing State v. Chitwood, 370 
Or 305, 321, 518 P3d 903 (2022)). The prosecutor’s improper 
argument stood that fundamental right on its head and prej-
udiced defendant before the jury. Further, the prosecutor’s 
comments concerned a key argument in the defense’s case, 
rather than an “incidental or collateral matter.” See Spieler, 
269 Or App at 645 (noting that the prosecutor’s improper 
comments affecting a critical element of the defense’s case 
weighed in favor of finding the error prejudicial). One of defen-
dant’s primary defenses is that he did not have the reckless 
mental state required to be found guilty of violating the SPO. 
He argued that he went to the bar only after Portune tex -
ted him that B was not there—and the prosecutor’s improper 
statements directly called that argument into question.
 Additionally, the trial court did not sustain the 
objection in front of the jury and instead said “[g]o ahead, 
258 State v. Deangelo
counsel,” exacerbating the harmfulness of the error. See 
Starr, 337 Or App at 691 (noting that a trial court overruling 
a defendant’s request to strike an improper argument accen-
tuated the error). Finally, improper statements made during 
rebuttal “have the power of recency in the minds of the jury,” 
and thus are more likely to be persuasive. Chitwood, 370 
Or at 318. Thus, the prosecutor’s mischaracterization of the 
burden, and the fact that the court allowed the prosecutor to 
continue with the argument, may have mislead the jury as 
to the correct burden of proof.
 In sum, “[w]e must reverse when it is clear that 
an argument was improper, properly challenged and likely 
to prejudice the jury unfairly.” State v. Rosenbohm, 237 Or 
App 646, 649, 241 P3d 344 (2010) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). Here, the prosecutor’s comment was improper, it 
was appropriate for defendant to object on the grounds of 
burden shifting, the argument prejudiced the jury unfairly, 
and the trial court’s error in failing to sustain the objection 
was not harmless.
 Reversed and remanded.
