A179700
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/19/state_v._hambrick.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10953527/state-v-hambrick/
Caption: State v. Hambrick
Date: 2026-08-19

308 August 19, 2026 No. 783
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
DANIEL SCOTT HAMBRICK,
Defendant-Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
22CR31722; A179700
Erik M. Buchér, Judge.
Submitted July 25, 2024.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Kyle Sessions, Deputy Public Defender, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission, filed the briefs for appellant.
Ellen F. Rosenblum, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General, and Robert M. Wilsey, Assistant Attorney 
General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Pagán, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.*
PAGÁN, J.
Affirmed.
Shorr, P. J., dissenting.
______________
 * O’Connor, Judge vice Mooney, Senior Judge.
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 309
 PAGÁN, J.
 This is a criminal appeal in which defendant 
appeals from a judgment of conviction for stalking pursu -
ant to ORS 163.732 (Count 1); menacing pursuant to ORS 
163.190 (Count 2); and attempted coercion pursuant to 
ORS 163.275, ORS 161.405 (Count 3). Defendant raises two 
assignments of error, arguing that the trial court erred by 
denying his motions for judgment of acquittal (MJOA) on the 
stalking and menacing charges. Defendant argues that the 
communications at issue were equivocal and protected free 
speech under State v. Rangel, 328 Or 294, 306, 977 P2d 379 
(1999). For the reasons explained below, we conclude that 
the trial court did not err in denying defendant’s motions 
because a reasonable trier of fact could have found, based on 
the context, that at least two of defendant’s communications 
with the victim were repeated and unwanted contacts under 
ORS 163.732(1) (stalking) and that defendant intentionally 
placed the victim in fear of imminent serious physical injury 
under ORS 163.190(1) (menacing). Accordingly, we affirm.
I. FACTS
 As we will discuss in greater detail below, the cir -
cumstances surrounding defendant’s communications in 
June and July 2022 are highly relevant to our analysis. We 
will thus discuss the brief history of the parties’ interactions.
 The victim, D, lives in Hillsboro with her husband 
and children. D was born and raised in Texas and is the 
daughter of a famous cardiologist. 1 In November 2021, D 
received a letter signed with the name “Danny” and a thumb 
drive from defendant, a person she did not know and with 
whom she had never communicated, in which he explained 
in a “confusing” manner that he knew D’s father. D did not 
feel threatened and simply discarded the letter and the 
thumb drive.
 On May 7, 2022, D received another letter, also from 
“Danny.” D did not feel threatened by the second letter—it 
was rambling and incoherent but did not contain threats. 
The letter referred to a timeframe of “2 months,” but D did 
 1 The family frequently received letters from strangers due to D’s father’s 
lifesaving medical work. 
310 State v. Hambrick
not know what, if anything, that meant. D kept the letter 
because she thought it was “strange” and “unsettling,” but 
she did not think there was any “reason to call anyone” to 
report it.
 On May 23, 2022, D received a third letter, again 
signed “Danny,” from defendant dated May 22, 2022, which 
contained the following:
 “You want to be a baby boo, I want that also, I want 
this in a way that makes you feel confident, sexy, attrac -
tive, [and] way way more imaginative than your Mother. 
There is tape under my desk [and] your father told me, and 
do not think this image in my head didn’t have anything to 
do with this. We are in a unique situation. If you want to 
dress up really really slutty, * * * Wear something sluttier 
than your Mother, from the car to my door that makes you 
feel confident, ask me to show you the patent material for 
your father and then ask me to do that which you’ve wanted 
me to do most, knowing about the ring [and] Harry [and] 
June, kind of take the initial shine off. But you can wear 
my Arsenal jersey on the sofa if you do, and that makes me 
remember the time you said ‘It was me,’ and we both were 
furious about that.
 “How does a woman feel comfortable? When she is get -
ting fucked like silly and it isn’t till she’s raped in some 
cultures. I have never liked that word as it means anger to 
me, I will allow you to force me to do whatever makes you 
feel like my [D’s first name], even if that means I let you go 
nuts sometimes. That is love.”
 The letter also suggested that defendant had a 
vague, but hostile, relationship with both of D’s parents. D 
felt the letter was “very perverse to read * * * and disturbing.”
 On June 9, 2022, D received a FedEx delivery that 
required her signature. She signed for the large envelope 
before realizing it was from defendant. When she saw it 
was from defendant, she asked the delivery driver to take it 
back.
 On June 20, a bouquet of roses arrived at D’s home 
with an unsigned note that said, “Would you accept a rose?” 
D believed that the roses were from defendant; she checked 
the FedEx website and learned that the rejected envelope 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 311
had been returned to defendant that day. D felt “increas -
ingly worried and uncomfortable” because the letters were 
getting more frequent, and she had now received a pack -
age. A couple of days later, D received a fourth letter from 
defendant dated June 23, 2022, which stated, among other 
things:
 “Lady [D],
 “I have thought about it. Prayed about it. May, my 
puppy was spayed Tuesday and we really have two options. 
Marion [and] Katrin’s way, I get mad, you get sad, or pris-
oner exchange. You saw my night shirt I sleep in. I got them 
for free. In prisoner exchange, it is simple, He works for 
me—not to exceed the time she works for you. I need one 
of your girls, to shut my sister’s mother in law up. If I can 
get a beautiful Korean girl on a table near Clemson South 
Carolina before the end of this week, I die happy. If she is 
dead, like Katrin, my mom gets to ask herself for a little 
while how you and I walked in one day and sat a Korean 
girl on a table, and will tape that S, so so funny.
“* * * * *
 “I want this before the end of this month. I want July 
to be a happy month July for you. * * * [G]et a sitter for 
the girls, or bring them, your call, I want this before next 
week.”
 As will be discussed in more detail below, D believed 
that that letter indicated that defendant was either in 
Oregon or going to travel to Oregon shortly, and she believed 
that it was threatening in nature.
 On June 29, D received a call from a 737 area code, 
which is a Texas area code. She blocked the number. On 
July 2, D unblocked the number because she suspected that 
“Danny” was going to travel to Oregon, and she wanted 
to know if he did. Beginning at 12 a.m. on July 3, and 
“throughout the night,” D received several text messages, 
missed calls, and a voicemail. Those contacts were from a 
woman named Claudia who claimed to be defendant’s girl-
friend. D found the messages “alarming.” But she explained 
that “[t]here wasn’t really anything specifically threatening 
to [her]” and she wondered if it was all a prank.
312 State v. Hambrick
 On July 3, 2022, D called the police nonemergency 
line. D shared the letters and other information and com -
munications with the officers as they communicated with 
her throughout that day. At 9:30 that evening, D received 
a voicemail from “Dan” explaining that he was in Oregon, 
that he had just been released from jail, and that he was 
going to look for a hotel. D called the police again.
 An hour later, D received a second voicemail from 
“Dan” in which he said he was stuck at the Fairfield Inn in 
room 315 because his car had been impounded. He warned 
D that he had “significant training as an assassin” and said 
that if D did not show up in person to his hotel in the next 
24 to 48 hours he was going to go after D’s loved ones.
 D called 9-1-1 to report that defendant had threat -
ened her. D called the police following the two voicemails 
because she was “alarmed” that the caller had travelled all 
the way to Oregon, and she feared for her safety. Hillsboro 
Officers Johnson and Koral investigated. They confirmed 
that a person named Daniel Hambrick lived in Texas. 
Johnson ran a criminal history check and learned that 
defendant had been arrested and released in Oregon on July 
2, 2022, on an unrelated matter. Johnson then checked the 
Fairfield Inn in The Dalles and learned that a guest with 
defendant’s name was staying there. Hillsboro police then 
asked The Dalles police to send someone to the Fairfield Inn 
to speak to defendant. Officer Kramer of The Dalles police 
met defendant at the hotel. Defendant explained to Officer 
Kramer that he was in Oregon traveling to Hillsboro to 
meet D because she was supposed to marry him. Kramer 
and defendant talked for approximately 30 minutes and 
touched on many random topics. Afterwards, Kramer did 
not believe that defendant was a threat to D. Kramer did 
not arrest defendant because he did not believe that he had 
probable cause that defendant had committed a crime.
 When he learned that The Dalles police had not 
arrested defendant, Koral drove to The Dalles and contacted 
defendant. Defendant told Koral that he was in Oregon to 
“be with [D].” Koral arrested defendant.
 Defendant was charged with stalking, menacing, and 
attempted coercion. He waived his right to a jury trial and 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 313
was tried to the court. At trial, at the completion of the state’s 
case, defendant moved for a judgment of acquittal on both the 
stalking and menacing counts. Defendant argued that his 
communications with D did not satisfy Rangel’s requirements 
because neither communication constituted an unequivocal 
threat to D. The trial court denied the motions, stating that 
while the communications alone would not be sufficient, com-
bined with defendant’s behavior, the evidence was sufficient.
 The court found defendant guilty as charged and 
sentenced defendant to 180 days in jail and 36 months of 
probation. Defendant appealed, challenging the trial court’s 
denial of his MJOAs for stalking and menacing.
II. ANALYSIS
 In reviewing the denial of an MJOA, we consider 
whether a rational trier of fact could have found the essen -
tial elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt, view-
ing the evidence in the light most favorable to the state. 
State v. Rader, 348 Or 81, 91, 228 P3d 552 (2010).
A. The Stalking Charge
 In his first assignment of error, defendant contends 
that the trial court erred by denying his MJOA on Count 
1, stalking. Specifically, defendant argues that the letters, 
package, bouquet of flowers, and unsigned note that he 
sent to D did not constitute “true threats” and, therefore, 
the state failed to meet its burden of proving the crime of 
stalking.
 Under ORS 163.732(1), a person commits the crime 
of stalking if:
 “(a) The person knowingly alarms or coerces another 
person * * * by engaging in repeated and unwanted contact 
with the other person;
“(b) It is objectively reasonable for a person in the 
victim’s situation to have been alarmed or coerced by the 
contact; and
“(c) The repeated and unwanted contact causes 
the victim reasonable apprehension regarding the personal 
safety of the victim or a member of the victim’s immediate 
family or household.”
314 State v. Hambrick
 ORS 163.730(1) defines “alarm” as “to cause appre-
hension or fear resulting from the perception of danger.” 
“Contact” includes but is not limited to “[s]ending or mak -
ing written or electronic communications in any form to the 
other person,” as well as several other enumerated forms of 
expressive and non-expressive conduct. ORS 163.730(3).
 The parties agree that when contacts are consid -
ered expressive communication—such as the speech or writ-
ing in this case—they “must consist of a threat that convinc-
ingly expresses to the addressee the intention that it will 
be carried out, and that the actor has the ability to do so” 
in order to comply with Article I, section 8, of the Oregon 
Constitution.2 Rangel, 328 Or at 306 (emphasis in original). 
In other words, “a contact involving expression cannot under-
lie a stalking conviction unless the expressive contact was a 
threat that ‘instills in the addressee a fear of imminent and 
serious personal violence from the speaker, is unequivocal, 
and is objectively likely to be followed by unlawful acts.’ ” 
S. L. L. v. MacDonald , 267 Or App 628, 630, 340 P3d 773 
(2014) (quoting Rangel, 328 Or at 303). However, “hyperbole, 
rhetorical excesses, and impotent expressions of anger or 
frustration” do not constitute threats under Rangel. Rangel, 
328 Or at 303 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 Equally important for our analysis is that we must 
view the communications “cumulatively,” being mindful that 
what “might appear benign when viewed in isolation can 
take on a different character when viewed either in combi -
nation with or against the backdrop of one party’s aggres -
sive behavior toward the other.” C. P. v. Mittelbach, 304 Or 
App 569, 577, 468 P3d 496 (2020) (internal quotation marks 
omitted).
1. The June 23, 2022 Letter
 With that analysis in mind, we conclude that the 
June 23, 2022 letter qualified as a “contact” under ORS 
163.732 because that letter instilled in D “a fear of imminent 
and serious personal violence” that was “objectively likely 
to be followed by unlawful acts.” See Rangel, 328 Or at 303. 
 2 Article I, section 8, provides, in part, that “[n]o law shall be passed restrain-
ing the free expression of opinion, or restricting the right to speak * * * on any 
subject whatever[.]”
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 315
Defendant remonstrates that “the letter contained no true 
threats, i.e., no objective and unequivocal threat to inflict 
physical violence,” and that D “was not in apprehension of 
an imminent threat of physical violence.” But defendant’s 
argument lacks accuracy and context. To begin, defendant 
inaccurately argues that the June 23 letter did not contain 
a temporal statement from which D could infer that any 
threat was “imminent.” That argument ignores that the let-
ter stated that defendant had expectations that had to be 
fulfilled by the end of the week, and that he had planned for 
July to be “something special” for D, which was days away 
when she received the letter.
 Regarding the nature of the threat, the context and 
escalation of the statements undermines defendant’s argu-
ments. First, D testified that she first received a letter from 
defendant in November 2021, and that she did not know 
who defendant was. According to D, she discarded the letter 
thinking it was a “scam” and the letter had not “seem[ed] 
threatening at that time.” Approximately six months later, 
D received a second letter from defendant which included 
personal information about D’s family that D believed defen-
dant “could have gotten * * * from anywhere, from reading 
about [D’s family].” The letter also included the phrase 
“Your Danny is a bit slow sometimes, still have 2 months.” 
D explained that she did not know what that phrase meant 
at the time. D found that second letter to be “unsettling,” 
and she kept it “just in case there’s more[.]” Thus, defen -
dant’s prior contacts, before the June 23 letter, provided an 
already disturbing context, including: obsessive behavior 
including gathering information about her family and loca -
tion; discussing romantic and sexual relations despite being 
strangers and without her having provided any consent, and 
suggesting that he would engage in sexual relations with D 
against her will; and, finally, a vague deadline stated in a 
threatening manner: “[You] still have 2 months.”
 Recalling the specifics of the June 23 letter, it 
stated:
 “I have thought about it. Prayed about it. May, my 
puppy, was spayed Tuesday and we really have two options. 
Marion [and] Katrin’s way, I get mad, you get sad, or 
316 State v. Hambrick
prisoner exchange. You saw my night shirt I sleep in. I got 
them for free. In prisoner exchange, it is simple, he works 
for me, not to exceed the time she works for you.
 “I need one of your girls, to shut my sister’s mother in 
law up. If I can set a beautiful Korean girl on a table in 
near Clemson South Carolina before the end of this week, 
I die happy. If she is dead, like Katrin, my mom gets to ask 
herself for a little while how you and I walked in one day 
and sat a Korean girl on a table, and will tape that S, so so 
funny.
 * * * * *
“I want all of this before the end of this month. I want July 
to be a happy July for you. * * * Get a sitter for the girls, or 
bring them, your call, I want this before next week.”
 D stated that that letter to her “fe[lt] like there’s 
some harmful intention.” D explained that her husband 
“is Korean,” and that her daughters “look Korean.” D was 
“very much on alert to receive this,” and although she did 
not know if defendant was “actually going to take action,” 
she “was a lot more alerted and worried about it.” When 
asked what she meant by “alerted,” D said that “it looks like 
[defendant] knows my—he knows—he seems to know more 
about me, about my family * * * the impression from this let-
ter, whatever he has in mind is harmful. And why would 
he talk about my family like this?” When asked what she 
meant by “like this,” D clarified: “Like about having one of 
my daughters on the table that would make his, I think, his 
mother-in-law happy to see her like that.”
 D also testified that defendant’s reference in the let-
ter to “I want this before next week” “added to [her] stress,” 
in light of defendant’s earlier letters and packages he had 
sent to her home:
 “And so, yes, I’m thinking, okay, yeah, July is coming 
up, I want this before next week. So that—it says ‘coming 
up.’ And then in his previous letter, he talked about in two 
months’ time. So there seems to be some sort of plan or 
some plan of his that if he really wanted to carry some -
thing out that it would happen in July. Right.” 
 That evidence is sufficient to permit a reasonable 
trier of fact to find that, in the totality of the circumstances, 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 317
defendant’s fourth letter to D constituted a “threat” that 
instilled in D “a fear of imminent and serious personal vio -
lence” that was “objectively likely to be followed by unlawful 
acts.” Rangel, 328 Or at 303; see also State v. Murphy, 306 
Or App 535, 541-42, 475 P3d 100 (2020), rev den, 367 Or 
559 (2021) (contacts must be considered under the totality of 
the circumstances). We reject defendant’s argument that the 
vagueness of defendant’s message should lead us to conclude 
that the evidence was insufficient, as the vagueness itself, 
combined with the other content of defendant’s messages, 
caused D to reasonably have a higher level of apprehension 
because of her inability to prepare for whatever defendant 
had planned.
 Further, a reasonable trier of fact could have found 
that the threat was “imminent.” As we have previously 
explained, an imminent threat need not convey a risk of 
immediate harm. S. L. L. , 267 Or App at 633. Instead, an 
imminent threat is “ready to take place” or “near at hand.” 
Id.; see also State v. Dompeling, 171 Or App 692, 695, 17 
P3d 535 (2000) (explaining that imminent means “near at 
hand, impending, or menacingly near” (internal quotation 
marks omitted)). And like other aspects of whether a state -
ment is threatening, imminence is examined in the totality 
of the circumstances. See S. L. L., 267 Or App at 633; A.Z. 
v. Lange, 336 Or App 652, 657, 562 P3d 647 (2024) (conclud-
ing that evidence that the respondent lived in California 
and would need to travel to Oregon in order to carry out 
his threats did not, on that record, preclude the threat from 
giving rise to a fear of imminent harm that was objectively 
likely to be followed by unlawful acts). Defendant argues, 
and the dissent agrees, that our decision in State v. C. S. , 
275 Or App 126, 134, 365 P3d 535 (2015) requires us to find 
that the threats here were not imminent. 352 Or App at 324 
(Shorr, P.J., dissenting). But we disagree that the context 
of C. S. is analogous. C. S. involved a minor child who did 
not demonstrate any independent capability to carry out the 
threats they were making to others, regardless of the spec -
ificity of the timing in the threats. C. S., 275 Or App at 134. 
Here, the context includes multiple references, beginning in 
May 2022, that defendant expected D to either consent to 
a relationship with him by July, or he would cause her or 
318 State v. Hambrick
her family physical harm. Defendant’s reference to wanting 
something “before next week” was certainly imminent, par-
ticularly because it was vague and yet very near in time, 
which is far more concerning for someone who is considering 
how to protect themselves and other family members.
 Defendant’s statements in the fourth letter also 
sufficed to permit a reasonable trier of fact to find that the 
victim had a reasonable apprehension or fear for the safety 
of her family. As noted, the text of the stalking statute 
requires proof that the victim has “reasonable apprehension” 
regarding personal safety or the safety of a family member 
as a result of the unlawful contacts. ORS 163.732(1)(c). For 
expressive contacts, Rangel requires the contact to “instill[ ] 
in the addressee a fear of imminent and serious personal 
violence.” 328 Or at 303. Rangel derived that requirement, in 
part, from the statutory definition of “alarm,” which “means 
to cause apprehension or fear resulting from the perception 
of danger.” ORS 163.730(1); see also Delgado v. Souders, 334 
Or 122, 150, 46 P3d 729 (2002) (“In the context of commu -
nicative contacts, the term ‘alarm’ in * * * ORS 163.730(1) 
refers to causing apprehension or fear of personal violence.” 
(discussing Rangel; footnote omitted)).
 D’s testimony sufficed to permit a reasonable trier 
of fact to find that she was concerned, alarmed, and worried 
about defendant’s threat. D testified that after receiving the 
fourth letter she was “very much on alert to receive this.” D 
testified that she believed that defendant had a plan to come 
to Oregon, or was in Oregon already, and that something 
was going to happen by the end of the week. Coupled with 
her testimony that she believed that defendant’s plan was 
harmful, the evidence sufficed to prove that D was alarmed.
2. Defendant’s voicemail
 Defendant’s second voicemail to D on July 3 also 
could have reasonably constituted a “threat” under Rangel. 
In that recording, defendant told D:
 “I have rallied—this is [defendant]. This is for [D]. I 
need you to talk to me in person. I’m at the Fairfield near -
est the correction facility. The room is number 315, three 
one five. Come alone, and I’ll be fine, or else I’m going to 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 319
begin engaging my Great Uncle Harry’s assassin, and you 
don’t want that to happen. I have significant training as an 
assassin.
 “So unless you want me to start going after somebody 
or multiple people that you love, I would recommend that 
you basically show up in person in the next 24 to 48 hours. 
I have to be here until my car gets out of impound. Thank 
you. Bye.”
 D described herself as “extremely alarmed,” after 
hearing that voicemail. She stated, “I didn’t know how close 
he was. He said he was in Oregon. I thought, well, either 
way, if I don’t do something, then I’m also putting other peo-
ple in danger.” D called 9-1-1. When asked why she was con-
cerned about putting other people in danger, D explained 
that “[defendant’s] claiming to be a trained assassin, * * * 
and he—he’s threatening, like, my direct loved ones. So one 
or more people he would harm.”
 When asked if she was fearful for her “personal 
safety” or the safety of her family members, D answered: 
“Yes.” D was concerned that defendant could arrive at her 
home because he had her address, and “he’s saying he’s 
in Oregon. I didn’t know at that time exactly where the 
Fairfield Inn was, but I didn’t know how close he was.”
 From that evidence, a reasonable trier of fact could 
have found that defendant’s second voicemail constituted a 
“threat” that instilled in D a fear of imminent and serious 
personal violence that was objectively likely to be followed by 
unlawful acts if D failed to comply with defendant’s demand. 
Defendant expressly told D that if she did not come “talk to 
me in person” within “24 to 48 hours” he would “start going 
after somebody or multiple people that you love;” that he 
would “be engaging my Great Uncle Harry’s assassin,” and 
that he had “significant training as an assassin.”
 Defendant contends that the second voicemail did 
not constitute a threat under Rangel because any harm was 
not “imminent.” Defendant does not appear to argue that his 
“24 to 48 hour” timeline was too long to be “imminent” under 
ORS 163.732. Instead, defendant argues that “the addressee 
must believe that the speaker had the ability to imminently 
carry out the threatened harm,” and D could not have had 
320 State v. Hambrick
that belief here because “[d]efendant explained that his vehi-
cle had been impounded and that he had to stay where he 
was until he retrieved it.” We disagree. A reasonable trier 
of fact could have found that defendant’s threat did instill 
in D a fear of imminent serious physical violence because 
defendant’s “24 to 48 hour” ultimatum may have been tied 
to when he could retrieve his car and leave the Fairfield Inn. 
As noted, in the second voicemail defendant told the victim: 
“I have to be here until my car gets out of impound . Thank 
you. Bye.” (Emphasis added.) Read in context, a reasonable 
factfinder could have found that defendant was demanding 
that D meet him at the Fairfield Inn before defendant could 
retrieve his car from impound; that is, in “the next 24 to 
48 hours.” In the totality of the circumstances, defendant’s 
threat to “start going after somebody or multiple people” that 
the victim loved was sufficiently “ready to take place” or “near 
at hand” to constitute an “imminent” threat. See S. L. L. , 
267 Or App at 633. Further, defendant had already demon -
strated through his conduct that he was extremely eager to 
complete his plan, even though he had already been arrested 
in Oregon and had lost the use of his vehicle. Defendant had 
left his home state, was arrested under circumstances irrel-
evant to this appeal, was released without access to his vehi-
cle, and still sought to find a hotel to execute the plan he had 
for D. In that context, it was reasonable for D to believe that 
defendant was determined to make physical contact with 
her, regardless of the roadblocks he might encounter.
 Accordingly, because a reasonable factfinder could 
find that defendant engaged in at least two qualifying “con-
tacts” under ORS 163.732, the trial court correctly denied 
defendant’s MJOA on the stalking charge.
B. The Menacing Charge
 Finally, we briefly address defendant’s second 
assignment of error. Defendant argues that he was entitled 
to a judgment of acquittal on the menacing charge because 
“the statement was not credible to threaten serious injury,” 
and “because the threatened conduct was not imminent.”
 Defendant was charged with one count of menacing 
based on the second voicemail he left for the victim on July 3, 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 321
2022. ORS 163.190(1) provides that “[a] person commits the 
crime of menacing if by word or conduct the person inten -
tionally attempts to place another person in fear of immi -
nent serious physical injury.” Here, a reasonable trier of fact 
could have found that defendant’s second voicemail placed D 
in fear of imminent serious physical injury, because, as was 
discussed in detail above, a reasonable trier of fact could 
have found that defendant was imminently threatening D, 
and D’s loved ones, with assassination, i.e., “serious physical 
injury.”
 Defendant argues that his statement was merely 
“the kind of vague hyperbolic threat that does not suffi -
ciently identify the nature of the threatened injury.” We dis-
agree, and conclude that such a term is, in fact, highly spe -
cific. As D explained, she understood the term “assassin” to 
mean someone that kills people, and that is consistent with 
the ordinary meaning of the term, which Webster’s defines 
as “one that murders either for hire or from fanatic adher -
ence to a cause.” Webster’s Third New Int’l Dictionary 130 
(unabridged ed 2002). Thus, it is not unreasonable to con -
clude that defendant—by claiming training as an assassin 
and threatening to “go after” D’s loved ones—was threat -
ening to kill those people, and, thus, was threatening them 
with “serious physical injury” as within the meaning of ORS 
163.190(1). Further, we strain to imagine what alternative 
meaning of the word “assassin” defendant was communicat-
ing to D besides his ability to either cause serious physical 
injury or death to her or one of her loved ones. There is no rea-
sonable circumstance that a stranger would say to another 
stranger—unsolicited—that they are a trained assassin 
unless they want to communicate that they have the ability 
to kill someone. To the extent that the statement was vague, 
in this context the vagueness would weigh against defen -
dant, as it would only lead to a reasonable person imagining 
multiple ways defendant could have meant to cause death 
or injury. We do not read Rangel to protect clear threats of 
imminent violence if the declarant happens to obfuscate the 
exact nature of the harm they intend to inflict.
 Defendant also argues that he was entitled to a 
judgment of acquittal on the menacing charge because he 
322 State v. Hambrick
gave the victim “24 to 48 hours” to comply with his demand 
and, thus, any threat to the victim’s loved ones was not 
“imminent” under ORS 163.190(1). Compare Dompeling, 171 
Or App at 695-96 (threat that the youth would stab victim 
in her sleep, a vague but close at hand time, was sufficiently 
imminent even though youth did not have a knife when they 
made the statement), with C. S., 275 Or App at 133 (con -
cluding that repeated, vague threats to several students 
by youth to inflict harm in the unspecified future were not 
imminent). We disagree. This case is like Dompeling, where 
a vague threat that the youth “thought about doing it while 
[victim] was in [her] sleep” was tied to a particular, yet also 
vague, time period that we considered imminent: in the vic-
tim’s sleep, whenever that would occur. Dompeling, 171 Or 
App at 694. The threats here are also tied to a very spe -
cific, yet also vague, time period: 24-48 hours. Again, the 
vagueness here weighs against defendant because D could 
not know whether she and her family were in danger at the 
24-hour mark or whether defendant would choose to “give 
her more time.” When a deadline is given that would trig -
ger violence, such as the one here, that was palpably close 
in time considering how much defendant knew about D’s 
family members and how difficult it would be for D to react 
in a way that could protect them, a reasonable trier of fact 
could readily find that defendant’s threat was imminent. 
Defendant’s demand that D “show up in person in the next 
24 to 48 hours” unless she wanted him to “start going after 
somebody or multiple people that you love” was not vague or 
speculative. That threat, coupled with defendant’s escalat-
ing behavior that had already led him to a decision to leave 
Texas and travel to Oregon to be closer to D and her family, 
was sufficiently “ready to take place” or “near at hand” to 
constitute an “imminent” threat. The trial court correctly 
denied defendant’s MJOA.
 Affirmed.
 SHORR, P. J., dissenting in part, concurring in 
part.
 I write separately because I disagree in part with 
the majority’s analysis, at least as it is applied under our cur-
rent case law, regarding whether at least one of defendant’s 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 323
threats to D met the standard to be an imminent threat 
to support a stalking conviction under ORS 163.732(1). 
Because I would conclude that defendant’s threats in his 
June 23, 2024, letter (also referred to as the “fourth letter” 
in the trial court) did not meet the standard for an “immi -
nent” threat, I would conclude that the state did not present 
sufficient evidence to prove at least one of the two unwanted 
contacts required to prove stalking under ORS 163.732(1). 
Therefore, the trial court erred in denying the motion for 
judgment of acquittal on that charge. However, I agree with 
the majority that defendant’s July 3, 2022, voicemail to D 
included an imminent threat and was sufficient to support 
the menacing conviction under ORS 163.190(1). 1 The trial 
court did not err in denying an acquittal on that charge. As 
a result, I respectfully dissent in part and concur in part.
 I begin with my agreement with the majority’s 
analysis. First, I agree that the threat to support both 
the stalking and menacing convictions in this case, which 
involves speech, must convey an “imminent” threat of seri-
ous physical injury. I do not repeat all of the majority’s 
analysis here. I further agree that, under our case law, an 
imminent threat is one that is “near at hand, impending, 
or menacingly near.” State ex rel Juv. Dept. v. Dompeling , 
171 Or App 692, 695, 17 P3d 535 (2000) (internal quotation 
marks omitted). I also agree that we consider the statements 
in the totality of the circumstances. S. L. L. v MacDonald , 
267 Or App 628, 633, 340 P3d 773 (2014).
 Even with the benefit of those general standards, 
determining what is an imminent threat of serious harm 
can be a difficult task. The threats that come before the 
trial courts and us are often made by people who are act -
ing out in moments of rage with people close to them or 
are made by strangers who may have mental illness. They 
may convey passing feelings of anger and frustration, inco-
herent but violent ramblings, or true threats of impending 
violence. How to distinguish among them is often quite dif-
ficult. In addition, because verbal threats are expressive in 
nature, we must be particularly careful. The guarantees 
 1 Defendant does not challenge his conviction for attempted coercion, ORS 
163.275 (Count 3).
324 State v. Hambrick
of the right to free speech in Article I, Section 8, of the 
Oregon Constitution prohibit, subject to historical excep -
tions inapplicable here, the legislature from criminaliz -
ing the content of speech, although permit criminalizing 
“the pursuit or accomplishment of forbidden results” from 
that speech. State v. Rangel, 328 Or 294, 302, 977 P2d 379 
(1999) (quoting State v. Robertson, 293 Or 402, 416-17, 649 
P2d 569 (1982)); see also State v. C. S., 275 Or App 126, 130, 
365 P3d 535 (2015) (noting that obviously empty threats of 
serious injury are not so harmful as to deserve criminal 
sanction).
 We do have some further guidance from precedent 
on this issue, and this is where I depart from the major -
ity. In C. S., we concluded that a threat by a middle school 
youth to harm another child within increasingly narrow 
time frames, which ultimately included a threat to do harm 
within three days, was not “near at hand,” “impending,” or 
“menacingly near.” 275 Or App at 133. The majority ignores 
the specific time frames discussed in that case.
 I do not read C. S. to require that we always take 
the threat entirely at face value and, as noted, we consider 
the totality of the circumstances. It should go without say -
ing that a child’s threats and taunts at a middle school 
are made in a completely different context than threats by 
adults, and their sincerity may be treated differently. Still, 
C. S. and our other case law do consider the text and actual 
time frames conveyed in the threat and their surrounding 
context. If the threat to attack someone in three days in C. 
S. was not imminent, it is hard to conclude that the threat 
in the June 23 letter to harm D’s children “before the end 
of this week” or before “the end of this month” is imminent. 
See also id. (stating that the vague threats are insufficient 
because the “possibility of unspecified future harm * * * is 
not the equivalent of ‘imminent’ harm.”).
 Significant to this case and the totality of the cir -
cumstances, the implicit threat in the fourth letter was deliv-
ered by mail from Texas to Oregon (and bizarrely and implic-
itly threatened to harm D’s children in South Carolina). D 
understood that defendant’s letters came from Texas. At that 
point at least, there was no indication that defendant was in 
Cite as 352 Or App 308 (2026) 325
Oregon or had any plan to come to Oregon. 2 That fact fur -
ther supports the conclusion that the threat was not immi -
nent. We have treated threats from other states differently 
depending on the particular circumstances. In V. G. G. v. 
Beckham, 224 Or App 565, 578, 198 P3d 980 (2008), we con-
cluded that an email threat sent by the accused stalker from 
California to Oregon was not imminent where the accused 
lived in California, apparently did not know the protected 
person’s Oregon address, and there was no evidence of a 
plan to come to Oregon—although the respondent had vis -
ited Oregon in the past. By contrast, in A. Z. v. Lange , 336 
Or App 652, 657, 562 P3d 647 (2024), we held that a threat 
from someone who lived in California was imminent where 
the respondent knew the Oregon victim’s address and inti-
mate details about their whereabouts, indicated that he was 
not in California, had planned to return to the area, and 
had resided for a time with the victim’s mother. This case 
falls a bit in between but, as in V. G. G., there is no evidence 
that defendant at the time that he sent the fourth letter had 
any plan to come to Oregon. In sum, I conclude that the 
fourth letter did not convey an imminent threat and could 
not be the basis for a second contact necessary to prove the 
stalking charge under ORS 163.732(1).
 I agree, however, that the implicit threat conveyed 
in the July 3 voicemail to harm D if she did not visit him “in 
the next 24 to 48 hours” was sufficiently imminent to sup -
port the menacing charge under ORS 163.190(1). As above, 
the context of the threat and the totality of the circum -
stances matter. By that point, defendant was conveying his 
progressively looming threats from nearby in Oregon. He 
had travelled thousands of miles from Texas to Oregon in an 
attempt to meet D, which supports the inference that defen-
dant had an intent to follow through on his obsession and 
past threats. There was sufficient evidence of imminence at 
 2 I disagree with the majority’s factual statement that D testified that, at the 
time she received the fourth letter, she “believed defendant had a plan to come 
to Oregon or was in Oregon already.” 352 Or App at 318-19. Indeed, although D 
had a feeling defendant might come to Oregon, she testified that she did not con -
tact police at that point because “I didn’t feel like I was in danger” and “I didn’t 
even know, really, is it—this is a real person? Is this a prank?” D did not under -
stand that defendant was in Oregon until she received the voicemail from him on 
July 3.
326 State v. Hambrick
that point. The trial court did not err in denying the motion 
for judgment of acquittal on the menacing charge.
 I respectfully dissent in part and concur in part.
