A185819
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/19/walker__washburn_v._progressive_universal_ins._co..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10953520/walker-washburn-v-progressive-universal-ins-co/
Caption: Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
Date: 2026-08-19

No. 781 August 19, 2026 287
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
Matthew WALKER,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
PROGRESSIVE UNIVERSAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Defendant-Respondent.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
23CV31115; A185819 (Control)
Matthew WASHBURN,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
PROGRESSIVE UNIVERSAL INSURANCE COMPANY,
Defendant-Respondent.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
23CV27813; A185820
Judith H. Matarazzo, Judge. (General Judgment filed 
October 15, 2024)
Peter O. Tuenge, Judge pro tempore. (General Judgment 
filed October 21, 2024)
Argued and submitted June 3, 2026.
Travis Eiva argued the cause for appellants. Also on the 
briefs was Rachel Jennings.
Katie D. Buxman argued the cause for respondent. Also 
on the brief was Alexander J. Brunino.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
POWERS, J.
Reversed and remanded.
288 Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
Cite as 352 Or App 287 (2026) 289
 POWERS, J.
 In this consolidated appeal, plaintiffs challenge the 
trial court’s dismissal of their claims against defendant, 
Progressive Universal Insurance Company. In separate acci-
dents, plaintiffs were injured by an underinsured driver 
while driving motorcycles, resulting in injuries greater than 
their motorcycle Uninsured/Underinsured (UM/UIM) bene -
fits. In addition to their motorcycle insurance, plaintiffs had 
Progressive auto policies that covered other vehicles that were 
not involved in the accident. Plaintiffs sought additional UIM 
coverage under their auto policies, and defendant denied those 
claims, asserting that the “regular use” exclusion applied. 
Plaintiffs sued for breach of contract, arguing that the auto 
policy “regular use” exclusion was unenforceable because the 
application of that exclusion provided less favorable coverage 
than the Oregon model policy described in statute, which 
sets forth the minimum coverage requirements. Defendant 
maintained that a proper coverage-to-coverage analysis did 
not require the trial court to void policy provisions based on 
hypothetical facts and that, here, plaintiffs’ arguments are 
hypothetical because plaintiffs would each be denied cover -
age under the model policy. On cross-motions for summary 
judgment, the trial court agreed with defendant’s argu -
ments, granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment, 
and denied plaintiffs’ motion.1 As explained below, because 
the facts do implicate the exclusion and the application of the 
auto policy exclusion results in less favorable coverage than 
the model policy requires, we reverse and remand.
 In reviewing cross-motions for summary judgment, 
we view the record for each motion in the light most favor-
able to the party opposing it to determine whether there is 
a genuine issue of material fact and, if not, whether either 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. O’Kain v. 
Landress, 299 Or App 417, 419, 450 P3d 508 (2019).
 The relevant facts are few and undisputed. Walker 
and Washburn (collectively, plaintiffs) were separately injured 
in motorcycle accidents caused by underinsured drivers but 
 1 Although plaintiffs’ cases were separate and they filed separate motions 
for summary judgment, we generally refer to only a single motion because they 
present identical issues.
290 Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
present parallel UIM claims. At the time of each of the acci-
dents, plaintiffs had motorcycle insurance policies in addi -
tion to a separate Progressive auto policy, which included 
UIM coverage. Plaintiffs sustained injuries greater than 
their motorcycle UIM benefits. Plaintiffs sought additional 
coverage and submitted claims for the UIM benefits pursu -
ant to their auto policy. Defendant denied the claims based 
on the “regular use” exclusion. That exclusion provided:
 “Coverage under this Part III will not apply:
 “1. to bodily injury sustained by any person while 
occupying or being struck by a motor vehicle that is owned 
by or furnished for the regular use of you, a relative, or a 
rated resident.
 “This exclusion does not apply to a covered auto that 
is insured under this part III * * *.”
(Boldface in original.) The auto policy included a definition 
explaining that a “covered auto” means, in part, “any addi-
tional auto” and “any replacement auto.”2 The policy defined 
“additional auto” as “an auto you become the owner of during 
the policy period that does not permanently replace an auto 
shown on the declarations page[,]” provided that the addi -
tional conditions are met. A “replacement auto” is defined 
as “an auto that permanently replaces an auto shown on 
the declarations page[.]” The policy further defined “auto” to 
mean a “land motor vehicle * * * with at least four wheels[.]”
 After defendant denied plaintiffs’ claims based on 
that “regular use” exclusion, plaintiffs sued for breach of 
contract. As noted, the parties filed cross-motions for sum -
mary judgment. Defendant continued its assertion that it 
properly denied plaintiffs’ claims, maintaining that the 
facts must implicate the provision and that the court was 
not required to strike a provision based on hypothetical 
 2 The complete definition of “Covered auto” provides:
 “5. ‘Covered auto’ means:
 “a. any auto or trailer shown on the declarations page for the cover -
ages applicable to that auto or trailer; 
 “b. any additional auto; 
 “c. any replacement auto; or
 “d. a trailer owned by you.”
(Boldface in original.)
Cite as 352 Or App 287 (2026) 291
facts or an abstract theory of coverage. Plaintiffs asserted 
that the coverage-to-coverage analysis required under Vega 
v. Farmers Ins. Co. , 323 Or 291, 918 P2d 95 (1996), does 
not require consideration of the facts, and that because the 
exclusion was less favorable than Oregon’s model policy, 
which sets forth the minimum coverage requirements and 
is discussed in depth below, the exclusion was unenforceable 
and should be stricken from the contract. See Vega, 323 Or at 
299 (explaining “that the validity of a challenged UIM provi-
sion must be tested, not by a direct comparison between the 
challenged provision with an individual statutory provision 
but, instead, by a comparison between coverage offered by 
the policy containing the challenged provision and the cov -
erage offered by a hypothetical policy containing the provi -
sions set out at ORS 742.504(1) to (12)” (emphases omitted)). 
In absence of that exclusion, plaintiff maintains, defendant 
had no basis to deny UM/UIM coverage to plaintiffs.
 Because the cases presented identical legal ques -
tions, the trial court held a consolidated hearing on the 
cross-motions for summary judgment, at which the parties 
disputed whether the exclusion should be stricken from 
the policy as inconsistent with Oregon’s model policy. See 
id. (describing coverage-to-coverage comparison between a 
challenged insurance provision with the statutory provision). 
Plaintiffs argued that defendant’s exclusion provided less 
favorable coverage than the model policy coverage requires 
in two ways. Plaintiffs explained that, first, the auto pol -
icy preserves coverage for only a “covered auto,” defined as 
having “at least four wheels,” even if owned by or furnished 
for the regular use of the insured, whereas the model policy 
requires the preservation of coverage for “an insured vehi -
cle,” which includes two- and three-wheeled vehicles. 3 The 
 3 ORS 742.504(2) provides, in part:
 “(d) ‘Insured vehicle,’ except as provided in paragraph (e) of this provi-
sion, means:
 “(A) The vehicle described in the policy or a newly acquired or substitute 
vehicle, as each of those terms is defined in the public liability coverage of the 
policy, insured under the public liability provisions of the policy; or
 “(B) A nonowned vehicle operated by the named insured or spouse if a 
resident of the same household, provided that the actual use thereof is with 
the permission of the owner of the vehicle and the vehicle is not owned by nor 
furnished for the regular or frequent use of the insured or any member of the 
same household.”
292 Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
second difference, plaintiffs argued, is that the model policy 
requires the exclusion to preserve coverage for substitute 
vehicles, which the auto policy does not include. Plaintiffs 
argued that, because the auto policy exclusion is narrower 
than the statute requires, it provides less favorable coverage 
and must be stricken from the policy.
 In response, defendant asserted that the coverage-
to-coverage analysis described in Vega requires consider -
ation of the facts of the claims. Defendant remonstrated 
that plaintiffs’ arguments are hypothetical and abstract, 
because plaintiffs would each be denied coverage under the 
model policy. In defendant’s view, the correct analysis for 
interpreting the UIM statute under Vega is to determine 
what the legislature intended, and the legislature did not 
intend for claimants who pay to insure one vehicle to have 
UIM coverage for all of their owned vehicles under that 
vehicle’s policy.
 At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court noted 
that the question before the court was, in essence, “whether 
the facts need to implicate the provisions at issue or not,” 
and decided to take the case under advisement. Ultimately, 
the court granted defendant’s motion and denied plaintiffs’ 
motions for summary judgment, explaining that the facts 
must implicate the challenged insurance policy provision 
at issue, which they do not in this case. Plaintiffs timely 
appealed.
 The parties reprise their arguments on appeal. 
Plaintiffs renew their argument that the policy exclusion 
results in less favorable coverage than the coverage required 
under the model policy set forth in ORS 742.504(4)(b). At 
oral argument, plaintiffs further asserted that the statute 
requires that “[e]very policy * * * shall provide uninsured 
motorist coverage that in each instance is no less favorable 
in any respect[,]” and that “instance” means instance of cov-
erage, rather than a specific claim. Plaintiffs contend that, 
at minimum, “instance” is ambiguous and that the court 
reads ambiguous terms in favor of the insured. Defendant 
argues, as it did below, that the facts must implicate the 
exclusion and that plaintiffs present an abstract theory of 
coverage. Defendant also points to Sheppard v. Progressive 
Cite as 352 Or App 287 (2026) 293
Classic Ins. Co., 375 Or 262, 273, 590 P3d 958 (2026), argu-
ing that the Oregon Supreme Court recently held that the 
same Progressive exclusion is consistent with the model 
policy.
 Oregon law requires that “[e]very motor vehicle 
liability policy” provide “uninsured motorist coverage” and 
“underinsurance coverage.” ORS 742.502(1)(a), (5). UIM 
coverage is insurance against the loss that occurs when an 
insured suffers “bodily injury or death” related to a motor 
vehicle accident for which another person is at fault and the 
at-fault person has insufficient liability insurance to pay the 
damages that the injured person would have been “legally 
entitled to recover” in a civil action against the at-fault per-
son. ORS 742.502(5); ORS 742.504(1)(a).
 The legislature has set forth a comprehensive model 
policy of UM/UIM coverage. ORS 742.504; see also Vega, 323 
Or at 302 (so describing). The model policy requires that 
all automobile insurance policies “shall provide uninsured 
motorist coverage that in each instance is no less favorable in 
any respect to the insured or the beneficiary than if the fol-
lowing provisions were set forth in the policy.” ORS 742.504. 
The comprehensive UM/UIM model policy “represents the 
minimum coverage; that is, an actual policy must provide 
coverage at least as favorable to the insured as the model.” 
Sheppard, 375 Or at 273; accord Rogers v. Farmers Ins. Co., 
349 Or App 691, 694, 591 P3d 1205 (2026). Therefore, to 
determine the enforceability of a provision for UIM cover -
age, we must compare the coverage provided in the chal -
lenged policy with the coverage provided by the provisions 
set forth in ORS 742.504. Vega, 323 Or at 299. When a policy 
provision is less favorable than the model policy requires, 
that provision is unenforceable and stricken from the policy, 
and the court does not replace it with the comparable model 
policy provision. See Erickson v. Farmers Ins. Co. , 331 Or 
681, 687-88, 21 P3d 90 (2001) (explaining that, where UM 
exclusions were unenforceable because they provided less 
favorable coverage than the model policy required, and the 
remaining policy terms provided coverage, “there [was] no 
reason to replace the unenforceable provisions that denied 
[the] plaintiff coverage with the statutory provisions”).
294 Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
 When a question of statutory interpretation arises 
in an insurance coverage dispute, we “apply our familiar 
method of statutory interpretation, seeking to determine 
the legislature’s intent, of which the statutory text and con-
text are the best evidence.” Sheppard, 375 Or at 274 (citing 
State v. Gaines, 346 Or 160, 171, 206 P3d 1042 (2009)).
 We begin by concluding that the exclusion is nei -
ther irrelevant to the facts of this case nor a hypothetical or 
abstract theory of coverage. As noted above, ORS 742.504 
requires that “[e]very policy * * * shall provide uninsured 
motorist coverage that in each instance is no less favorable 
in any respect[.]” Here, the application of the “regular use” 
exclusion in the auto policy is the reason that plaintiffs were 
denied coverage. That is, but for the “regular use” exclu -
sion being applied to those specific facts, plaintiffs would 
have coverage under the auto policy and defendant would 
have to pay the UIM benefits. Because the facts trigger the 
application of the “regular use” exclusion within the auto 
policy, and that exclusion, according to plaintiffs, provides 
less favorable coverage than the model policy requires, the 
“regular use” exclusion is the dispositive provision at issue 
and relevant to plaintiffs’ cases. Accordingly, we need not 
determine whether instance refers to a claim or coverage.
 We proceed, then, under the Vega framework by 
comparing the coverage of the Progressive auto policy with 
the coverage of the model policy in the statute. Plaintiffs 
assert that the “regular use” exclusion in the auto policy 
provides less favorable coverage. In their view, the auto 
policy preserves coverage for only a “covered auto,” defined 
as having “at least four wheels,” whereas the model policy 
requires the preservation of coverage for “an insured vehi -
cle,” which includes two- and three-wheeled vehicles. We 
agree with plaintiffs’ argument.
 Under ORS 742.500(3)(a), a “motor vehicle” includes 
“every self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person 
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public 
highway.” ORS 742.504(2)(m) provides that “vehicle” means 
“every device in, upon or by which any person or property 
is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, 
but does not include devices moved by human power or used 
Cite as 352 Or App 287 (2026) 295
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.” By those terms, 
both the statutory definition of “motor vehicle” and “vehicle” 
include two- and three-wheeled devices, including motorcy-
cles. In contrast, the auto policies preserve coverage for a 
“covered auto,” which includes an “additional auto,” mean-
ing “an auto you become the owner of during the policy 
period,” and “replacement auto,” meaning “an auto that per-
manently replaces an auto shown on the declarations page.” 
The auto policy further defines the term “auto” to include a 
land motor vehicle “with at least four wheels.” Thus, the defi-
nition in defendant’s policy materially narrows the coverage 
available when compared to the model policy in which the 
legislature defined vehicle in ORS 742.502(2)(m) to include 
motorcycles. Accordingly, we conclude that defendant’s pol-
icy provides less favorable coverage than required by ORS 
742.504. See Cantu v. Progressive Classic Ins. Co., 325 Or 
App 184, 193, 528 P3d 1187 (2023) (similarly concluding 
that by limiting the definition of “auto” to devices having “at 
least four wheels,” the defendant provided less favorable cov-
erage to the plaintiff than required by the model statute).
 We turn to plaintiffs’ second argument, asserting 
that the auto policy fails to provide coverage for substitute 
vehicles, which the model policy requires.
ORS 742.504(2)(d) defines “insured vehicle” to include “the 
vehicle described in the policy or a newly acquired or sub -
stitute vehicle[.]” The auto policy, in contrast, preserves the 
required coverage for “additional auto[s]” and “replacement 
auto[s],” which, by defendant’s definitions, require ownership 
or permanency, but it does not extend preservation of cov -
erage to “substitute vehicles.” Plaintiffs, therefore, received 
less favorable coverage during the life of the policy because 
they were entitled to coverage for substitute vehicles under 
the model policy, but did not receive such coverage based on 
the language contained in the auto policy exclusion.
 Defendant asserts that a “temporary” substitute 
vehicle cannot be furnished for regular use. In support, 
defendant points to Wallace Co. v. State F. M. Auto. Ins. Co., 
220 Or 520, 526, 349 P2d 789 (1960), in which the court noted 
that “it seems obvious that the [furnished-for-regular-use] 
clause implies a restriction upon the use of automobiles over 
296 Walker / Washburn v. Progressive Universal Ins. Co.
which the insured has a rather permanent right of control.” 
Id. Since the parties submitted their briefs, the Oregon 
Supreme Court issued Sheppard, in which the court clar -
ified that, when determining whether a vehicle has been 
furnished for regular use, “the central focus of that inquiry 
must be on the insured’s right to use the vehicle; the manner 
or extent to which the insured actually exercised that right 
is not dispositive.” 375 Or at 280. The court explained that a 
“vehicle made available only on an ‘infrequent’ basis would 
fall outside the exclusion, whereas one that an insured 
has the right to use ‘often’ would fall within it[,]” but it 
expounded that permanency or “de facto ownership” was not 
required. Id. at 281-83 (noting that, “[a]lthough [ Wallace] 
did mention ‘permanent’ when discussing what would trig-
ger the exclusion, it summarized its understanding of ‘fur-
nished for regular use’ more broadly, without referring to 
permanent control, much less to an insured’s ability to add 
another vehicle to their insurance policy[ ]”). Accordingly, 
the auto policy provides less favorable coverage, because the 
auto policy requires ownership or permanency. Moreover, 
to the extent that defendant relies on the Supreme Court’s 
comments in Sheppard that the exclusion at issue here is 
permissible, that question was neither presented nor argued 
before the court in that case.
 Ultimately, the auto policy exclusion at issue is 
unenforceable and should be stricken because its applica -
tion would provide less favorable coverage than the model 
policy requires. See Sheppard, 375 Or at 273 (“If any policy 
term is less favorable to the insured than the model policy, 
then that term is unenforceable.”); Erickson, 331 Or at 687-
88 (explaining that when an insurance policy provision is 
less favorable than the model policy requires, that provision 
is unenforceable and stricken from the policy). Accordingly, 
because plaintiffs are entitled to UIM coverage, the trial 
court erred by granting defendant’s motion for summary 
judgment and denying plaintiffs’ motions.
 Reversed and remanded.
