A188833
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/08/12/a._l._t._v._odell.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10945844/a-l-t-v-odell/
Caption: A. L. T. v. O'Dell
Date: 2026-08-12

112 August 12, 2026 No. 757
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
A. L. T.
Petitioner-Respondent,
 v.
RICHARD DUSTIN O’DELL,
Respondent-Appellant.
Marion County Circuit Court
25SK02637; A188833
Amy M. Queen, Judge.
Submitted June 3, 2026.
Andy Simrin and Andy Simrin PC filed the brief for 
appellant.
No appearance for respondent.
Before Aoyagi, Presiding Judge, Egan, Judge, and Pagán, 
Judge.
AOYAGI, P. J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 352 Or App 112 (2026) 113
 AOYAGI, P. J.
 Respondent appeals a judgment granting a per -
manent stalking protective order (SPO) against him for 
the protection of petitioner. In four assignments of error, 
he contends that the trial court erred by (1) denying his 
motion for a directed verdict; (2) deciding the case with -
out allowing his counsel to make a closing argument as 
provided in ORCP 58; (3) finding that respondent engaged 
in two or more unwanted contacts that caused petitioner 
objectively reasonable alarm; and (4) issuing the perma -
nent SPO. As explained more below, we reject each claim 
of error. The trial court properly denied the motion for a 
directed verdict, as the evidence was legally sufficient to go 
to the factfinder. Regarding the lack of closing argument, 
no objection was made, and we disagree that preservation 
is excused, so our review is limited to plain error, and the 
trial court did not plainly err because it is not obvious that 
ORCP 58 applies. Finally, the court’s findings are sup -
ported by evidence in the record, and respondent has iden-
tified no error in its application of the law to those facts. 
Accordingly, we affirm.
FACTS1
 The parties dated for five or six months in early 
2025. They broke up once in May 2025, but soon resumed 
their relationship, then broke up again in June 2025 after 
returning from a trip to Las Vegas. Petitioner “blocked” 
respondent afterwards.
 On June 28, 2025, petitioner left work around 
2:30 a.m. She found that respondent had placed on her 
car some shower items that she had left at his apartment. 
Petitioner pulled out of the parking lot and stopped at the 
stop sign to get onto the freeway. Respondent came up 
behind her in his car, flashing his brights, then followed 
 1 The only testimony at the SPO hearing was that of petitioner and her 
mother, and, based on its findings, the trial court credited that testimony in full. 
As such, the facts stated in the light most favorable to petitioner (as relevant to 
review of a directed-verdict ruling) are the same as the facts found by the trial 
court (as relevant to review of the ultimate disposition). We therefore provide a 
single statement of the facts, focusing on the evidence on which the trial court 
relied in granting the SPO. 
114 A. L. T. v. O’Dell
her onto the freeway, where he pulled beside her.2 They both 
rolled down their windows, and respondent said, “Unblock 
me.” Petitioner called respondent on the phone and told him 
to stop. He told her to pull over, and she said no. Respondent 
was still in the lane next to hers and said that he would 
“make” her. He swerved into petitioner’s lane, causing her to 
swerve. Petitioner kept driving on the freeway, and respon-
dent eventually pulled over near a rest stop, while petitioner 
continued home. They stayed on the phone. Respondent was 
initially yelling but then calmed down, asked petitioner 
about school, and told her that she would never hear from 
him again if they did not make up. Petitioner told respon -
dent that she did not want to talk to him and did not want 
to make up.
 On June 29, 2025, petitioner drove home from work 
around 3:30 a.m. Petitioner lives with her mother “on a dead 
end in the middle of nowhere.” As she was driving down her 
street, a car passed her, then turned around and followed 
her. Petitioner was scared. She called her mother and told 
her that a car was behind her and that she thought it was 
respondent. Petitioner’s mother relayed that she had just seen 
a car drive by their house and turn around. The car chased 
petitioner’s car up the hill into her driveway. Petitioner “saw 
him” at that point. Petitioner exited her car and ran into the 
house. Petitioner’s mother went outside with a bat in hand. 
Respondent, who had pulled into the driveway, “pulled back 
and left.” Petitioner’s mother could not see the driver in the 
dark, but petitioner said it was respondent. Petitioner called 
the police to report the incident. Later that night, respon -
dent sent petitioner a Facebook message, mocking her job 
and telling her that she had made an enemy for life.
 Petitioner filed for an SPO on June 30, 2025. 
Petitioner and her mother testified to the facts stated above. 
At the conclusion of petitioner’s evidence, respondent moved 
for a directed verdict. His argument focused on the evidence 
regarding events prior to June 28 (not recounted herein). 
The trial court denied the motion, ruling that the evidence 
 2 As discussed more later, petitioner used “he” and “him” in her testimony, 
rather than respondent’s name, but it is reasonable to infer that she meant 
respondent. 
Cite as 352 Or App 112 (2026) 115
was legally sufficient for an SPO based on the incidents on 
June 28 and 29.
 After denying the directed-verdict motion, the trial 
court asked respondent’s counsel, “Do you have any evidence 
you’d like to present?” Counsel said no.
 The court proceeded to announce that it was grant-
ing the permanent SPO. The court stated that petitioner had 
“absolutely met her burden of proof.” It found that respon -
dent engaged in unwanted contact with petitioner on June 
28 and 29, that petitioner was alarmed by those contacts, 
that it was objectively reasonable to be alarmed by those 
contacts, that the repeated and unwanted contact caused 
petitioner reasonable apprehension regarding her own per-
sonal safety, and that respondent posed a credible threat to 
petitioner’s safety.
DENIAL OF DIRECTED VERDICT
 Respondent first assigns error to the denial of 
his motion for a directed verdict. Because the matter was 
heard by the court, that motion is better characterized as a 
motion to dismiss based on insufficient evidence. Cf. Oregon 
Psychiatric Partners v. Henry, 293 Or App 471, 473 n 2, 429 
P3d 399 (2018) (“[i]n a bench trial, a defendant’s motion for 
directed verdict is better understood as an ORCP 54 B(2) 
motion for involuntary dismissal”).
 ORS 30.866(1) allows a petitioner to bring a civil 
action for an SPO if:
 “(a) The respondent intentionally, knowingly or reck -
lessly engages in repeated [3] and unwanted contact [4] with 
the petitioner or a member of the petitioner’s immediate 
family or household thereby alarming or coercing the 
petitioner;
 3 Two qualifying contacts within two years of the commencement of the 
action meet the standard for “repeated.” ORS 163.730(9) (“ ‘Repeated’ means 
two or more times.”); ORS 30.866(6) (“An action under this section must be com-
menced within two years of the conduct giving rise to the claim.”).
 4 “Contact” is broadly defined and includes, inter alia, following a person, 
waiting outside a person’s home or place of work, or committing a crime against 
a person. ORS 163.730(3)(b), (c), (g).
116 A. L. T. v. O’Dell
 “(b) It is objectively reasonable for a person in the peti-
tioner’s situation to have been alarmed or coerced by the 
contact; and
 “(c) The repeated and unwanted contact causes the 
petitioner reasonable apprehension regarding the personal 
safety of the petitioner or a member of the petitioner’s 
immediate family or household.”
The trial court may enter a temporary SPO if it finds prob -
able cause based on the allegations in the petition. ORS 
30.866(2). The petition and temporary order must then 
be served on the respondent with an order requiring the 
respondent to personally appear in court to show cause why 
the temporary order should not be continued indefinitely. Id.
 At the hearing, the standard of proof is a prepon -
derance of the evidence. ORS 30.866(7).
 The question is whether petitioner’s evidence was 
legally insufficient to support the issuance of a perma -
nent SPO, such that respondent’s motion should have been 
granted and the case dismissed as a matter of law. Delgado 
v. Souders, 334 Or 122, 130, 46 P3d 729 (2002). In answering 
that question, “we must view the evidence in the record, and 
all reasonable inferences to be drawn therefrom, in favor of 
[petitioner], the nonmoving party.” Id. at 134. So viewing the 
evidence, and keeping in mind that a petitioner may rely on 
circumstantial evidence and reasonable inferences to prove 
the elements of an SPO, we must determine whether the 
evidence would allow a reasonable person to find each of 
the required elements proved by a preponderance of the evi-
dence. Id. at 134-35. “[I]t is a question of law whether the 
evidence presented was sufficient to support the elements 
required to obtain an SPO.” Id. at 134. It is also a question of 
law “whether the evidence presented is sufficient to support 
a particular inference.” Id. at 135. Petitioner is entitled to 
the benefit of reasonable inferences, but not impermissible 
speculation. Id. at 134-35; State v. Campbell, 348 Or App 
306, 310, 590 P3d 612 (2026).
 On appeal, respondent’s legal-insufficiency argu -
ment turns entirely on petitioner’s use of “he” and “him” to 
refer to the other driver on June 28 and 29. Respondent does 
not contest that the evidence was legally sufficient for an 
Cite as 352 Or App 112 (2026) 117
SPO if he was the driver of the other vehicle during those 
incidents. He argues, however, that the evidence was legally 
insufficient to prove that he was the other driver, partic -
ularly as to the June 29 incident, because petitioner did 
not use his name in her testimony and because petitioner’s 
mother did not see the other driver on June 29.
 We are unpersuaded. As an initial matter, respon -
dent did not argue to the trial court that the evidence was 
legally insufficient to prove that he was the other driver 
on June 28 and 29. Having not sought dismissal on that 
basis, respondent has a preservation problem. See State v. 
K. J. B., 362 Or 777, 791, 416 P3d 291 (2018) (“As a rule, an 
objection as to the legal insufficiency of evidence to prove a 
claim on one theory does not have the effect of preserving all 
other possible theories of insufficiency; rather, parties must 
explain to the court and opposing party a specific reason for 
the asserted legal insufficiency.”). The argument also fails 
on the merits in any event.
 Petitioner alleged in her petition that respondent 
made her afraid for her physical safety when “he intention-
ally tried hitting [her] car” and “when he tailed [her] into 
[her] driveway with his car.” The trial court asked petitioner 
about those specific allegations when she testified. It quoted 
the allegations and asked petitioner to describe those inci -
dents, which is when she testified to the June 28 and 29 
incidents. In context, it is readily apparent that petitioner 
was referring to respondent when she said “he” and “him.”5 
Moreover, petitioner obviously saw respondent during the 
June 28 incident, as he spoke to her through their open car 
windows, and she then called him on the phone and talked 
to him at length. As for the June 29 incident, although peti-
tioner’s mother could not see into the other car in the dark, 
and petitioner initially was not certain who was following 
her, the trial court specifically asked petitioner whether she 
“saw him” once they were in the driveway, and she answered 
yes. The evidence was legally sufficient to go to the factfinder, 
so the court did not err in denying respondent’s motion.
 5 It seems likely that respondent did not move to dismiss on this basis 
because it was obvious to everyone in the room that petitioner was referring to 
respondent. If that was not the case, then, had such a motion been made, this 
issue likely would have been conclusively resolved on the record.
118 A. L. T. v. O’Dell
ULTIMATE FINDINGS AND ISSUANCE OF SPO
 We next address the third and fourth assignments 
of error, in which respondent challenges the trial court’s fac-
tual findings and ultimate decision to issue a permanent 
SPO. Whereas the first assignment of error required us to 
determine whether the evidence in the record was legally 
sufficient to support an SPO, the third and fourth assign -
ments of error require us to determine whether the facts 
found by the trial court at the conclusion of the hearing were 
supported by evidence and, ultimately, whether those facts 
allowed the trial court to reach the disposition it did upon 
application of the law. See S. A. B. v. Roach , 249 Or App 
579, 580, 277 P3d 628 (2012) (“[W]e review the facts for any 
evidence and the legal conclusions based on those facts for 
errors of law. Our task is to review the facts found by the 
trial court to determine whether they are supported by any 
evidence, and then to determine whether, as a matter of law, 
those facts together with facts implicitly found by the trial 
court, provide a basis for issuance of an SPO under ORS 
30.866.” (Internal quotation marks, citation, and brackets 
omitted.)).
 In this case, the trial court credited the witnesses’ 
testimony, and it made express and implied findings con -
sistent with the facts stated above, including finding that 
respondent was the other driver on June 28 and 29. As 
explained in the last section, the evidence allowed a reason-
able inference that respondent was the other driver in both 
incidents. The trial court’s finding on that issue is therefore 
supported by evidence. Respondent has not challenged any 
other factual finding by the trial court, nor has he identified 
any error in how the trial court applied the law. We there -
fore reject the third and fourth assignments of error.
LACK OF CLOSING ARGUMENT
 We conclude with the second assignment of error. 
Respondent contends that the trial court violated ORCP 
58 by not allowing his counsel to make a closing argument 
before the court announced its decision. Neither party made 
an opening statement or a closing argument, and there was 
no discussion of that fact with the court.
Cite as 352 Or App 112 (2026) 119
 Respondent acknowledges that he did not preserve 
his claim of error. He urges us to excuse preservation, argu-
ing that he “had no opportunity to object” before the court 
ruled and that any objection made after it started to rule 
would have been futile as the court had already made up 
its mind. We decline to excuse preservation. When the trial 
court began to announce its decision, respondent could 
have interjected and asked to make a closing argument. 
Although the court had not asked for closing arguments, it 
also had not foreclosed them, and nothing in this record sug-
gests that it would have been hostile to a request, even one 
interjected once respondent realized the court was starting 
to announce its decision. Cf. L. M. B. v. Cohn , 298 Or App 
782, 784 & n 2, 450 P3d 50 (2019) (excusing preservation, 
as to claim that the evidence was legally insufficient to sup-
port an SPO, where, during the respondent’s testimony, the 
trial court suddenly stated, “I’ve heard enough,” announced 
its decision, would not allow respondent to respond, and 
stated, “No, we’re done here.”). As for respondent’s futility 
argument, although the court may have made up its mind 
in the sense that it was ready to rule based on the evidence, 
it does not follow that requesting closing argument would 
have been “futile.” There is no reason to assume that the 
court would have denied the request (which is how futility 
is normally assessed). Moreover, if the court agreed to hear 
closing arguments, whether as a matter of discretion or 
right, we presume that it would have listened to them and 
properly considered them.
 We therefore do not excuse preservation. It follows 
that our review is limited to plain error, which petitioner 
requests in the alternative. See State v. Wyatt, 331 Or 335, 
341, 15 P3d 22 (2000) (“Generally, an issue not preserved 
in the trial court will not be considered on appeal.”); ORAP 
5.45(1) (giving us discretion to consider “plain” errors). An 
error is “plain” when it is an error of law, the legal point 
is obvious and not reasonably in dispute, and the error is 
apparent on the record without our having to choose among 
competing inferences. State v. Vanornum, 354 Or 614, 629, 
317 P3d 889 (2013). Whether an error is “plain” is a question 
of law. State v. Gornick, 340 Or 160, 167, 130 P3d 780 (2006). 
It is a matter of discretion whether to correct a plain error 
120 A. L. T. v. O’Dell
that was not harmless. State v. Ortiz, 372 Or 658, 672, 554 
P3d 796 (2024).
 Here, we conclude that any error is not plain. 
Respondent contends that he was entitled to two hours of 
closing argument under ORCP 58. ORCP 58 is a civil proce-
dure rule regarding “trial” proceedings, both “by the court” 
and “by a jury.” Trial by jury is subject to the procedures 
set forth in all nine subsections of ORCP 58 B. See ORCP 
58 B (“Trial by a jury shall proceed in the following manner 
unless the court, for good cause stated in the record, other -
wise directs: * * *.”). Trial to the court, by contrast, is subject 
only to the procedures set forth in subsections B(3) through 
B(6). See ORCP 58 A (“Trial by the court shall proceed in 
the manner prescribed in subsection B(3) through subsec -
tion B(6) of this rule, unless the court, for good cause stated 
in the record, otherwise directs.”).
 ORCP 58 B(6), applicable to both court and jury tri-
als, states:
 “When the evidence is concluded, unless the case is 
submitted by both sides to the jury without argument, the 
plaintiff may commence and conclude the argument to the 
jury. The plaintiff may initially waive argument and, if the 
defendant then argues the case to the jury, the plaintiff 
will have the right to reply to the argument of the defen -
dant, but not otherwise.”
Meanwhile, ORCP 58 B(7), applicable only to jury trials, 
states, “Not more than two counsel may address the jury on 
behalf of the plaintiff or defendant. Plaintiff and defendant 
shall each be afforded a minimum of two hours to address 
the jury, irrespective of how that time is allocated among 
that side’s counsel.”6
 To begin, respondent was not entitled to two hours 
of closing argument. That argument is based on ORCP 58 
B(7), which applies only to jury trials. See ORCP 58 A (pro-
viding that only subsections B(3) through B(6) apply in a 
trial by the court).
 6 See State v. Doern, 156 Or App 566, 571, 967 P2d 1230 (1998), rev den, 328 
Or 666 (1999) (concluding, based on an earlier version of ORCP 58 B(7), that there 
was “no question” that it “violated ORCP 58 B” to limit closing argument to the 
jury to 20 minutes).
Cite as 352 Or App 112 (2026) 121
 As for being entitled to some closing argument, 
ORCP 58 B(6) suggests a right to closing argument in both 
court trials and jury trials. And an SPO proceeding is a 
“civil action,” ORS 30.866, to which the Oregon Rules of Civil 
Procedure apply, Falkenstein v. Falkenstein, 236 Or App 445, 
449, 236 P3d 798 (2010). But it is not obvious and is rea -
sonably in dispute whether an SPO hearing qualifies as a 
“[t]rial by the court” within the meaning of ORCP 58 A. ORS 
30.866 provides for a permanent SPO to be decided after a 
hearing on a show-cause order. ORS 30.866(2) (providing for 
the respondent to be ordered to “personally appear before the 
court to show cause why the temporary order should not be 
continued for an indefinite period”); ORS 30.866(3)(a) (pro -
viding for a “hearing” on the show-cause order). It is debat -
able whether a show-cause hearing is a “[t]rial by the court” 
within the meaning of ORCP 58 A.
 We therefore conclude that it was not plain error for 
the trial court to announce its decision on the permanent 
SPO without first requesting closing arguments.
 Affirmed.
