A188530
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/29/dept._of_human_services_v._t._r._s._1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10939735/dept-of-human-services-v-t-r-s/
Caption: Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
Date: 2026-07-29

820 July 29, 2026 No. 715
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of C. D. S., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
v.
T. R. S.,
Appellant.
Jackson County Circuit Court
24JU01824; A188530 (Control)
In the Matter of C. R. R. S., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
v.
T. R. S.,
Appellant.
Jackson County Circuit Court
24JU01823; A188529
David J. Orr, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 22, 2026.
George W. Kelly argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellant.
Kyleigh Gray, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Paul L. Smith, Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
HELLMAN, J.
Reversed.
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 821
822 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
 HELLMAN, J.
 Father appeals from judgments terminating his 
parental rights to his children, R and C, who were five- and 
four-years-old, respectively, at the time of trial.1 On appeal, 
father raises three assignments of error. In his first and sec-
ond assignments, he challenges the juvenile court’s decision 
to terminate his parental rights on the basis that he is unfit 
under ORS 419B.504, and on the basis of neglect under ORS 
419B.506. In his third assignment, he argues that the court 
erred by ruling that termination of his parental rights is in 
the children’s best interests under ORS 419B.500.
 On de novo review, we conclude that clear and con-
vincing evidence establishes that father’s conduct, includ -
ing his substance abuse, which he has struggled to man -
age, poses a serious detriment to the children and that his 
limited progress in ameliorating the conditions leading to 
Oregon Department of Human Services’ (ODHS) interven-
tion makes the children’s integration into his home within 
a reasonable period of time highly improbable. Because we 
conclude that father is unfit, we do not reach father’s second 
assignment of error regarding the court’s determinations of 
neglect. However, we also conclude that ODHS did not carry 
its burden to prove that terminating father’s parental rights 
was in R’s and C’s best interests. Specifically, we conclude 
that severing the significant bond between father and the 
children risked harm to R and C, and that ODHS did not 
present sufficient evidence to establish that termination, as 
opposed to a permanent guardianship, was in the children’s 
best interests. We therefore reverse.
 We review proceedings for termination of paren -
tal rights de novo. ORS 19.415(3)(a) (“Upon an appeal from 
a judgment in a proceeding for the termination of paren -
tal rights, the Court of Appeals shall try the cause anew 
upon the record[.]”). That standard requires us to examine 
the record with “fresh eyes” to determine whether the evi -
dence below persuades us that it is “highly probable” that 
father is unfit, that integration is improbable within a rea -
sonable time, and that termination is in the children’s best 
 1 The appeals in Case Nos. A188529 and A188530 have been consolidated for 
purposes of opinion and otherwise remain separate cases. 
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 823
interests. Dept. of Human Services v. T. L. M. H., 294 Or App 
749, 750, 432 P3d 1186 (2018), rev den, 365 Or 556 (2019). 
Although our review is de novo, we give “considerable weight 
to the findings of the trial judge who had the opportunity to 
observe the witnesses and their demeanor in evaluating the 
credibility of their testimony.” Dept. of Human Services v. 
T. L. B., 294 Or App 514, 516, 432 P3d 343 (2018), rev den, 
365 Or 556 (2019) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 We briefly recount those facts necessary to provide 
context for our ruling and supplement those facts in the 
discussion of father’s assignments of error. R was born in 
April 2019, and C was born in June 2020. In March 2022, 
ODHS became involved with the family after an incident 
in which father left the children unaccompanied in the car 
for approximately 15 minutes while he ran an errand, for 
which he was charged with second-degree child neglect. 
Later that same month, ODHS filed petitions asking the 
juvenile court to assert jurisdiction over the children on the 
basis that father’s and mother’s substance abuse, as well as 
father’s mental health issues, interfered with their ability 
to safely parent, and that mother had exposed the children 
to a chaotic and volatile home environment in which she 
was verbally abusive to father and the children. Father and 
mother admitted those allegations, and the juvenile court 
asserted jurisdiction in June 2022. At the time the children 
were removed from their parents’ care, father and the chil-
dren had been living with father’s friend of 30 years, J, and 
his wife. J asked father to leave the home, and the couple 
became the resource parents to the children.
 Father’s and mother’s relationship has been, at 
times, volatile and marked by domestic violence. In June 
2022, law enforcement responded to a domestic disturbance 
in which mother attempted to hit father with her car. Father 
reported to the responding officers that mother had “sped 
towards him” in her car, that “the vehicle contacted him and 
forced him onto the hood,” and that he had been “in fear 
that [mother] was trying to run him over with her vehicle.” 
Multiple neighbors witnessed the incident and corroborated 
father’s account. Mother was arrested and later convicted of 
menacing constituting domestic violence, reckless driving, 
824 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
and recklessly endangering another person. Mother was 
sentenced to two years of probation and, as a condition of 
her probation, was ordered to have no contact with father.
 For at least a few months following the June 2022 
incident, mother and father continued to live together, and 
even after the no-contact order went into effect in August 
2022, mother and father continued to see each other “peri-
odically.” Specifically, an ODHS caseworker, Mayfield, 
made unannounced visits to father’s and mother’s homes in 
both July and August of 2022 and found mother and father 
together. In September 2022, father admitted to Mayfield 
that he and mother were “living together” at his mother’s 
home but asserted that “they had separate rooms and that 
they stayed in different parts of the house.” In June 2023, 
the children were returned to mother for a trial reunifica -
tion, during which time Mayfield was aware that mother 
and father were “consistently” violating the no-contact 
order. Mayfield “tried to work with the parents and have 
them completely understand about the no-contact order” 
but did not remove the children based on that violation. 
The trial reunification was ultimately unsuccessful, lasting 
approximately two months, and the children were returned 
to substitute care with J and his wife.
 At the termination trial, when questioned about the 
June 2022 incident, father offered a different account of the 
incident. He denied that mother had hit him with her car, 
testifying that “she came up close to me at a crawling speed” 
and that “I had no fear of her actually hitting me at all.” 
By the time of trial, the no-contact order had expired, and 
mother and father were living together again. Since June 
2022, no other incidents between father and mother had 
involved law enforcement. However, ODHS continued to have 
“concerns” about their living arrangement and relationship 
because, as a caseworker testified, “the domestic violence 
portion is still something that has not been addressed and 
there’s no accountability there.” Father testified that he had 
“a hope” that mother would help him parent because “that 
would make things a lot easier” but affirmed that if mother 
was “not clean and sober” or “wasn’t doing what she needed 
to be doing” he would be willing and able to act protectively 
toward the children.
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 825
 Father also has a history of methamphetamine 
use. Throughout the life of the dependency case, father 
has started substance abuse treatment multiple times, but 
his participation in those programs has been inconsistent. 
After initially seeking treatment in March 2022, he stopped 
attending services, and five months later, “self separated 
from recommended services against professional advice.” 
Father enrolled in a different program in October 2022 and 
was diagnosed with stimulant use disorder and other stimu-
lant dependence. He consistently engaged with the program 
for several months, but by January 2023, his attendance 
had dropped off. In May 2023, he had a positive urinalysis 
(UA) for methamphetamine, and his counselor testified that 
father had failed to “ma[k]e sustained meaningful progress 
in treatment.” He was later discharged from that program. 
In January 2024, father again began substance abuse treat-
ment and graduated from inpatient treatment in May 2024. 
However, his participation in outpatient treatment was 
“sporadic,” and in September 2024, he again had a positive 
UA for methamphetamine. At the time of trial, father had 
recently reengaged with a treatment program after receiv -
ing a DUII, but he had thus far failed to comply with the UA 
schedule as required by the terms of his diversion program, 
and he had yet to complete the required coursework.
 Since removal from their parents’ care in March 
2022, and apart from a two-month trial reunification in 
the summer of 2023, the children have lived with J and his 
wife, who are also the children’s designated adoptive place-
ment. The children have spent the majority of their life 
in substitute care and “see [J and his wife] as their par -
ents[,]” although they also call father “Daddy.” Dr. Coghlan, 
a child psychologist, evaluated both children in 2024. She 
diagnosed R with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
and “other specified trauma- and stressor-related disor -
der, developmental trauma disorder.” She diagnosed C with 
global developmental delay as well as attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder and recommended that ODHS and 
his caregivers pursue early childhood and special education 
services for him. At the termination trial, Coghlan opined 
that the children needed permanency as soon as possible 
but that they were also attached to their biological parents:
826 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
 “So in my report I talked about just the need for per -
manency as quickly as possible because of how long they’ve 
been in care and that they’ve had unsuccessful reunifica -
tion. In my report, I do talk about kind of competing needs 
in terms of permanency. So there’s a lot of things that are in 
these [children’s] best interest. I think from an attachment 
perspective, it’s definitely in [the children’s] best interest 
to maintain as many safe and appropriate relationships 
with caregivers and family members as possible. It’s also 
in their best interest to have a permanent placement that’s 
not at risk for future disruption. So kind of balancing those 
needs is what decision-makers need to do in figuring that 
stuff out.”
As to maintaining relationships with family members, she 
explained that, “I think [the children have] had consistent 
contact with their biological parents this whole time, so sev-
ering that relationship would be stressful for [them] and 
could result in emotional distress, behavioral dysregulation, 
all those kinds of things.”
 J testified that he and his wife wanted to adopt the 
children because they “were very much part of our family and 
* * * we wanted to make that official[.]” A caseworker, Rouhier, 
testified that adoption was in the children’s best interests 
because of “concerns about the issues with boundaries” and 
“parents adhering to those boundaries.” She explained that 
mother and father did not understand “the full scope of * * * 
what’s happening here and that when parental rights are 
terminated they will not have the decision-making power 
that they have today.” Father specifically had shown up at 
J’s home “unannounced a few times, not recently.” Rouhier 
explained that “[t]his is a historical behavior on the case, 
but they’re having instances where he showed up asking 
to take the [children], saying ‘I wanted to take them to the 
park,’ and didn’t seem to understand that you can’t just take 
them.” She therefore opined that J and his wife need “full 
legal authority to exercise and set” boundaries.
 Following the trial, the juvenile court concluded 
that father was unfit, that he had neglected the children, 
and that termination of father’s parental rights was in 
the children’s best interests. In concluding that father was 
unfit, the court ruled that ODHS had proved, by clear and 
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 827
convincing evidence that father’s substance abuse, physical 
and emotional neglect of the children, lack of effort to adjust 
his circumstances, exposure of the children to domestic vio-
lence, failure to present a viable plan for return of the chil -
dren to his care and custody, and failure to learn or assume 
parenting skills rendered him unfit and made integration of 
the children into his home improbable within a reasonable 
time. In reaching the conclusion that termination was in the 
children’s best interests, the court found that “there was a 
very serious problem with Father’s credibility” because “[h]is 
testimony regarding the automobile incident, and it’s maybe 
somewhat unpleasant to say, but it’s clear to me that * * * 
[father] sat there and [father] committed perjury[.]” Because 
of the “honesty problems” on the parents’ part, the court 
concluded that it was not “farfetched * * * to imagine, once 
the kids are a little bit older, the parents influencing the 
children to bring forward some kind of action to terminate 
the guardianship.” The court also found that “a significant 
bond between father and [the children]” exists but that the 
risk in severing the legal relationship was “almost non-exis-
tent” because the court credited J’s testimony that he would 
foster a relationship between father and the children when 
it was safe and appropriate to do so. Father appealed the 
judgments as to both C and R.2
 Father first argues that the juvenile court erred in 
terminating his parental rights on the basis of unfitness 
under ORS 419B.504. A juvenile court may terminate a 
parent’s rights based on unfitness if it determines by clear 
and convincing evidence that the parent is “unfit by rea -
son of conduct or condition seriously detrimental to the child 
or ward and integration of the child or ward into the home 
 2 The juvenile court also terminated mother’s parental rights to both chil -
dren, and she separately appealed those judgments. We affirmed the juvenile 
court’s termination of her rights in Dept. of Human Services v. J. E., 349 Or App 
587 (2026) (nonprecedential memorandum opinion). However, “[t]he rights of one 
parent may be terminated without affecting the rights of the other parent[,]” 
ORS 419B.500, and we thus review father’s challenge to the termination of his 
rights independent of our review in mother’s case. See, e.g., State ex rel Juv. Dept. 
v. Proctor, 167 Or App 18, 29-30, 34, 2 P3d 405, adh’d to on recons, 169 Or App 
606, 10 P3d 332 (2000) (terminating the father’s parental rights but concluding 
that the mother’s parental rights should not be terminated because “[o]ur obli -
gation in reviewing this matter is to apply the legal standards for termination 
articulated in the statutes” to each parent). 
828 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
of the parent or parents is improbable within a reasonable 
time due to conduct or conditions not likely to change.” ORS 
419B.504; ORS 419B.521(1) (“The facts on the basis of which 
the rights of the parents are terminated, unless admitted, 
must be established by clear and convincing evidence * * *.”). 
“Both the ‘serious detriment’ and ‘reasonable time’ inqui-
ries are child-specific and require evidence in psychological 
and developmental terms regarding the particular child’s 
needs.” Dept. of Human Services v. C. F. S. , 345 Or App 
71, 72-73, 581 P3d 1006 (2025), rev den, 375 Or 67 (2026) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). ODHS has the burden 
to prove that a parent is presently unfit at the time of the 
termination trial—“past unfitness is insufficient.” Dept. of 
Human Services v. B. J. J. , 282 Or App 488, 503, 387 P3d 
450 (2016) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 Having reviewed the record de novo, we conclude 
that father was unfit at the time of the termination trial. 
Clear and convincing evidence demonstrates that father has 
failed to consistently participate in or successfully complete 
treatment to address his substance abuse and that he denies 
or otherwise minimizes ODHS’s concerns about domestic 
violence in his relationship with mother. Although he testi-
fied that he would parent without mother if needed, father’s 
lack of parenting skills presented an ongoing risk of harm 
to the children. Father had a history of physically neglecting 
the children while they were in his care, and throughout the 
life of this case, he has failed to consistently engage in case 
planning and has only minimally engaged with the services 
offered to him to improve his parenting skills.
 Those conditions and conduct would be seriously 
detrimental to C and R, especially considering their need 
for a “permanent placement that’s not at risk for future dis-
ruption.” Dr. Coghlan, a child psychologist who evaluated 
the children, testified that if the children were placed in an 
environment where their “needs aren’t met consistently,” 
whether because of substance abuse or domestic violence in 
the home, it could result in dysregulation and may hinder 
“therapeutic progress.” Thus, given the length of time the 
children have been in care, the services provided to father, 
and father’s minimal level of engagement with and progress 
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 829
in those services, we conclude that the issues which led to 
the juvenile court’s jurisdiction over the children cannot be 
resolved within a reasonable amount of time for the children 
to return to his care. Accordingly, the juvenile court did not 
err in ruling that father was unfit under ORS 419B.504, and 
we therefore do not reach father’s second assignment that 
the juvenile court erred in terminating his parental rights 
on the basis of neglect pursuant to ORS 419B.506. See State 
ex rel Dept. of Human Services v. Radiske , 208 Or App 25, 
59, 144 P3d 943 (2006) (“[T]he trial court terminated [the] 
father’s parental rights based on unfitness, ORS 419B.504, 
and neglect, ORS 419B.506, both of which, if proven, are 
independently sufficient statutory grounds for termination.” 
(Emphasis in original.)).
 We turn then to father’s third assignment of error, 
in which he argues that ODHS failed to carry its burden to 
show that terminating his parental rights is in C’s and R’s 
best interests under ORS 419B.500. “Whether terminating 
the legal relationship between a parent and a child is in the 
child’s best interest requires a fact-specific, child-centered 
inquiry into how termination likely will affect the particu -
lar child.” Dept. of Human Services v. L. M. B., 321 Or App 
50, 52, 515 P3d 927 (2022). In considering whether termina-
tion of the legal relationship is in the child’s best interest, 
we consider “(1) the strength of the bond between the par -
ent and child; (2) whether severing that bond will help or 
harm the child; (3) the benefits to the child of terminating 
parental rights; and (4) the risk of harm to the child posed 
by termination.” Id. at 53. Importantly, the juvenile court’s 
determination that a parent is unfit does not give rise to a 
presumption that termination is in the child’s best interest. 
Dept. of Human Services v. T. M. D. , 365 Or 143, 161, 442 
P3d 1100 (2019).
 Here, as the juvenile court found, there is a “signif-
icant bond” between father and the children. Even though 
the children have been in substitute care for the majority of 
their lives, they understand that father is their biological 
parent, and they call him “daddy.” Father attends super -
vised visits with the children, during which father is “con -
sistent[ly]” “loving, and affectionate, and engaged,” although 
830 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
both C and R sometimes revert to “old behaviors” after visits 
with father. The record also contains evidence that sever -
ing the bond with their father could harm the children and 
potentially result in “emotional distress and behavioral dys-
regulation.” Dr. Coghlan further opined that the children 
should be able to maintain relationships with their biolog -
ical family members when doing so is consistent with their 
best interests.
 To be sure, J testified that he was willing to foster a 
relationship between father and the children, and the juve-
nile court found that testimony credible. We agree that J’s 
express willingness to maintain contact between the chil -
dren and father mitigates, to a certain extent, the harm to 
the children posed by severing their legal relationship with 
their father. However, where a parent contends that a child’s 
best interest can be met without termination, as is the case 
here, “the availability of another permanency plan that 
will advance the child’s best interest, such as a permanent 
guardianship, may be a factor” in our decision. T. M. D., 365 
Or at 162-63. On that point, we observe that J’s main goal 
was to provide the children with a permanent and stable 
home, and his testimony indicates that he would have been 
willing to serve as a guardian, if the juvenile court had 
ordered it.
 For its part, the state does not dispute that the 
children are bonded with father, but it contends that, not -
withstanding that bond, termination is in the children’s 
best interests because of the risk that father would attempt 
to disrupt a permanent guardianship by encouraging the 
children to move to terminate it. The evidence offered in 
support of that argument is that father has shown up unan-
nounced at J’s home on multiple occasions to ask to take the 
children to the park and that father continued to have con -
tact with mother despite the no-contact order. The state fur-
ther emphasizes that, based on father’s testimony regarding 
the June 2022 incident involving mother, which directly con-
flicted with statements he made to police, the juvenile court 
found that father’s testimony lacked credibility. Accordingly, 
in the state’s view, “there is no reason to believe that father 
would not attempt to disrupt a permanent guardianship.”
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 831
 We conclude that the evidence developed by ODHS 
in support of its case that termination is in C’s and R’s 
best interests does not clearly and convincingly persuade 
us that the benefits of permanently severing the children’s 
legal relationship with father outweigh the risks posed by 
termination. We agree that the evidence establishes that 
it is in C’s and R’s best interests to remain long-term with 
their current caregivers, whom they see as their primary 
source of “comfort” and “protection.” However, we are not 
persuaded that father’s conduct in showing up at the home 
of his long-time friend hoping to take the children to the 
park evidences a likelihood that he would seek to disrupt a 
permanent guardianship. Indeed, Rouhier testified that, in 
response to father’s behavior, J was “appropriate in setting” 
“boundaries” with father, and the record does not contain 
any evidence that father was uncooperative or otherwise 
belligerent when confronted with that boundary.
 More to the point, we are unpersuaded that father’s 
efforts to foster an interpersonal relationship with his 
children through a developmentally appropriate activity 
indicates an intent to legally challenge a guardianship. 
“[A] permanent guardianship is not a temporary arrange -
ment”—the juvenile court may impose a permanent guard -
ianship “only if the juvenile court finds that the grounds 
for termination of parental rights are met and finds that 
it is in the child’s best interest that the parent never have 
physical custody.” Dept. of Human Services v. M. H., 306 Or 
App 150, 164, 473 P3d 1152 (2020) (citing ORS 419B.365 
(2), (3)). Additionally, a parent may not file a motion to vacate 
a permanent guardianship, ORS 419B.368(7), and a per -
manent guardian has the authority to set boundaries con -
cerning the “physical custody and control” of the child. ORS 
419B.367(6) (explaining that “a person appointed guardian 
has legal custody of the ward and the duties and authority of 
legal custodian and guardian under ORS 419B.373”); ORS 
419B.373(1) (establishing the duties and authority of a legal 
custodian).
 In other words, as a permanent guardian to C and 
R, J would have the authority, consistent with the terms 
of the guardianship order, to determine when and how the 
832 Dept. of Human Services v. T. R. S.
children spend time with their father. We recognize that, 
under a permanent guardianship, father could seek vis -
itation. ORS 419B.368(1) (“The court, on its own motion 
or upon the motion of a party * * * may review [or] modify 
* * * a guardianship order.”); ORS 419B.367(3)(a) (providing 
that, in the order appointing the guardian, the court may 
“[s]pecify the frequency and nature of visitation or contact 
between relatives * * * and the ward, if the court determines 
that visitation or contact is in the ward’s best interests”). 
But seeking visitation through appropriate legal avenues is 
not inherently disruptive to a permanent guardianship, nor 
is it damaging to the children’s sense of permanency in the 
same way that pressuring a child to vacate a guardianship 
would be. 
 Finally, we conclude that mother’s failure to comply 
with the no-contact order does not carry ODHS’s burden as 
to father. We have previously considered a parent’s inability 
to comply with court orders in assessing whether termina -
tion is in a child’s best interest. Dept. of Human Services v. 
W. L. J.-E., 324 Or App 121, 124-25, 524 P3d 989 (2023). 
In W. L. J.-E., based on the father’s history of disregard -
ing judicial orders, including violating an order prohibiting 
contact with his older children who had been removed from 
his care and regularly violating conditions of his probation, 
we concluded that “[t]here [were] reasons to fear that con -
fusion and disruption would occur[,] * * * even though [the] 
father could not undo the guardianship itself.” Id. at 125. 
However, in this case, the no-contact order was a condition 
of mother’s probation to which father himself was not sub -
ject. And although we share the juvenile court’s concerns 
about their ongoing relationship and do not condone father’s 
participation in mother’s violation of her probation, under 
the circumstances presented here, we do not find that any 
boundary issues between father and mother clearly indi -
cate that father would fail to respect boundaries imposed 
by J pursuant to a permanent guardianship or would other-
wise pressure the children to discontinue the guardianship 
arrangement. 
 To that point, we defer to the juvenile court’s find -
ing that father did not testify credibly about the June 2022 
Cite as 351 Or App 820 (2026) 833
incident with mother. However, that a victim of domestic 
violence recants a previous allegation against an abuser 
does not provide evidentiary support for the proposition that 
adoption is in the child’s best interest because that parent 
would be unable to respect boundaries set by the prospec -
tive adoptive parent. And we fail to see a logical throughline 
connecting father’s conflicting accounts of abuse to a likeli -
hood that he would pressure the children to move to vacate 
the guardianship.
 The state suggests that father’s “honesty problems” 
permit a conclusion that he would attempt to disrupt a guard-
ianship because there is no evidence to the contrary. But 
ODHS has the burden to present affirmative evidence of the 
harm and benefits to the child in severing the legal relation -
ship with the parent. L. M. B., 321 Or App at 52-53 (“The juve-
nile code demands a persuasive factual showing that termi -
nation of parental rights to a particular child is in that child’s 
best interest, in view of the particular needs and circum -
stances of the child.” (Internal quotation marks and brack -
ets omitted.)); see also Dept. of Human Services v. K. R. K. , 
348 Or App 651, 667, 591 P3d 727 (2026) (“The decision to 
sever a legal relationship is not one to be taken lightly, and, as 
we have made clear, ODHS bears the burden to demonstrate 
that it is highly probable that taking that irrevocable step is 
in the child’s best interests.”). The absence of evidence does 
not carry that burden. On this record, we cannot conclude 
that it is highly probable that termination is in C’s and R’s 
best interests.
 Reversed.
