A183454
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/29/state_v._klaus_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10939725/state-v-klaus/
Caption: State v. Klaus
Date: 2026-07-29

738 July 29, 2026 No. 708
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
STEVEN MICHAEL KLAUS,
Defendant-Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
20CR35140, 23CR05129, 23CR03966; 
A183454 (Control), A183455, A183456
Erik M. Buchér, Judge.
Argued and submitted February 5, 2026.
Lindsey Burrows argued the cause and filed the reply 
brief for appellant. On the opening brief were Ryan T. 
O’Connor and O’Connor Weber LLC.
Philip Thoennes, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Tookey, Presiding Judge, Kamins, Judge, and 
Jacquot, Judge.
KAMINS, J.
Reversed and remanded.
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 739
740 State v. Klaus
 KAMINS, J.
 In this consolidated criminal appeal, defendant 
appeals from judgments of convictions in three related 
cases. Following a stipulated facts bench trial, defendant 
was convicted of two counts of first-degree unlawful sexual 
penetration, ORS 163.411, five counts of first-degree sexual 
abuse, ORS 163.427, four counts of second-degree invasion 
of personal privacy, ORS 163.700, and two counts of using a 
child in a display of sexually explicit conduct, ORS 163.670. 
Defendant challenges the denial of his motion to suppress 
evidence found on a laptop that he purchased with his 
ex-wife and that was left at the family home after defen -
dant moved out and the couple divorced. Defendant’s ex-wife 
provided the laptop to law enforcement and consented to a 
search of its contents. Defendant, through counsel, objected 
to a search. After approximately six months, law enforce -
ment obtained a search warrant and searched the laptop. 
Defendant argues that he had a privacy interest in the 
contents of the laptop, his ex-wife could not consent to the 
search, he did not abandon his privacy interest in the lap -
top, a nd the warrant was insufficiently particular and over-
broad. We conclude that defendant had a privacy interest 
in at least some of the contents of the laptop, defendant did 
not abandon that interest, his ex-wife could not consent to a 
search of those contents, and the warrant was insufficiently 
particular as to those contents. Accordingly, we reverse and 
remand.
I. FACTS
 “We review a trial court’s ruling on a motion to sup-
press for errors of law, and we are bound by the trial court’s 
findings of fact, provided they are supported by constitu -
tionally sufficient evidence.” State v. Zweygartt, 337 Or App 
234, 236, 562 P3d 1106, rev den, 373 Or 738 (2025). “We 
state the facts consistent with the trial court’s findings and 
its denial of defendant’s motion to suppress.” State v. Bunch, 
305 Or App 61, 62, 468 P3d 973 (2020). “To the extent that 
the court did not make express findings, we presume that 
the court decided the facts in the light most favorable to the 
state.” Id.
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 741
A. Defendant and Carder’s Relationship
 In early 2010, defendant and Carder started dat -
ing and purchased a home together. They married in 2011. 
Defendant had three daughters from a prior relationship and 
Carder had two children from a prior relationship, includ -
ing a daughter, Z. Around that time, defendant and Carder 
purchased a laptop computer. It was a household computer 
that stayed in public areas of the house and was used for 
“household stuff” like family photos and tax returns, but it 
was mostly used by defendant. Defendant would sometimes 
take it with him to his work overnight to kill time. It was 
password protected, but Carder knew the password.
 In May 2019, the relationship between Carder and 
defendant “deteriorated” and Carder requested that defen -
dant move out of the family home, or she would file a restrain-
ing order. Defendant moved out and Carder packed up “much 
of [defendant’s] stuff” and dropped it off where he was stay -
ing. Defendant’s daughters also brought over some of defen-
dant’s belongings to him “as needed.” Defendant never asked 
for the laptop, and Carder retained possession of it.
 Carder and defendant divorced in December 2019. 
In the judgment of dissolution, which incorporated an arbi-
tration agreement between the parties, Carder and defen -
dant agreed that they would have no trouble dividing up 
personal property, but if they had any issues, they could 
seek the arbitrator’s help, even after entry of the dissolu -
tion judgment. In March 2020, defendant drove to Carder’s 
home with movers to pick up some tools and other items that 
Carder had left in a storage trailer. When Carder believed 
the movers were taking more items than agreed upon, she 
called the police. Carder and defendant agreed that any 
further contact regarding exchange of items should happen 
through attorneys. Defendant never reached out through an 
attorney for any additional items, including the laptop, prior 
to finding out that the laptop was turned in to the police, 
and never sought an arbitrator’s help (per the dissolution 
judgment) to claim the laptop.
 In May 2020, a pipe burst in the home and Carder 
“packed a bunch of stuff” and dropped it off for defendant 
742 State v. Klaus
and his daughters. Carder believed the laptop went into stor-
age at that time, while the house was undergoing remedia -
tion. Carder fully moved out of the home a few months later 
and relocated to Redmond, bringing the laptop with her.
B. Z Discloses Sexual Abuse and Police Search the Laptop
 When Carder told her daughter, Z, that she and 
defendant were getting a divorce, Z disclosed that defendant 
was sexually abusing her. After an investigation, a grand 
jury indicted defendant on two counts of unlawful sexual 
penetration in the first degree, ORS 163.411, and five counts 
of first-degree sexual abuse, ORS 163.427, for acts that 
occurred between June 2010 and November 2016. As part 
of his defense strategy, defendant requested custody records 
of Z from Carder through a subpoena. Carder thought the 
records might be on the shared laptop. When searching the 
laptop, Carder discovered a document titled “A Serious Man” 
that had several hyperlinks with titles that indicated child 
sexual abuse materials (CSAM). The document appeared 
to be created by defendant. Carder emailed the district 
attorney, informing her about the document, and the dis -
trict attorney disclosed Carder’s email and the document to 
defendant. Defendant then emailed the district attorney’s 
office to note his objection to any search of the laptop and 
requesting its return. The following month, Carder turned 
the laptop over to Detective Pomeroy at the Forest Grove 
Police Department and consented to a search of the device.
 Approximately six months after receiving the lap -
top, Pomeroy prepared an affidavit and accompanying 
search warrant to search the device for evidence related 
to the crimes of encouraging child sex abuse in the second 
degree, ORS 163.686, 1 in addition to the crimes for which 
defendant was indicted: sexual abuse in the first degree, 
 1 ORS 163.686 provides, in full:
 “(1) A person commits the crime of encouraging child sexual abuse in the 
second degree if the person:
 “(a)(A)(i) Knowingly possesses or controls, or knowingly accesses with 
the intent to view, a visual recording of sexually explicit conduct involving a 
child for the purpose of arousing or satisfying the sexual desires of the person 
or another person; or
 “(ii) Knowingly pays, exchanges or gives anything of value to obtain or 
view a visual recording of sexually explicit conduct involving a child for the 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 743
and unlawful sexual penetration in the first degree. In his 
affidavit, Pomeroy wrote that in his training and experience
“individuals in [sic] engaged in child pornography will down-
load and upload unlawful images and videos from via [ sic] 
a variety of internet-based websites and applications. Those 
unlawful images and videos are often shared and traded 
among other users engaged in that activity via hyperlinks.”
Pomeroy also described the document titled “A Serious Man.” 
Pomeroy explained that he found posts online that said that 
one of the websites listed on the document had been taken 
down because it hosted child pornography, and that the 
name of another website was a reference to father-daugh -
ter incest. Based on his research, Pomeroy believed he had 
probable cause to search the laptop for evidence of encourag-
ing child sexual abuse in the second degree, sexual abuse in 
the first degree, and unlawful sexual penetration in the first 
degree. Pomeroy requested, and was granted, a warrant to 
search, seize, and analyze the laptop for multiple types of 
digital evidence—both evidence that was located on the 
laptop, such as media files, as well as cloud-based evidence 
such as evidence “identifying the existence and use of cloud 
storage accounts, including service providers, usernames, 
and passwords.” That warrant authorized a search for the 
following categories of evidence: (1) “user identification for 
digital devices and digital evidence”; (2) “log-in and pass -
word information for digital devices and digital evidence”; 
(3) “[m]edia [f]iles” such as “pictures, videos, and associated 
data”; (4) “[i]nternet [u]sage”; (5) “[r]ecords of [c]ommunica-
tion * * * including content of communications”; (6) evidence 
“identifying the existence and use of cloud storage accounts, 
purpose of arousing or satisfying the sexual desires of the person or another 
person; and
 “(B) Knows or is aware of and consciously disregards the fact that creation 
of the visual recording of sexually explicit conduct involved child abuse; or
 “(b)(A) Knowingly pays, exchanges or gives anything of value to observe 
sexually explicit conduct by a child or knowingly observes, for the purpose 
of arousing or gratifying the sexual desire of the person, sexually explicit 
conduct by a child; and
 “(B) Knows or is aware of and consciously disregards the fact that the 
conduct constitutes child abuse.
 “(2) Encouraging child sexual abuse in the second degree is a Class C 
felony.”
744 State v. Klaus
including service providers, usernames, and passwords”; 
and (7) evidence related to certain specific websites.
 The search warrant was executed by Digital 
Forensics Investigator Hunter. The search brought up every 
media file on the computer, including “carved” files, which 
means files that had been previously deleted, and “cached” 
files, which create automatic copies of viewed images to store 
on the computer. Hunter found around 1,500 pictures that he 
believed showed minors engaged in sexually explicit conduct. 
He found them in “[v]arious locations,” but did not specify the 
exact locations of each of the CSAM files he found. Hunter 
did, however, testify that “your typical carved images that we 
talked about, that deleted space” were some of the “various 
locations” in which he found images. He also found one image 
in an “Adobe Bridge cache[,]” which means that a user deleted 
the image but the image remained in the software program’s 
cache. Hunter also found 52 videos of Z in a “little nuanced 
location” of a back-up of a phone that had been saved on the 
laptop. The videos were on a phone that someone had used a 
“program” to back up, which transferred those files on to the 
computer. The phone was named Steve’s iPhone.2 Seven of the 
videos contained nudity and appeared to be taken from a hid-
den camera in Z’s bedroom. Hunter also found internet brows-
ing history and searches that referred to child pornography.
C. Defendant’s Motion to Suppress
 Defendant moved to suppress the evidence found on 
the laptop. In his written motion, defendant argued that he 
had constitutionally protected interests in the laptop that 
were violated by a warrant that was insufficiently partic -
ular.3 Defendant contended that the warrant, as written, 
lacked specificity because it authorized a search for “almost 
any information or data” in his laptop, with “nothing in the 
computer * * * that is off-limits.” Defendant further argued 
that the warrant was overbroad because it allowed for a 
search of evidence beyond the time period where the crimes 
were alleged to have occurred, and beyond the scope of prob-
able cause as it related to the “Serious Man” document.
 2 Defendant’s first name is Steve.
 3 Defendant also argued that the warrant lacked probable cause that he com-
mitted any crime, but he has abandoned that argument on appeal.
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 745
 The state, in its written response, argued that 
defendant did not have a possessory interest in the laptop at 
the time it was seized by law enforcement, defendant aban-
doned his constitutionally protected property interest in the 
laptop because he separated himself from it once the divorce 
was finalized, Carder had authority to consent to the search 
because the laptop was shared marital property, and the 
warrant—if required at all—was sufficiently particular.
 The trial court denied defendant’s motion to sup -
press. The court concluded that Carder owned the lap -
top because, although it was initially marital property, it 
became Carder’s in the divorce when she kept the laptop and 
defendant did not seek an arbitrator’s help to claim it. The 
court further ruled that Carder, as the owner of the laptop, 
had “the personal privacy interest in it” and could do any -
thing she wanted to with it, including consent to a search. 
Alternatively, the court ruled that Carder was “at least joint 
owner” of the laptop with “at least a third party interest [in] 
it.” The court did not reach any issues with the warrant.
 Defendant proceeded to a stipulated facts trial 
where he was convicted, and this appeal followed.
II. ANALYSIS
 We begin with a discussion of the nature of defen -
dant’s constitutionally protected interests in the laptop at 
the time it was seized and searched. After concluding that 
defendant had privacy and possessory interests in some, but 
not all, of the contents of the laptop, we consider whether 
defendant abandoned those interests and whether Carder 
could validly consent to an invasion of those interests. 
Finally, we examine whether the warrant was sufficiently 
particular. We conclude that defendant did not abandon his 
Article I, section 9, interests in the contents stored outside 
his laptop (such as cloud services or records of internet usage 
held by third parties), Carder’s consent was invalid, and the 
warrant was insufficiently particular.
A. Defendant’s Privacy Interest
 Among other rights, Article I, section 9, of the Oregon 
Constitution grants “the people” the right to be “secure * * * 
746 State v. Klaus
against unreasonable search” of their “effects.” “A search 
occurs when a person’s privacy interests are invaded.” State 
v. Voyles, 280 Or App 579, 584, 382 P3d 583, rev den, 360 Or 
751 (2016) (internal quotation marks omitted). If a person 
has no privacy interest in property to begin with, then a 
search has not occurred. State v. McCrary, 266 Or App 513, 
517, 337 P3d 1008 (2014).
 “In Oregon, the right to privacy—the individual 
freedom from government scrutiny—protected by Article I, 
section 9, is not defined by private property or contractual 
rights, although such rights may inform the analysis in a 
given case.” State v. Lien/Wilverding, 364 Or 750, 759-60, 
441 P3d 185 (2019) (Lien). Rather, “the right to privacy pro-
tected by Article I, section 9, ‘is the freedom from scrutiny 
as “determined by social and legal norms of behavior, such as 
trespass laws and conventions against eavesdropping.” ’ ” Id. 
(first quoting State v. Newcomb, 359 Or 756, 764, 375 P3d 
434 (2016), then quoting State v. Campbell, 306 Or 157, 170, 
759 P2d 1040 (1988), emphasis in Lien). “[T]he fundamen-
tal question * * * is whether the government’s conduct, ‘if 
engaged in wholly at the discretion of the government, will 
significantly impair “the people’s” freedom from scrutiny, for 
the protection of that freedom is the principle that under -
lies the prohibition on “unreasonable searches” set forth in 
Article I, section 9.’ ” Id. (quoting Campbell, 306 Or at 171); 
see also State v. De Witt Simons , 375 Or 70, 80, 587 P3d 
311 (2026) (“Article I, section 9, on the other hand, does not 
focus on the expectation of privacy of the individual; rather, 
it focuses on the expectations that society sets for the con -
duct of our government.”).
 The right to privacy may also extend to objects that 
are discarded, or no longer in their original owner’s physical 
possession. In Lien, for example, the defendants placed their 
trash in an opaque, closed garbage bin, and took their bins 
out to the street, expecting their trash to be collected and 
commingled with the other homes in the neighborhood. 364 
Or at 753. The police, however, arranged for the trash collec-
tors to retrieve the defendants’ trash and search it, uncover-
ing evidence of crimes. Id. In concluding that the defendants 
had a privacy interest in their trash, the Supreme Court 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 747
“first consider[ed] general social norms of behavior.” Id. at 
760. The court looked to local news articles, case law, and law 
review articles to conclude that “most Oregonians would con-
sider their garbage to be private and deem it highly improper 
for others—curious neighbors, ex-spouses, employers, oppo -
nents in a lawsuit, journalists, and government officials, to 
name a few—to take away their garbage bin and scrutinize 
its contents.” Id. at 761-62 (citing Chris Lydgate & Nick 
Budnick, Rubbish!, Willamette Week (Dec 11, 2017), http://w 
b ww.wweek.com/portland/article-1616-rubbish.html-2 (last 
accessed May 1, 2019), California v. Greenwood, 486 US 35, 
50, 108 S Ct 1625, 100 L Ed 2d 30 (1988) (Brennan, J., dis -
senting), and Jonathan Simon, Katz at Forty: A Sociological 
Jurisprudence Whose Time Has Come , 41 UC Davis L Rev 
935, 962 (2007)). Even the trash collector in the case testi -
fied that he would not collect garbage from a customer at 
the request of a private citizen because doing so would be an 
invasion of privacy. Id. at 761.
 The court then considered “legal norms concerning 
personal privacy,” observing that “[t]he common law, as well 
as other sources, such as statutes, administrative rules, and 
local ordinances, are informative concerning existing legal 
norms of behavior.” Id. at 762. The court found it particularly 
relevant that the government’s act, if done in a non-law-en-
forcement setting, would violate general civil law. The court 
observed that, in Oregon, there was a common law cause of 
action for tortious invasion of privacy, which was one of the 
few causes of action that allow for mental suffering dam -
ages. Id. at 763.
 Applying those principles to this case, defendant did 
not have a privacy interest in the media files that were located 
on the laptop, because, under prevailing “legal norms” and 
“social norms,” the laptop was no longer his property after 
the divorce, and thus his freedom from government scrutiny 
of those files was not “significantly” impaired. As the trial 
court explained, under Oregon law, when a married couple 
divorces, a court determines ownership of marital property 
(including marital assets purchased during the marriage, 
like the laptop). See ORS 107.105(1)(f) (providing jurisdiction 
for the court to divide property “as may be just and proper 
748 State v. Klaus
in all the circumstances”). Once the dissolution judgment is 
filed, “the property division ordered shall be deemed effec -
tive for all purposes.” ORS 107.105(3).
 Here, the dissolution judgment incorporated the 
parties’ arbitration agreement. That agreement stated that 
the parties agreed that they “will have no problem dividing 
their personal property, and had a brief discussion about 
use of the trailer to do this. The Arbitrator can be involved 
further, even after entry of Judgment, if there is any dis -
pute about the personal property division.” On numerous 
occasions, defendant either collected personal property, or 
received personal property, but never asked for the laptop, 
disputed ownership of the laptop, or involved the arbitrator 
further. Thus, under the divorce judgment, Carder owned 
the laptop and the files located on it.
 Moreover, there is a legal and social norm that an 
ex-spouse does not have a right to privacy in personal prop-
erty possessed by the other ex-spouse in a divorce. That norm 
is, in fact, reflected in the parties’ divorce judgment. That 
judgment awarded “any keys that open or close property” to 
be delivered to the spouse receiving the locked property:
“Each party is awarded keys that open or close property 
awarded to that party. This includes physical keys to real 
property, vehicles, lock boxes, computer systems, and the 
like, as well as electronic keys such as garage door openers. 
The party having keys associated with property awarded 
to the other party shall immediately deliver said keys to 
the other party, keeping no copies for him or herself.”
(Emphasis added.) In other words, an ex-spouse cannot keep 
the physical or electronic keys to property awarded to the 
other spouse because they no longer have any possessory or 
privacy interest in the property. Under those norms, defen-
dant had no “right to privacy” in files that were located 
on the laptop, because defendant no longer owned the lap -
top. Because defendant did not have a “right to privacy” in 
those files, no search of those files under Article I, section 9, 
occurred.4
 4 For similar reasons, no search as to those files occurred under the Fourth 
Amendment as well. See Katz v. United States, 389 US 347, 351-52, 88 S Ct 507, 
19 L Ed 2d 576 (1967) (explaining test under Fourth Amendment).
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 749
 However, just because defendant no longer owned 
the laptop—that is, no longer had a possessory ownership 
interest in the laptop itself under the norms of property law—
does not necessarily mean that defendant had no privacy 
interest in anything accessible from the laptop. The search 
warrant for the laptop sought more than just media files that 
defendant may have created that were located on the laptop: 
it also sought access to over nine years’ worth of defendant’s 
digital data which could be stored elsewhere: cloud storage 
accounts, “including service providers, usernames, and pass-
words,” during the time frame of the criminal activity; inter-
net browsing history; and records of communication.
 The Supreme Court has recently explained that 
“Oregonians enjoy a right to privacy [under Article I, sec-
tion 9,] in their internet communications, even when access-
ing the internet via a third-party provider.” De Witt Simons, 
375 Or at 88. In De Witt Simons , the defendant accessed 
the internet from his laptop at home through a nearby 
public Wi-Fi network. Id. at 73. The owner of the Wi-Fi 
network provided the police with a year’s worth of all the 
unencrypted traffic it had collected from the defendant’s 
computer, which included the content of the communication 
that the computer was having with the internet. Id. at 76. 
The police identified the defendant as the owner of the com-
puter by employing a directional antenna at times when the 
defendant was logged onto the Wi-Fi network to determine 
the physical location of the defendant’s signal. Id. The police 
then obtained a warrant to search the defendant’s laptop, 
which revealed CSAM. Id. at 77.
 The De Witt Simons court concluded that the defen-
dant had an Article I, section 9, privacy right in “internet 
activities” conducted on the public Wi-Fi network. After 
acknowledging that “the use of the internet is a modern 
necessity, and wireless access is part and parcel of that,” 
375 Or at 83, the court concluded that the “societal norm 
that a person’s internet searches and browsing activities are 
reasonably considered to be private” granted them constitu-
tional protections. Id. at 87; see also id. at 88 (“[T]he mere 
fact that, to access the internet, society has accepted that 
multiple private entities along the path of a communication 
750 State v. Klaus
may, in theory, monitor the traffic does not equate to social 
acceptance that the government would use Wi-Fi networks 
to surveil its citizenry.”).
 If the defendant in De Witt Simons had a privacy 
right in internet use conducted through a third party’s pub-
lic Wi-Fi, then defendant here must have a privacy right in 
the digital data stored by third parties at issue in this case. 
Here, the state sought not only access to files stored on the 
laptop that defendant no longer owned, but also access to 
digital data stored by third parties: for example, cloud ser -
vices, communications, and internet browsing activity, all of 
which could potentially be accessed through other devices. 
While social and legal norms in this case would allow for 
government intrusion on the files stored directly on the lap-
top, a person would likely object to a government search of 
years of his Dropbox, Google Drive, or iPhoto Library, merely 
because he logged onto those accounts on a shared computer 
at some point in the past. See State v. Bellar , 231 Or App 
80, 110, 217 P3d 1094 (2009), rev den, 348 Or 291 (2010) 
(Sercombe, J., dissenting) (“[O]ur social norms are evolving 
away from the storage of personal data on computer hard 
drives to retention of that information in the ‘cloud,’ on serv-
ers owned by internet service providers. That information 
can then be generated and accessed by hand-carried per -
sonal computing devices. I suspect that most citizens would 
regard that data as no less confidential or private because 
it was stored on a server owned by someone else.”). Such an 
invasion, absent a warrant, would constitute an unreason -
able search under Article I, section 9.5
B. Abandonment
 The state argues, as an alternative ground for 
affirmance, that even if defendant retained some privacy 
interest in the digital data following the divorce, defendant 
abandoned that interest through affirmative actions (or fail-
ures to act) that demonstrated an intent to relinquish his 
interests. The trial court did not make express findings on 
 5 We emphasize that, unlike the defendant in De Witt Simons, who retained 
a privacy right in his internet usage stored by third parties (and, presumably, in 
all the content remaining on his laptop), defendant here retained no privacy right 
in communications stored on the laptop itself, because defendant no longer owned 
the laptop following the divorce. 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 751
abandonment; however, the parties argued abandonment 
below, and the record was adequately developed, so we may 
resolve the argument on appeal. See Sherertz v. Brownstein 
Rask, 314 Or App 331, 341, 498 P3d 850 (2021), rev den, 
369 Or 338 (2022) (“If [an] argument is properly presented 
again on appeal and raises a question of law, we may sim -
ply resolve it, typically remanding only if it is necessary 
for the trial court to make factual findings from conflicting 
evidence, exercise discretion, or the like.”). The issue before 
us is whether the facts support that defendant abandoned 
his privacy interest in data stored outside the laptop. As we 
explain, the facts do not support that conclusion.
 A person with a protected privacy interest in prop -
erty can relinquish that interest by abandoning the prop -
erty. State v. Cook , 332 Or 601, 34 P3d 156 (2001). Any 
abandonment must be clear and requires “an unequivocal 
manifestation of an intention to relinquish all constitution-
ally protected interests in the affected property.” Bunch, 305 
Or App at 69. “It is the state’s burden to prove by a pre -
ponderance of the evidence that a defendant abandoned his 
interest in a given item of property.” State v. Laney, 318 Or 
App 509, 516, 507 P3d 308 (2022).
 We have previously identified several factors that 
may be relevant in assessing whether a person has aban -
doned their Article I, section 9, interest:
• Actions taken by the police in relation to the prop -
erty ( e.g., whether they lawfully requested defen -
dant to step away from the property, obtained it 
through illegal conduct, etc.)
• Location where the property was left (e.g., public or 
private property)
• Circumstances surrounding how the defendant left 
the property ( e.g., left in plain view, hidden, left 
in a way that others would find it, left in a way to 
demonstrate continuing control)
• Whether the defendant gave up their rights to con-
trol the disposition of the property.
State v. Ipsen, 288 Or App 395, 399-400, 406 P3d 105 (2017).
752 State v. Klaus
 At the outset, we note that our existing case law, 
which so far has only identified factors for determining 
abandonment of physical property, may not be as helpful in 
determining the proper analytical framework for analyzing 
abandonment of digital property. For example, the “loca -
tion where the property was left” poses several questions. 
Does digital data accessible through the cloud exist on the 
devices on which the data can be accessed or on a third- 
party’s servers? See United States v. Hunt, 153 F4th 858, 865 
(9th Cir 2025) (holding the Fourth Amendment’s “reason -
able expectation of privacy framework” requires adapting 
the abandonment doctrine in light of the “unique character-
istics of cellphone data” and concluding that “the abandon -
ment doctrine can apply to cellphone data but courts should 
analyze the physical phone and its data separately to deter-
mine whether the circumstances allow the conclusion that 
there was an intent to abandon either”); State v. Mansor, 
363 Or 185, 217, 421 P3d 323 (2018) (“We do not think that 
it is useful to conceive of a computer as consisting of multi -
ple ‘rooms’ or containers, and a valid warrant to search a 
computer need not identify ‘places’ to search at that level of 
abstraction.”).
 However, some governing principles undoubtedly 
apply. First, we are mindful that the United States Supreme 
Court has explained that the privacy interests in digital data 
are equal to or surpass those of a home, Riley v. California, 
573 US 373, 396-97, 134 S Ct 2473, 189 L Ed 2d 430 (2014), 
and the Oregon Supreme Court has found that reasoning 
to be “persuasive.” Mansor, 363 Or at 222 (citing Riley). 
Second, the vast majority of people conduct their business 
online, making digital data an “essential” and necessary 
part of modern life. See De Witt Simons , 375 Or at 82-84 
(“Nearly every member of society, young or old, rich or poor, 
housed or unhoused, will use the internet to conduct what 
they intend to be private business—indeed, in many cases 
they must do so. In our age of paperless billing and cloud-
based storage, health records are accessed and finances are 
managed online.”); Steven Arango, Cloudy with a Chance 
of Government Intrusion: The Third-Party Doctrine in the 
21st Century, 69 Cath U L Rev 723, 734 (2020) (advocating 
for greater protection against warrantless searches of cloud 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 753
data, and stating, “Today’s world requires speed, access, 
and reliability—only the cloud can provide all three of 
 these features. Cloud storage is not merely beneficial to 
everyday life, it is essential.” (Footnotes omitted.)). In the 
context of abandonment, then, the intent to relinquish 
interests in digital data must be exceedingly clear, to over -
come such strong privacy interests in an “essential” facet of 
modern life.6
 Put together, we conclude that the state did not 
meet its burden to demonstrate that defendant intention -
ally relinquished all of his protected interests in his digital 
data stored by third parties. The state cannot point to any 
evidence in the record, such as defendant giving his cloud 
accounts and passwords to another person to use instead of 
him, canceling his email accounts, or demonstrating affir -
matively that he no longer wished to continue using his 
accounts, that would indicate he no longer had rights in his 
digital data. The state merely points to defendant’s inac -
tion as it relates to the physical laptop itself: defendant did 
not attempt to hide the laptop, did not manifest an attempt 
to maintain control over it, failed to assert any ownership 
interest in the laptop during the divorce proceedings, and 
 6 State courts that have compared abandonment of a digital device, like a lap-
top or a phone, to abandonment of all the digital data accessible from the device 
are split, although it appears that the majority of jurisdictions do not apply a dif -
ferent test for abandonment of a digital device from its data. See Commonwealth 
v. Elverton, No. 1183 WDA 2022, 2023 WL 8883434 at *46 (Pa Super Ct 2023) 
(“Since Riley, lower courts have not reached a clear consensus on how Riley effects 
the abandonment doctrines as applied to cell phones, if at all.”); State v. Brown, 
423 SC 519, 524, 815 SE 2d 761, 764 (2018) (upholding warrantless search of 
password-protected cellphone under Fourth Amendment abandonment doctrine 
when the phone had been left in police custody for days without anyone claiming 
it); State v. Samalia, 186 Wash 2d 262, 274, 375 P3d 1082, 1088 (2016) (declining 
to adopt “special rules” for abandoned cell phones). However, at least one court, 
applying the privacy rationale from Riley, has concluded that a “categorical rule 
permitting warrantless searches of abandoned cell phones, the contents of which 
are password protected, is * * * unconstitutional.” State v. K. C. , 207 So 3d 951 
(Fla 4th Dist Ct App 2016), cert den, 582 US 922 (2017). And it appears that, out 
of the few federal courts that have addressed the issue, the Ninth Circuit has 
advocated for a similar approach as ours. See Hunt, 153 F4th at 866-68 (follow -
ing Riley, applying the abandonment doctrine to cellphones “while accounting 
for the unique aspects of cellphone data” may require courts “to distinguish a 
digital device from the data it contains to preserve the degree of privacy that 
existed at the time of the Fourth Amendment’s adoption” but declining to conduct 
a separate analysis because the record did not establish that the defendant had 
abandoned his phone).
754 State v. Klaus
failed to return to arbitration after the divorce. Those facts 
do not address steps defendant did or did not take regarding 
his digital data. The state thus failed to meet its burden to 
demonstrate abandonment of the digital data that was not 
solely on the laptop.
C. Consent
 The state next argues, as an alternative ground for 
affirmance, that Carder could provide valid consent for police 
to search defendant’s digital data on the laptop. Like aban -
donment, the parties argued consent to the trial court and 
sufficiently developed the factual record, so we may affirm on 
that basis. Sherertz, 314 Or App at 341. After considering the 
issue, however, we decline to affirm on consent grounds.
 Consent is an exception to the warrant require -
ment. State v. Bonilla, 358 Or 475, 486, 366 P3d 331 (2015). 
“When the state relies on consent, it must prove by a prepon-
derance of the evidence that ‘someone having the authority 
to do so’ voluntarily gave the police consent to search the 
defendant’s property and that any limitations on the scope 
of the consent were complied with.” Id. at 481 (quoting State 
v. Weaver, 319 Or 212, 219, 874 P2d 1322 (1994)). “In deter-
mining whether a third party had the authority to consent, 
the trial court ‘must consider the totality of circumstances, 
including facts that may not have been available to the 
police when the decision to search was made.’ ” Voyles, 280 
Or App at 585 (quoting Bonilla, 358 Or at 492).
 In the physical search context, when two people 
have actual authority over a shared space, either person 
may consent to a search, “based on her or his own property 
interest.” Bonilla, 358 Or at 486; see also State v. Dowdy , 
117 Or App 414, 419, 844 P2d 263 (1992) (where person with 
common authority over hotel room consented to a search, 
the defendant’s “privacy interest in the room was not vio -
lated”). “That is the risk of cotenancy.” State v. Gonzalez-
Coria, 318 Or App 524, 534, 508 P3d 52, rev den, 370 Or 197 
(2022).
 Here, the state did not meet its burden, based on 
the totality of the circumstances, to show that Carder had 
actual authority to consent to the search of all the digital 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 755
data, as opposed to the data that was located on the laptop. 
There was no evidence in the record that Carder had access 
to defendant’s cloud accounts, or had a property interest in 
defendant’s digital data, such that she could consent to a 
search.
 In arguing otherwise, the state points to the fact 
that Carder knew the password to the laptop and had full 
access to the laptop. See State v. Solorio , 304 Or App 666, 
675, 468 P3d 522 (2020) (suggesting that girlfriend could 
have authority to consent to a search of a safe if defendant 
gave her the combination along with permission to enter the 
safe). The state also notes that there was no evidence in the 
record that defendant had a right to exclude others from the 
laptop. See Voyles, 280 Or App at 586 (sufficient evidence 
that property owners could consent to a search of their prop-
erty when, significantly, there was “nothing in the record 
to indicate that defendant had any exclusive or even joint 
control over the third parties’ real properties that gave her 
the right to exclude the property owners from using parts of 
their own properties” (emphasis in original)).
 Those arguments miss the mark. While Carder, as 
a co-owner, may have been able to consent to a search of 
the laptop itself, that is qualitatively different from whether 
she could consent to a search of defendant’s cloud account, 
or externally stored records of communication or internet 
browsing history. There was no evidence that defendant 
granted Carder permission to access his full array of dig -
ital data, as distinct from the data that was located on the 
laptop. See State v. Sobczak, 347 Wis 2d 724, 751, 833 NW 
2d 59, 72 (2013) (consent of girlfriend to search the defen -
dant’s laptop was valid when the defendant granted the 
girlfriend explicit permission to use the laptop without any 
limitation, the girlfriend used the laptop in a common area 
of the house, the police opened only the files that the girl -
friend found before applying for a search warrant, and the 
files inspected on consent were not password protected and 
were “accessible to anyone.”). The state thus failed to meet 
its burden to establish that Carder possessed authority to 
consent to a search of defendant’s digital data stored exter-
nally from the laptop.
756 State v. Klaus
D. Warrant
 As we have explained, defendant maintained a pri-
vacy interest in his digital data, notwithstanding Carder’s 
ownership of the laptop following the divorce and purported 
consent to its search. Given that the state does not argue 
that any other exception to the warrant requirement applied 
to defendant’s digital data, police were required to obtain 
a warrant in order to invade defendant’s privacy interests 
through a search. State v. McCarthy, 369 Or 129, 131, 501 
P3d 478 (2021). As mentioned, police here did obtain a war-
rant after seizing defendant’s laptop. The next issue, then, 
is whether the warrant obtained by police was sufficient to 
justify the search. For the reasons that follow, the warrant 
was deficient in several aspects.
 A warrant must be supported by probable cause—
that is, “the facts upon which the warrant is premised must 
lead a reasonable person to believe that seizable things 
will probably be found in the location to be searched.” State 
v. Anspach, 298 Or 375, 380-81, 692 P2d 602 (1984); ORS 
133.545(6). “Probably” means “more likely than not.” State 
v. Maxfield, 133 Or App 371, 374, 891 P2d 1342, adh’d to 
as modified on recons, 134 Or App 542, 896 P2d 581 (1995) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). For Fourth Amendment 
purposes, probable cause means “a fair probability that con-
traband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular 
place.” Illinois v. Gates, 462 US 213, 238, 103 S Ct 2317, 76 
L Ed 2d 527 (1983).
 In addition to being supported by probable cause, a 
warrant must be sufficiently particular, that is, it must “par-
ticularly describ[e] the place to be searched, and the person 
or thing to be seized.” Or Const, Art I, § 9; ORS 133.565 
(2)(b); US Const, Amend IV (providing same). The purpose of 
the particularity requirement is a prohibition against “gen-
eral warrants whereby administrative officers determine 
what is and what is not to be seized.” State v. Rose, 264 Or 
App 95, 106, 330 P3d 680, rev den, 356 Or 400 (2014) (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted); Andresen v. Maryland, 427 
US 463, 480, 96 S Ct 2737, 49 L Ed 2d 627 (1976) (general 
warrants that allow “exploratory rummaging in a person’s 
belongings” are prohibited by the Fourth Amendment).
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 757
 To meet the particularity requirement of Article I, 
section 9, “a warrant authorizing the search of digital 
devices ‘must identify, as specifically as reasonably possi -
ble in the circumstances, the information to be searched for, 
including, if relevant and available, the time period during 
which that information was created, accessed, or otherwise 
used.’ ” State v. Myers, 338 Or App 59, 565 P3d 463 (2025) 
(quoting Mansor, 363 Or at 218). “If the warrant describes 
the information sought with that degree of specificity, and 
if the supporting affidavit supplies probable cause to justify 
the described search, then the warrant satisfies the particu-
larity requirement of Article I, section 9.” State v. Turay, 371 
Or 128, 149-50, 532 P3d 57 (2023); see also Mansor, 363 Or 
at 219-20 (applying that standard and concluding that the 
warrant to search for internet history from a specific date 
was not facially unlawful).
 The warrant must also satisfy the “overbreadth” 
component of Article I, section 9. That means that the war-
rant “must not authorize a search that is broader than the 
supporting affidavit provides probable cause to justify.” 
Turay, 371 Or at 146 (internal quotation marks omitted).
 Here, in the probable cause affidavit to support the 
application for the warrant, Pomeroy stated that he believed 
the laptop would contain evidence of the crimes of encourag-
ing child sexual abuse in the second degree, ORS 163.686; 
sexual abuse in the first degree, ORS 163.427; and unlawful 
sexual penetration in the first degree, ORS 163.411.
 With respect to those crimes, Pomeroy stated that 
defendant was arrested in June 2020 as a result of “an ongo-
ing investigation with [defendant] and [Z].” Pomeroy stated 
that sexual abuse against Z occurred between 2010 and 
2017, domestic violence against Carder happened on May 8, 
2019, and defendant moved out of the home on May 20, 2019. 
Pomeroy also explained the facts around defendant and 
Carder’s divorce, and how Carder discovered the “A Serious 
Man” document. Pomeroy described that, in his research of 
some of the links in the document, he found that one of the 
websites was pornographic and reported by users as con -
taining CSAM, and another had a title that, according to 
Pomeroy’s understanding of the Bible, referenced daughters 
758 State v. Klaus
having an incestual relationship with their father. Finally, 
Pomeroy also explained that he knew, from his training and 
experience, that “individuals in [ sic] engaged in child por -
nography will download and upload unlawful images and 
videos from via a variety of internet-based websites and 
applications,” and that “[t]hose unlawful images and videos 
are often shared and traded among other users engaged in 
that activity via hyperlinks.” Pomeroy did not explain, in 
his affidavit, the connection between “individuals engaged 
in child pornography” and the crimes of sexual abuse in the 
first degree, ORS 163.427; and unlawful sexual penetration 
in the first degree, ORS 163.411, nor any reason why, in his 
training and experience, he knew that individuals engaged 
in sexual abuse or unlawful sexual penetration store evi -
dence of their crimes on a computer. Pomeroy also did not 
describe the alleged incidents that occurred against Z.
 The warrant here contained the following seven 
search commands to search for evidence of the crimes of 
encouraging child sexual abuse in the second degree, ORS 
163.686; sexual abuse in the first degree, ORS 163.427; 
and unlawful sexual penetration in the first degree, ORS 
163.411:
 “Evidence related to Digital Devices and Digital 
Evidence:
 “[1] Any and all documentation regarding user identi -
fication for digital devices and digital evidence (including 
but not limited to billing and purchase documentation);
 “[2] Any and all documentation regarding log-in 
and password information for digital devices and digital 
evidence;
 “And as to the above digital devices and digital evi -
dence, to further search for, seize, and analyze the digital 
items for the following:
 “[3] Media Files (pictures, videos, and associated 
data)—evidence related to the crimes under investigation 
during a time frame from January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019;
 “[4] Internet Usage—evidence related to the crimes 
under investigation of connecting to, searching, and 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 759
browsing the internet during a time frame from January 1, 
2010 to May 20, 2019;
 “[5] Records of Communication—evidence related to 
the crimes under investigation of engaging in communi -
cations (voice, video, email, text or otherwise), including 
content of communications, during a time frame from 
January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019:
 “[X] All records of communication
 “[6] Cloud Storage—evidence related to the crimes 
under investigation identifying the existence and use 
of cloud storage accounts, including service providers, 
usernames, and passwords, during a time frame from 
January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019;
 “[7] Websites—evidence related to the crimes under 
investigation of Tumblr.com, lmgbox.com and Pixvenue.
com during a time frame from January 1, 2010 to May 20, 
2019.”
We address each command in turn.
1. First and Second Search Commands
 The first two search commands fail the particu -
larity requirement, because they seek too much nonspecific 
information without any temporal limitation. See State v. 
Bock (A169480), 310 Or App 329, 334, 485 P3d 931 (2021) 
(Bock) (“Any interpretation of the search command broad 
enough to permit the use of any material discovered on the 
cell phone relevant to establish the device owner or user’s 
identity is impermissibly nonspecific.” (Emphasis in origi -
nal.)). In fact, the commands bear a striking resemblance 
to the impermissible commands from Bock. In that case, we 
concluded that a search command for “Any evidence identi-
fying the owner/user of the device” was insufficiently par -
ticular because it required the executing officer to employ 
discretion in determining what to seize and thus was “tan -
tamount to a general warrant.” Id. at 335 (emphasis added). 
The first and second commands here, which seek “ any and 
all documentation” regarding “user identification” for digital 
devices and digital data, as well as “log-in and password 
information,” without any temporal limitation, are insuffi -
ciently particular.
760 State v. Klaus
2. Third and Fourth Search Command
 The third search command sought “Media Files 
(pictures, videos, and associated data)—evidence related to 
the crimes under investigation during a time frame from 
January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019.” The fourth search com -
mand sought “Internet Usage—evidence related to the crimes 
under investigation of connecting to, searching, and brows -
ing the internet during a time frame from January 1, 2010 to 
May 20, 2019.” To the extent that those commands seek dig-
ital data protected by Article I, section 9, those commands 
are insufficiently particular and overbroad. As mentioned, 
defendant was indicted for sexually abusing his stepdaugh-
ter based on acts that occurred between 2010 and 2016, and 
Pomeroy stated that the abuse occurred until 2017. There 
was nothing in the affidavit or the search warrant applica -
tion that provided any reason why evidence of those crimes 
would be found on defendant’s laptop for several years fol -
lowing the end of the abuse. See State v. Serrano (A173250), 
324 Or App 453, 459, 527 P3d 54 (2023) (affidavit cured lack 
of specificity in warrant when it “described in detail the vid-
eos and photos that the officer believed were evidence of the 
charges of sodomy and rape * * * that would be found on [the] 
defendant’s phone” and “described the possible date ranges 
when the videos and photos were taken and when they had 
been uploaded to” various websites). The search command 
allowed the forensic specialist conducting the search to look 
for evidence related to all crimes that were under investi -
gation without distinguishing between the crimes related 
to abuse of Z rather than child pornography, even though it 
did not establish that the laptop would contain media files 
or internet communications related to Z’s abuse. As such, 
that command failed to describe the evidence “with as much 
specificity as reasonably possible under the circumstances 
[ ] so as to limit the enhanced risk of intrusion into defen -
dant’s privacy interests” with a digital search, Turay, 371 
Or at 151. That is so because the command authorized a 
search for media files or internet communications related to 
Z from years beyond those for which Pomeroy had probable 
cause to believe that a crime had been committed against 
her. Moreover, the state testified that defendant did not even 
own the laptop prior to June 2010. Thus, even to the extent 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 761
that the “Serious Man” document, in conjunction with the 
investigation of defendant, provided probable cause that 
evidence of CSAM would be found on defendant’s computer 
for the duration of defendant’s ownership of the device, the 
command should have limited itself to the dates defendant 
actually owned the device. See State v. Gaskill, 340 Or App 
459, 468-69, 571 P3d 769 (2025) (a cell phone search war -
rant that sought drug-related data beginning in August 
2021 was sufficiently particular, notwithstanding the fact 
that the first controlled buy did not happen until several 
months later, because affidavit established that the defen -
dant was under investigation for several months).
3. Fifth Search Command
 The fifth search command sought “Records of 
Communication—evidence related to the crimes under 
investigation of engaging in communications (voice, video, 
email, text or otherwise), including content of communica -
tions, during a time frame from January 1, 2010 to May 20, 
2019.” It further indicated it was seeking “all” records of 
communication. That command is insufficiently particu -
lar. It lacks any subject matter limitations on the commu -
nication, does not say who the communications would be 
between, and has a date range that is too long. Compare 
Turay, 371 Or at 151-52 (warrant search categories of “any 
other evidence related to the crimes” under investigation 
and “any evidence related to” ride-share apps were insuffi -
ciently particular because they sought information “at any 
time, in any location, in any circumstance” and “both failed 
to include dates, subject matter limitations, or other param-
eters that would have provided a reasonable degree of spec-
ificity to an officer executing those commands—despite the 
fact that more specific details about time periods and phys-
ical locations were known to the investigating detective” 
(internal quotation marks omitted)) with Meyers, 338 Or App 
at 70-71 (digital search warrant was sufficiently particular 
when it specified the phone numbers involved in communi -
cation with an undercover police officer and thus “limited 
the search to only the communications between the relevant 
phone numbers” and “effectively limited the search to the 
relevant timeframe”) and State v. Rose, 264 Or App 95, 109, 
762 State v. Klaus
330 P3d 680, rev den, 356 Or 400 (2014) (warrant was suffi-
ciently particular because it stated that police could search 
for evidence of child sex abuse crimes “located in the elec -
tronic files stored in defendant’s Yahoo account”). And sim-
ilarly to the third and fourth command, it sought evidence 
on the laptop prior to defendant actually owning the laptop.
5. Sixth Search Command
 The sixth search command sought “Cloud Storage—
evidence related to the crimes under investigation identify-
ing the existence and use of cloud storage accounts, includ -
ing service providers, usernames, and passwords, during a 
time frame from January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019.” For sim-
ilar reasons to the fifth search command, that search com -
mand was insufficiently particular. As mentioned, individu-
als store a vast amount of data through their cloud accounts. 
A search command that authorizes intrusion into the use of 
one’s entire cloud account for “evidence related to the crimes 
under investigation” presents an “enhanced risk of intrusion 
into [a] defendant’s privacy interests,” Turay, 371 Or at 151; 
see also State v. Savath , 298 Or App 495, 501, 447 P3d 1 
(2019) (concluding that the digital “warrant’s summary 
characterization of the information sought—‘related to con-
trolled substances offenses’—was insufficient to apprise the 
executing officer of which items were or were not subject to 
the warrant”).
6. Seventh Search Command
 The seventh search command sought “Websites—
evidence related to the crimes under investigation of 
Tumblr.com, lmgbox.com and Pixvenue.com during a time 
frame from January 1, 2010 to May 20, 2019.” Other than 
searching for evidence beyond the dates that defendant 
actually owned the computer, that command satisfies the 
particularity requirement.
E. Remedy
 We conclude that defendant possessed a privacy 
interest in his digital data that was not stored on the laptop 
and that the state did not meet its burden to demonstrate an 
exception to the warrant requirement. Because the warrant 
Cite as 351 Or App 738 (2026) 763
lacked the specificity required under Article I, section 9, 
it was invalid. On remand, the trial court can determine 
whether any of the evidence seized was stored by a third 
party and suppress that evidence.
 Reversed and remanded.
