A183071
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/29/state_v._lonergan_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10939724/state-v-lonergan/
Caption: State v. Lonergan
Date: 2026-07-29

800 July 29, 2026 No. 713
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
JOHN SCOTT LONERGAN,
Defendant-Appellant.
Clackamas County Circuit Court
23CR36490; A183071
Susie L. Norby, Judge.
Submitted September 30, 2025.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Andrew D. Robinson, Deputy Public Defender, 
Oregon Public Defense Commission, filed the brief for appel-
lant. John Lonergan filed the supplement brief pro se.
Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General, and Elise Josephson, Assistant Attorney 
General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
HELLMAN, J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 351 Or App 800 (2026) 801
 HELLMAN, J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment convicting him 
of several crimes, including identity theft, ORS 165.800(1). 
On appeal, defendant argues that the trial court erred in 
denying his motion for judgment of acquittal (MJOA) on his 
identity theft charge. Specifically, defendant contends that 
the evidence was legally insufficient to support a conclusion 
that defendant constructively possessed the stolen identifi -
cation, which was stowed alongside a host of other stolen 
items in a truck that was in defendant’s possession.
 When reviewing a denial of an MJOA, we “view[ ] 
the evidence in the light most favorable to the state to deter-
mine if the state presented sufficient evidence from which 
a rational trier of fact, making reasonable inferences, could 
find the essential elements of the crime beyond a reason -
able doubt.” State v. Hedgpeth, 365 Or 724, 730, 452 P3d 948 
(2019) (internal quotation marks omitted). Here, viewing the 
evidence in the light most favorable to the state, a reason -
able factfinder could conclude that defendant constructively 
possessed the stolen identification. Accordingly, we affirm.
 We recite the relevant facts in accordance with the 
Hedgpeth standard. During the summer, L visited an unoc-
cupied rural property outside of Canby, which she had inher-
ited from her deceased parents. The property encompassed 
a house and several outbuildings. That day, she noticed that 
her father’s truck had been stolen from the property. She 
also observed that her late parents’ house had been burgled; 
many of her family’s possessions were missing, including 
tools, jewelry, and her mother’s wallet, the latter of which 
had been stored in a bedroom dresser.
 Later that summer, L again checked on the prop -
erty. She called police after hearing other people near the 
back of the property. Officers arrived and came across 
defendant, who had emerged from behind a tall bushy tree. 
Behind the tree, parked outside of an outbuilding, was the 
stolen truck. The truck’s ignition and steering column were 
destroyed, indicating that it had been unlawfully used. The 
outbuilding door was open and piles of debris were strewn 
on the ground outside.
 The officers arrested defendant. While detained, 
defendant told the officers that he had been hired to tidy up 
802 State v. Lonergan
the property, including by sorting through any recyclable 
and salvageable items. He also stated that he had been to 
the property three days prior and that, on that day, he had 
driven there in the truck and had been there for a “couple 
hours.” He indicated that he was in the process of purchasing 
the truck from the person he purported had hired him, who 
he had known for a week. Officers found a woman, codefen -
dant, sitting on the truck’s front passenger seat. Defendant 
claimed that codefendant was a “friend of [his],” who “said she 
could help” with the alleged job of cleaning up the property.
 Officers turned their attention to the truck. The 
truck bed and interior were piled with property stolen from 
the house and outbuildings, including generators, tools, jew-
elry, and assorted knickknacks. The officers searched the 
truck, sifting through the numerous items and asking L if 
she recognized any of them. L identified many of the items 
as previously being stored in the house or outbuildings.
 An officer folded the front passenger seat forward 
and began examining the small backseat of the truck cab. 
The backseat was disorganized, with many items haphaz -
ardly stacked atop one another, including clothing, toilet -
ries, food, and trash. The officer dislodged a backpack lying 
around the center of the backseat, which revealed a smaller, 
opaque black bag tucked underneath. The black bag was 
closed but unzipped. Inside it, the officer found L’s deceased 
mother’s wallet, which was folded but unclasped. Inside the 
wallet was L’s mother’s personal identification card. L testi-
fied that the last time she saw the wallet, it was in the bed-
room dresser in the house before the earlier burglary and 
that she did not put the wallet, nor any other piece of her 
family’s property, in the truck.
 Defendant was charged with several crimes, includ-
ing identify theft. ORS 165.800(1). At the close of the state’s 
case, defendant moved for a judgment of acquittal on the 
identity theft charge. He argued that the state had not 
met its evidentiary burden in establishing defendant’s pos -
session of the stolen identification to sustain a conviction 
because (1) there was no evidence of actual possession and 
(2) the evidence was insufficient to establish constructive 
possession because, even though the “wallet was in a bag 
Cite as 351 Or App 800 (2026) 803
that was in the back of the truck” that defendant drove to 
the property, there was no “evidence regarding when that 
bag was put in the back of the truck * * * [or] who put the bag 
in the back of the truck.” The state responded that there was 
adequate evidence to establish possession because there was 
clear evidence that defendant was stealing items from the 
property and “using the truck as a storage unit, essentially, 
for stolen property, and it contain[ed] th[e] identification”; in 
short, defendant “[wa]s in possession of th[e] truck and all 
the stolen property within th[e] truck,” including the identi-
fication. The trial court denied the motion. A jury convicted 
defendant of identity theft and other crimes.1
 Defendant appeals from the judgment of conviction.
 As relevant here, a person commits identify theft if 
they, “with the intent to deceive or to defraud, * * * possess[ ] 
* * * the personal identification of another person.” ORS 
165.800(1).2 For purposes of identify theft, “possess” means 
to “have physical possession or otherwise to exercise domin-
ion or control over property.” ORS 161.015(9); see also ORS 
161.035(2) (applying ORS 161.015(9)’s definition of “possess” 
to ORS 165.800(1)).
 Possession can be actual or constructive. State v. 
Haddon, 286 Or App 191, 198, 399 P3d 458 (2017), overruled 
on other grounds by State v. Serbin, 324 Or App 792, 527 
P3d 794 (2023). Because the state does not argue that there 
was evidence of actual possession on appeal, we analyze 
the sufficiency of proof as to only constructive possession. 
Constructive possession requires the state to prove that the 
“defendant knowingly exercised control over, or had the right 
to control, the contraband,” State v. Evans, 161 Or App 86, 
89, 983 P2d 1055 (1999), and it “may rely on circumstantial 
evidence and reasonable inferences flowing from that evi -
dence” to do so, State v. Hiner, 269 Or App 447, 453, 345 P3d 
478 (2015). However, mere evidence of a defendant’s “pres -
ence in the proximity” of an item is insufficient to establish 
 1 Defendant was also convicted of second-degree burglary, ORS 164.215, and 
unauthorized use of a vehicle, ORS 164.135.
 2 The full statutory provision reads, “A person commits the crime of identity 
theft if the person, with the intent to deceive or to defraud, obtains, possesses, 
transfers, creates, utters or converts to the person’s own use the personal identi -
fication of another person.” ORS 165.800(1).
804 State v. Lonergan
constructive possession. State v. Fry, 191 Or App 90, 93, 80 
P3d 506 (2003).
 The state takes the position that a rational factfinder 
could conclude that defendant constructively possessed the 
identification because he possessed the truck that the iden-
tification was found in, and because the evidence permitted 
an inference that defendant had previously stolen the wallet 
containing the identification from the property. We agree 
with the state’s argument.
 To start, defendant does not seriously dispute his 
possession of the truck, and we conclude that the evidence, 
viewed in the light most favorable to the state, would per -
mit a rational trier of fact to reach that conclusion. Notably, 
defendant told officers that he was purchasing the truck and 
that he had driven the truck to the property on the day of 
his arrest. However, we observe that inferring defendant’s 
constructive possession of the identification based only on 
his possession of the truck would require “too great an infer-
ential leap” and “a stacking of inferences that is too specu -
lative” to be reasonable. Hiner, 269 Or App at 453 (inter -
nal quotation marks omitted). As defendant argues, and 
the record demonstrates, the truck was filled with clothing, 
toiletries, food, and trash, as well as items stolen from the 
house and outbuildings. The identification was found in a 
wallet, which was itself in another bag, which was under 
a backpack, in the backseat of the truck. Given that evi -
dence, defendant’s possession of the truck, without more, 
was insufficient to permit a rational factfinder to conclude 
that he had the right to control the identification.
 Therefore, even though we have sometimes concluded 
that a defendant’s exercise of control over a larger container 
within which the contraband is housed permits a conclusion 
that the defendant constructively possessed that contraband, 
that principle does not apply here. See State v. Bauer, 128 Or 
App 598, 601, 876 P2d 802 (1994) (explaining that “evidence 
that the contraband is found in quarters owned or occupied 
by the defendant can be sufficient to allow the inference that 
[the] defendant has a right to control the contraband” (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted)). That is because that principle 
applies only “in cases in which the purported constructive 
Cite as 351 Or App 800 (2026) 805
possessor not only owned or occupied the premises in which 
the contraband was found, but also knew or, from the con -
traband’s location, reasonably could have known, of its pres -
ence.” State v. Stradley, 258 Or App 10, 15, 308 P3d 284 (2013) 
(emphases added); see also State v. Keller , 280 Or App 249, 
255, 380 P3d 1144 (2016) (holding that the defendant’s “pre -
sumed control of the car” did not “give rise to probable cause 
that he controlled everything within the vehicle”). That is, 
even where contraband is located within areas under a per -
son’s control, we have required evidence that suggests that 
the person was aware of the contraband, because construc -
tive possession requires the defendant’s knowledge of, in 
addition to the right to exercise control over, the contraband. 
See Stradley, 258 Or App at 16 (acknowledging the “ ‘know-
ing’ qualification of constructive possession”); Keller, 280 Or 
App at 254 (distinguishing between a defendant’s aware -
ness of contraband and his right to control it); see also State 
v. Borden, 307 Or App 526, 531, 476 P3d 979 (2020) (same). 
Here, the large number and variety of items present in utter 
disarray in the truck and the fact that the identification was 
nestled within multiple containers would not allow a rational 
trier of fact to determine that defendant’s mere possession of 
the truck itself indicated his knowledge of all the items that 
were in the truck, including the identification.
 However, defendant’s possession of the truck was not 
the only evidence in the record linking him to the identifica -
tion. Absent direct evidence, a defendant’s awareness of and 
right to control an item may be reasonably inferred based 
on, among other things, evidence of their proximity to the 
item, the length of time that they were in proximity to the 
item, the location and visibility of the item, and the means 
by which the item arrived at its location. See, e.g., State v. 
Miller, 238 Or 411, 414, 395 P2d 159 (1964) (holding that the 
“obviousness” of a firearm, which protruded from under the 
front seat of the car that the defendant was driving, and the 
“long time” that the defendant was operating the car were 
“particularly strong circumstantial evidence” supporting an 
inference that the defendant knew about the firearm); State 
v. Kulick, 314 Or App 680, 683-84, 497 P3d 789 (2021) (con -
cluding that there was insufficient evidence to establish the 
defendant’s constructive possession of a meth pipe found in 
806 State v. Lonergan
his girlfriend’s car that he was driving, where the pipe was 
not located in a place visible to the defendant and there was 
neither evidence that he had placed the pipe in the car nor 
that he “regularly drove, rode in, or accessed the car”).
 Here, L testified that her mother’s wallet, which 
contained the identification, had been stored in a bedroom 
dresser. She also testified that she discovered that the wal -
let was missing on the same day that she discovered that 
the truck and other valuables were stolen from the property, 
which was on some date previous to defendant’s apprehen -
sion. It is reasonable to conclude that the person who stole the 
truck and other valuables from the house was the same person 
who stole the wallet containing the identification. Defendant 
admitted to having been at the property three days prior and 
that he had obtained the truck within the past week. The 
truck was full of stolen items taken from both the house and 
the outbuildings. When officers encountered defendant, he 
was in the process of sorting through items taken from the 
buildings on the property, even though L indicated that she 
had not hired defendant to do so. In combination, and viewed 
in the light most favorable to the state, that evidence would 
permit a rational factfinder to conclude that defendant was 
aware of and exercised control over the wallet because he 
took it from the dresser and put it in the truck.3
 The most difficult part of the state’s case is whether 
defendant’s constructive possession of the wallet permitted 
 3 We note that the evidence does not establish precisely when the earlier 
theft of the truck and wallet occurred relative to when defendant was arrested, 
when defendant claimed that he had been on the property prior, or when defen -
dant indicated that he had come into possession of the truck. Thus, it is possible 
that defendant’s prior visit to the property or appropriation of the truck occurred 
after the wallet was removed from the house. Nevertheless, when viewed in total-
ity, the evidence allows for an inference that defendant stole both the truck and 
wallet in the earlier burglary incident, even if that inference does not “necessarily 
flow” from the evidence. Hedgpeth, 365 Or at 733 (emphasis in original).
 Further, defendant argues that because the wallet’s presence in the truck 
was just as “readily attributable” to codefendant’s actions, it was unreasonable 
to infer that defendant constructively possessed the wallet. But although the evi -
dence permitted a rational factfinder to conclude that codefendant was helping 
defendant steal valuables from the property and stow them in the truck on the 
day that police arrived, there is no evidence in the record linking codefendant to 
any previous visits to the property, which was when L testified that the wallet 
was stolen. Indeed, although codefendant shared burglary, criminal trespass, 
and unauthorized use of a vehicle charges with defendant, only defendant was 
charged with—and eventually convicted of—identity theft.
Cite as 351 Or App 800 (2026) 807
a rational trier of fact to conclude that defendant construc -
tively possessed the identification that was inside the wal -
let. That is the more difficult question because the state had 
to establish that defendant knew of the identification’s pres-
ence in the wallet. There was no direct evidence that defen-
dant knew about the identification, and the wallet itself did 
not announce the presence of the identification. Ultimately, 
however, we conclude that a rational factfinder could infer 
that defendant knew that the identification was contained 
in the wallet. The wallet itself is usually not the valuable 
item; instead, it is what a wallet contains that makes steal-
ing it worthwhile. Thus, it is a reasonable inference that a 
person stealing a wallet would open it to determine what 
was inside, and it is reasonable to conclude that defendant 
did so here. In fact, the wallet, when found by the officers, 
was unclasped. Cf. State v. Daniels, 348 Or 513, 521-22, 234 
P3d 976 (2010) (concluding that insufficient evidence sup -
ported an inference that the defendant knew about drugs 
where the drugs were located inside his girlfriend’s bag, and 
there was neither evidence that the bag announced its illicit 
contents, nor that the defendant had looked in the bag).
 In sum, because the record, when viewed in the 
light most favorable to the state, gave rise to reasonable 
inferences that defendant possessed the truck containing 
the identification and that defendant himself stole the iden-
tification, a rational factfinder could conclude that defen -
dant constructively possessed the identification. Therefore, 
we conclude that the trial court did not err in denying defen-
dant’s MJOA on the identity theft charge.4
 Affirmed.
 4 We do not address defendant’s three pro se assignments of error, because 
they are unpreserved. ORAP 5.45(1); see also State v. Pedersen, 338 Or App 362, 
367, 566 P3d 24, rev den, 374 Or 188 (2025) (“As a general rule, pro se litigants are 
bound by the same preservation rules as all other parties.” (Internal quotation 
marks omitted.)). Defendant does not request plain error review, and absent a 
direct request we generally do not engage in plain error review. ORAP 5.45(7); 
State v. Ardizzone, 270 Or App 666, 673, 349 P3d 597, rev den, 358 Or 145 (2015). 
Further, we observe that defendant’s third assignment of error, which amounts 
to a claim that his trial attorney provided inadequate assistance of counsel, is 
generally inappropriate for resolution on direct appeal. State v. Hutchinson, 337 
Or App 426, 435 n 4, 563 P3d 986, rev den, 373 Or 738 (2025); Davis v. Armenakis, 
151 Or App 66, 68 n 1, 948 P2d 327 (1997), rev den, 327 Or 83, 328 Or 194 (1998).
