A180940
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/29/state_v._yemelyanov_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10939716/state-v-yemelyanov/
Caption: State v. Yemelyanov
Date: 2026-07-29

764 July 29, 2026 No. 709
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
VITALIY YEMELYANOV,
Defendant-Appellant.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
20CR44738; A180940
Christopher A. Ramras, Judge.
Submitted May 13, 2025.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Kali Montague, Deputy Public Defender, 
Oregon Public Defense Commission, filed the briefs for 
appellant.
Ellen F. Rosenblum, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General, and Colm Moore, Assistant Attorney 
General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
Pagán, Judge.
PAGÁN, J.
On appeal, conviction on Count 1 reversed and remanded; 
remanded for resentencing; otherwise affirmed. On cross-
appeal, affirmed.
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 765
766 State v. Yemelyanov
 PAGÁN, J.
 Defendant appeals a judgment of conviction for one 
count of driving under the influence of intoxicants (DUII), 
ORS 813.010 (Count 1); one count of careless driving,1 ORS 
811.135 (Count 2); and one count of failure to perform duties 
of a driver, ORS 811.700 (Count 3). He asserts a single 
assignment of error, arguing that the trial court erred by 
admitting the results of defendant’s breath test after find -
ing that the police violated defendant’s Article I, section 12, 
rights under the Oregon Constitution. The state cross-
appeals, claiming that the trial court erred by concluding 
that defendant’s Article I, section 12, rights were violated. 
The state concedes that if we affirm on its cross-appeal and 
determine that defendant’s argument is preserved, the fail-
ure to suppress the results of the breath test was error and 
was not harmless as to the DUII conviction. Because we 
determine that the trial court did not err by concluding that 
defendant’s Article I, section 12, rights were violated and we 
conclude that defendant adequately preserved the issue, we 
the state’s cross-appeal, accept the state’s concession, and 
reverse and remand defendant’s conviction on Count 1. We 
do, however, agree with the state that the failure to sup -
press the results of the breath test was harmless error with 
regard to the counts of careless driving and failure to per -
form the duties of a driver, and we therefore affirm defen -
dant’s convictions on Counts 2 and 3.
I. BACKGROUND
 The parties agree as to the material facts of the 
case.
 This case revolves around a hit-and-run incident 
that occurred on July 26, 2020. Officer Li, one of the initial 
responding officers along with her partner, Officer Clark, 
testified that she received a report that there had been a 
car crash in which one car had hit a pole and the other car 
involved left the scene. She then stated that she was com -
municating with a driver involved in the accident who had 
 1 Defendant was initially charged with one count of reckless driving, ORS 
811.140. The court found him not guilty of reckless driving but guilty of the lesser 
included offense of careless driving, ORS 811.135.
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 767
“called” in, who stated that there had been a car driving the 
wrong way along the street, which caused her crash. The 
driver gave a description and the license plate number of the 
other car, and Li and Clark soon located the vehicle, which 
Li testified was in the middle of the road, had sustained 
heavy damage, was smoking, and had its airbags deployed. 
The driver was not in the car. A witness nearby pointed Li 
towards the driver of the car, whom Li identified as defen -
dant, who was trying to hide in the brush. Li instructed 
defendant to come out and detained him. Li testified that 
she heard Clark Mirandize defendant while she tried to 
locate the witness who had pointed out defendant. She then 
conducted a search of defendant when she could not locate 
the witness.
 Li then took defendant to the police car and ques -
tioned defendant about his address, if he had been driving, 
and how much he had been drinking. Defendant made sev -
eral incriminating statements, which were the subject of 
defendant’s motion to suppress.
 The officers then took defendant back to the pre -
cinct and to a DUI investigation room, where they were 
joined by another officer who specialized in DUI investiga -
tions. Defendant was not asked to perform any field sobriety 
tests but did answer some standard interview questions as 
a part of the precinct’s Intoxilyzer investigation. The DUII 
investigator testified that defendant had a noticeable accent. 
Defendant was read the implied consent form and agreed to 
provide physical cooperation, submitting to a breath test, 
which returned a result of 0.21 BAC.
 Before trial, defendant filed a written motion to 
suppress, arguing, in relevant part, that his Article I, 
section 12, rights had been violated and requesting that 
all evidence resulting from the violation be suppressed, as 
well as all derivative evidence. At the suppression hearing, 
defendant argued that the state had not met its burden to 
show that he understood the Miranda warnings provided to 
him in light of defendant’s limited understanding of English. 
During that hearing, defendant did not specifically argue 
that the results of the breath test should be suppressed as 
derivative evidence following from officer’s the Miranda 
768 State v. Yemelyanov
violation, focusing his argument instead on suppressing that 
evidence as fruit of an arrest without probable cause of DUII.
 During the closing arguments of the suppression 
hearing, the state claimed that it had satisfied its burden to 
show that defendant understood his rights, stating, “Officer 
Li testified that she was told by Officer Clark that [defen -
dant] did affirm his understanding of his rights, which is 
allowable at the motion stage.” The court took issue with the 
state’s claim in its ruling, and found that defendant’s Article I, 
section 12, rights had been violated, stating,
 “Now, with regards to the Miranda rights, I went back 
and read Officer Li’s testimony as I noted it to be, and I 
read that she heard Officer Clark read [defendant] his 
Miranda rights, and she did the inventory of the vehicle. I 
didn’t see anything that suggested [defendant] was asked 
if he understood his rights and was still willing to speak.
 “That may well have happened, but I agree with Defense 
that I can only go off the record that was created.”
The court granted defendant’s suppression motion in part, 
ordering suppression of all of his statements to the officers 
after his arrest. However, the court denied the suppression 
motion with regard to the breath test results, determining 
that the state had provided sufficient evidence to infer that 
defendant had understood the later conversation and the 
implied consent form. Defendant was convicted of DUII, 
careless driving as a lesser included offense of reckless driv-
ing, and failure to perform the duties of a driver. Defendant 
timely appealed.
II. ANALYSIS
 Because the state only concedes that the trial 
court erred in denying defendant’s suppression motion if we 
affirm its cross-appeal, we address that argument first and 
conclude that the trial court did not err in finding that the 
state had failed to meet its burden of showing that defen -
dant understood the Miranda warnings provided to him. 
Next, we conclude that defendant adequately preserved the 
issue of whether the breath test should be suppressed in his 
written motion and subsequently accept the state’s conces-
sion that admitting that test was error and not harmless 
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 769
as to defendant’s conviction for DUII (Count 1). Last, we 
conclude that the failure to suppress the breath test results 
was harmless error in regard to defendant’s convictions for 
careless driving and failure to perform the duties of a driver 
(Counts 2 and 3).
A. The State’s Cross-Appeal
 The state argues that the court applied the wrong 
legal standard when it ruled that defendant’s Article I, sec-
tion 12, rights had been violated, by requiring the state to 
show that defendant explicitly said that he understood and 
waived his rights. We conclude that the state misstates the 
trial court’s reasoning and that the trial court did not use 
an erroneous legal standard.
 We review the denial of a motion to suppress for 
errors of law, deferring to the trial court’s factual findings 
that are supported by evidence in the record. State v. Heise-
Fay, 274 Or App 196, 198, 201, 360 P3d 615 (2015). Whether 
defendant adequately understood the Miranda warnings is 
a question of historical fact. State v. Corona, 60 Or App 500, 
505, 655 P2d 216 (1982).
 It is well settled that the Oregon Constitution requires 
that police deliver adequate Miranda warnings to a suspect 
who is subjected to custodial interrogations to ensure that 
the suspect is “not compelled to provide information that 
can subsequently be used against [them] in a criminal pros-
ecution, and to ensure that the suspect is afforded the right 
to counsel.” State v. Lunacolorado , 238 Or App 691, 695, 
243 P3d 125 (2010), rev den, 350 Or 530 (2011). While those 
rights may be waived, such waivers must be “knowing and 
voluntary.” State v. Taylor, 296 Or App 278, 285, 438 P3d 419 
(2019). We have previously held that a defendant “who does 
not understand the Miranda warnings does not understand 
that he or she has those rights, and statements made absent 
the defendant’s understanding of those warnings are pre -
sumptively involuntary and subject to suppression because 
the defendant cannot validly waive those rights.” Id. at 285-
86 (internal quotation marks and ellipsis removed; empha -
sis in original). It is the state’s burden to show that the 
770 State v. Yemelyanov
defendant knowingly and voluntarily waived their rights 
before any statement will be admissible. Corona, 60 Or App 
at 505.
 Here, the state argues that the trial court erred 
by finding that the state had not met its burden to show 
that defendant understood the rights read to him because it 
applied the incorrect legal standard. The state argues that 
the court erroneously required the state to prove that defen-
dant had expressly communicated that he understood his 
rights and was still willing to talk to the officers, citing the 
following section of the court’s ruling:
 “Now, with regards to the Miranda rights, I went back 
and read Officer Li’s testimony as I noted it to be, and I 
read that she heard Officer Clark read [defendant] his 
Miranda rights, and she did the inventory of the vehicle. I 
didn’t see anything that suggested [defendant] was asked 
if he understood his rights and was still willing to speak.
 “That may well have happened, but I agree with Defense 
that I can only go off the record that was created.”
But the state takes the court’s comment out of context. In 
its closing argument, the state claimed that “Officer Li tes -
tified that she was told by Officer Clark that [defendant] did 
affirm his understanding of his rights, which is allowable 
at the motion stage.” That claim was not supported by the 
record; Li only testified to having heard Clark read defen -
dant his rights but said nothing about Clark telling her that 
defendant had understood them. We do not read the court’s 
above statement as an articulation of the legal standard as 
the state now claims, but rather the court explaining its rea-
soning for ruling in defendant’s favor by pointing out the 
disconnect between the state’s argument and the actual tes-
timony heard. The state’s claim that the trial court applied 
the wrong legal standard therefore fails and we affirm the 
state’s cross-appeal.
B. Suppression of the Breath Test Results
1. Preservation
 We conclude that defendant preserved for appeal his 
challenge to the admission of the results of his breath test 
because his written motion was sufficient to put the court and 
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 771
the state on notice that he was requesting that the breath 
test results be suppressed as derivative evidence result -
ing from the violation of defendant’s Article I, section 12, 
rights.
 Our preservation requirement is designed to ensure 
“fairness to opposing parties, by requiring that the positions 
of the parties are presented clearly to the initial tribunal 
so that parties are not taken by surprise, misled, or denied 
opportunities to meet an argument.” State v. Walker, 350 Or 
540, 548, 258 P3d 1228 (2011) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). When analyzing preservation issues, the Supreme 
Court many times over the years has “drawn attention to 
the distinctions between raising an issue at trial, identify -
ing a source for a claimed position, and making a particular 
argument. The first ordinarily is essential [for preservation], 
the second less so, the third least.” State v. Skotland, 372 Or 
319, 327, 549 P3d 534 (2024) (citing State v. Hitz, 307 Or 183, 
188, 766 P2d 373 (1988)) (internal citation omitted; empha-
sis original to Hitz). Furthermore, when, as here, a party 
makes a written motion and argues in favor of that motion 
at a hearing, the party need not reiterate every argument 
made in the written motion to preserve it for appeal. State v. 
Sepulveda, 288 Or App 632, 639, 406 P3d 169 (2017).
 Here, we conclude that defendant adequately pre -
served the argument that the breath test should be sup -
pressed because his motion to suppress evidence based on 
a violation of Article I, section 12, included the request to 
suppress any “derivative evidence,” which unambiguously 
included the breath test results. In section IV of the motion 
to suppress, defendant argued that the state violated his 
Article I, section 12, rights. He concluded that section by 
stating,
 “Where an officer has violated a defendant’s right to 
counsel, the prophylactic remedy of suppression is applica-
ble. It logically follows that any and all evidence obtained 
as the result of an illegal stop, search, seizure, or coerced 
consent to search must be suppressed as ‘fruit of the poi -
sonous tree.’ This includes any and all derivative evidence.”
(Internal citations omitted. Emphasis added.) There was 
no ambiguity about what evidence defendant was arguing 
772 State v. Yemelyanov
should be suppressed: evidence gained due to the specific vio-
lation of defendant’s Article I, section 12, rights. Moreover, 
the breath test result was the only “derivative evidence” 
obtained from the violation; there was no other evidence 
that that term in the suppression motion could refer to. See 
State v. Swan, 363 Or 121, 133, 420 P3d 9 (2018) (holding 
that the state failed to met its burden to prove that defen -
dant’s decision to submit to a breath test and the test results 
were not derivative evidence following from the violation of 
the defendant’s Article I, section 12, rights); State v. Oxford, 
87 Or App 580, 581, 584 n 3, 403 P3d 528 (2017) (acknowl -
edging that there could be cases in which defendant’s chal-
lenge to “the state’s ‘stop and seizure of the defendant,’ and 
the state’s ‘search of the defendant’s residence and personal 
room’ ” would lack the specificity to apprise the court of 
defendant’s argument, but it was unambiguous in context). 
Thus, even though the breath test was not expressly iden -
tified in defendant’s Article I, section 12, argument, it was 
unambiguously a part of the body of evidence defendant 
sought to suppress under that argument.
 The state nevertheless argues that defendant did 
not preserve the issue because defendant only argued that 
the breath test should be suppressed as evidence from an 
unconstitutional search in violation of his Article I, sec -
tion 9, rights. The state further argues that the principles 
of preservation are not met here because the state and the 
court did not know that defendant was going to argue for 
suppression of the breath test under Article I, section 12, 
and therefore lost the opportunity to develop the record on 
that topic. We find neither position persuasive.
 As discussed in depth above, even though defendant 
did not argue the Article I, section 12, angle for suppressing 
the results of the breath test at the suppression hearing 
itself, defendant’s written motion adequately framed the 
issue because the results of the breath test were the only 
derivative evidence the motion could have been referring to 
when it raised the issue for suppression of evidence under 
Article I, section 12. Additionally, the state was not taken 
by surprise, misled, or denied an opportunity to meet the 
argument because the first two, most important components 
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 773
of preservation were unquestionably accounted for: defen -
dant raised the issue (suppression of evidence and deriva -
tive evidence) and identified the source (Article I, section 12) 
of his position on appeal in his written motion. The state 
had notice of the issue and relevant authority in the form 
of defendant’s written motion. The state had the burden of 
persuasion and production to show that the breath test was 
too attenuated to be considered derivative evidence. See 
Swan, 363 Or at 133. The state’s decision not to address 
the matter does not then mean defendant’s argument was 
unpreserved.
 Thus, given that defendant’s written motion pre -
served the Article I, section 12, issue generally for review 
and the breath test was unambiguously a part of evidence 
defendant sought to suppress, defendant’s argument was 
sufficiently preserved, and we now turn to the state’s con -
cession on the merits.
2. The state’s concession
 The state concedes that, if we determine that defen-
dant’s argument is preserved and affirm the state’s cross 
assignment of error, then the trial court did err by not sup-
pressing the results of the breath test and the error was 
not harmless with regard to the DUII count. We accept the 
state’s concession without further discussion and reverse 
and remand on Count 1.
3. Harmless error
 Despite its concession that the trial court’s error in 
not suppressing the results of the breath test was not harm-
less with regard to defendant’s DUII conviction, the state 
argues that that error was harmless with regard to defen -
dant’s convictions for careless driving and failure to perform 
the duties of a driver. We agree and affirm defendant’s con-
victions on those two counts.
 An error is harmless if there is little likelihood that 
it affected the verdict. State v. Davis, 336 Or 19, 32, 77 P3d 
1111 (2003). Here, the trial court explained its reasoning for 
finding defendant guilty of careless driving. When ruling on 
the careless driving count, the court stated,
774 State v. Yemelyanov
“So all I really know is [defendant] was moving from lane 
to lane, and somehow a collision occurred.”
 “* * * * *
“But given that there was a collision, which did in fact, 
endanger property and the safety of persons, I—I will find 
him guilty of the violation of—of careless driving * * *.”
The court did not rely on the defendant’s state of intoxica -
tion when coming to that conclusion, and the elements of 
careless driving do not require any showing of impairment. 
See ORS 811.135. Instead, the court relied entirely on wit -
ness testimony describing the incident—evidence entirely 
unrelated to defendant’s breath test results.
 The court did not provide the same degree of 
analysis for its ruling that defendant was guilty of the 
failure to perform the duties of a driver, but like careless 
driving, defendant’s potential intoxication was irrelevant to 
whether he carried out the statutorily required duties when 
he, the driver, knew or had reason to believe that his vehicle 
was involved in a collision that resulted in damage to prop-
erty. See ORS 811.700. Those duties included remaining at 
the scene until defendant had given the other driver infor -
mation required by statute. ORS 811.700(1)(b). We can infer 
from the nature of the offense and the evidence present in 
the record that the court relied on evidence wholly unre -
lated to defendant’s blood alcohol test when ruling on that 
offense. Therefore, the court’s error in not suppressing the 
breath test results was harmless with regard to the verdicts 
on Counts 2 and 3 because there was little likelihood the 
error affected either verdict.
III. CONCLUSION
 We conclude that the trial court did not err when 
it determined that the state had not carried its burden to 
show that defendant understood the Miranda rights given 
to him and suppressed defendant’s subsequent statements 
to the police, and we thus affirm the state’s cross-appeal. We 
next conclude that defendant preserved the issue of whether 
the trial court was required to suppress the results of his 
breath test and accept the state’s concession that the trial 
court erred and that the error was not harmless with regard 
Cite as 351 Or App 764 (2026) 775
to Count 1, and thus we reverse and remand on Count 1. 
Lastly, we conclude that the error was harmless with regard 
to Counts 2 and 3 and affirm defendant’s convictions on 
those counts.
 On appeal, conviction on Count 1 reversed and 
remanded; remanded for resentencing; otherwise affirmed. 
On cross-appeal, affirmed.
