A189218
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/15/dept._of_human_services_v._c._a._w.__t._w._1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10933182/dept-of-human-services-v-c-a-w-t-w/
Caption: Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
Date: 2026-07-15

No. 662 July 15, 2026 439
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of S. C. W., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
and
S. C. W.,
Respondent,
v.
C. A. W.,
Appellant.
Columbia County Circuit
24JU02108; A189218 (Control), A189458
In the Matter of S. C. W., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
and
S. C. W.,
Respondent,
v.
T. W.,
Appellant.
Columbia County Circuit
24JU02108; A189218, A189458
Denise E. Keppinger, Judge.
Submitted April 22, 2026.
Shannon Storey, Chief Defender, Juvenile Appellate 
Section and Elena C. Stross, Deputy Public Defender, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission, filed the briefs for appellant 
C. A. W.
George W. Kelly filed the brief for appellant T. W.
440 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, Paul L. Smith, Solicitor 
General, and Stacy M. Chaffin, Assistant Attorney General, 
filed the brief for respondent Department of Human Services.
G. Aron Perez-Selsky filed the brief for respondent child.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
ORTEGA, P. J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 441
 ORTEGA, P. J.
 In this juvenile dependency case, mother and father 
appeal a judgment changing the permanency plan from reuni-
fication to guardianship for their daughter, S, who was 13 
years old at the time of the permanency hearing. In two assign-
ments of error, mother argues that the Oregon Department 
of Human Services (ODHS) did not meet its burden to prove 
that its efforts to reunify S were reasonable and, therefore, 
that the juvenile court erred in changing S’s permanency plan 
away from reunification. In father’s sole assignment of error, 
he argues that the juvenile court erred in changing S’s plan to 
guardianship because, in his view, the juvenile court’s reasons 
for doing so—S’s particular circumstances and preferences—
are not set out in, or fairly implied from, the jurisdictional 
judgment and are therefore impermissible.
 We conclude that the record supports the juvenile 
court’s determination that ODHS made reasonable efforts 
to reunify S with mother. We further conclude that the juve-
nile court did not err in changing S’s permanency plan after 
considering her particular circumstances and preferences. 
We therefore affirm.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
 We decline father’s request to review de novo because 
he does not explain why this is an exceptional case warrant-
ing such review. See ORAP 5.40(8) (providing that where we 
have “discretion to try the cause anew on the record and the 
appellant seeks to have the court exercise that discretion, 
the appellant shall concisely state the reasons why the court 
should do so,” and setting forth nonexclusive considerations 
for doing so). We therefore “review the juvenile court’s legal 
conclusions for errors of law, and we view the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the court’s disposition to determine 
if it supports the court’s legal conclusions.” Dept. of Human 
Services v. S. J. M., 364 Or 37, 40, 430 P3d 1021 (2018). We 
state the facts relevant to our analysis of parents’ assign -
ments of error in accordance with that standard.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
 An evaluation of the basis for the juvenile court’s 
decision requires us to navigate through a challenging 
442 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
factual record, which we attempt to summarize to the extent 
necessary to understand our conclusions in this case.
 Parents share six children. B and K are adults; 
H, S, L, and N were found to be within the juvenile court’s 
jurisdiction in April 2024, though this appeal involves only 
S. However, the family has a history of ODHS intervention 
dating back to 2007. In April 2015 (before L and N were 
born), ODHS placed B, K, H, and S in nonrelative foster care 
due to concerns regarding neglect related to parents’ sub -
stance abuse. S was returned to parents in July 2016.
 Leading up to this case, ODHS implemented a pro-
tection plan for the family in March 2022 to address con -
cerns that parents were using and exposing the children to 
methamphetamine, as well as mother’s “unpredictable and 
erratic behavior” and parents’ failure to maintain the chil-
dren in school. S had withdrawn from elementary school in 
October 2021 and had not returned. In July 2023, S moved 
in with her adult sister, K, due to the deteriorating relation-
ship between S and mother, and S briefly returned to school 
that fall but did not complete even a month before again 
withdrawing.
 In February 2024, mother stabbed father’s leg with 
a paring knife during a domestic dispute in N’s presence, 
leading to mother’s arrest and prosecution for assault. 
ODHS removed H, L, and N from parents’ care in March 
2024 and placed them with the same nonrelative resource 
parents who had cared for B, K, H, and S when they were 
removed in 2015.
 At the time, S was still living with K, who agreed 
to complete paperwork to become S’s guardian and enroll S 
in school. However, by April 2024, ODHS removed S from 
that placement, since K had not followed through and had 
acknowledged that she could not handle the responsibility of 
ensuring that S attended school. S joined her siblings in the 
foster care placement, which now qualified as a “fictive kin” 
or “kith” placement. See OAR 413-070-0000(31) (defining 
“fictive kin” synonymously with “kith” as “an individual who 
is not related to the child or young adult by blood, adoption 
or marriage but has an emotionally significant relationship 
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 443
with the child or young adult that has the characteristics of 
a family relationship”).
 That same month, parents admitted ODHS’s alle -
gations that:
• Mother “has been indicted and has pending charges for 
assaultive criminal behavior involving [d]omestic vio -
lence involving father, which interferes with her ability 
to safely parent the children currently”;
• “The child(ren) have been exposed to domestic violence 
between the parents, and [mother] needs the assistance 
of the agency and outside services to help her develop 
safe and stable domestic relationships that protect the 
children from exposure [to] domestic violence”;
• Mother “needs the assistance of ODHS to help her 
develop the parenting skills necessary to better provide 
for the educational needs of the children”;
• Mother’s “residential instability interferes with her 
ability to safely parent the child”;
• Father “has failed to provide for the educational needs 
of the children”; and
• Father’s “substance abuse interferes with his ability to 
safely parent the children.”
The juvenile court asserted jurisdiction on those bases.
 In September 2024, mother pleaded guilty to fourth-
degree assault constituting domestic violence and recklessly 
endangering another person, and she entered a deferred 
sentencing agreement on the assault charge. The terms of 
that agreement and of her 18-month probation required her 
to have no contact with father and to engage in substance 
abuse treatment.
 By November 2024, ODHS had referred mother to 
a parent mentor, residential substance abuse treatment, 
“hands-on parenting” training through Options, and domes-
tic violence services. ODHS also facilitated weekly visits 
with S and her siblings and thrice weekly video calls. The 
reports on mother’s progress in the residential treatment 
program were very positive.
444 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
 After mother had successfully completed residen -
tial treatment, H was returned to her care for a trial reuni-
fication and, in March 2025, the two moved into an apart -
ment in Portland. An Options worker made weekly visits to 
mother’s home through April 2025 to work on “organization, 
grocery shopping, and providing structure.”
 After mother completed substance abuse treatment, 
family visits were briefly expanded. However, S reported to 
the Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA) that during 
visits, the role of parenting her younger siblings fell on her, 
and that mother “doesn’t do anything with them and they 
don’t have any rules.” Further, ODHS learned that during 
an overnight visit with the children in April 2025, father 
was also present overnight and gave marijuana to H and S. 
When ODHS discussed the incident with S, she was “con -
flicted to share information” but expressed that “she wishes 
to not return to [mother’s] care.” The CASA also noted that 
mother had appeared “high as a kite” on at least one recent 
video call with the children and thereafter declined to turn 
on her camera for calls.
 On April 16, 2025, the attorney representing all 
four children moved to withdraw as counsel for S, citing a 
conflict of interest and S’s consent to the withdrawal, and he 
moved to appoint new counsel for S. According to the CASA, 
S sought a new attorney “to work with her on a different 
reunification plan from her siblings.” Around that same 
time, H was again removed from mother’s care due to con -
cerns that she was abusing marijuana and engaging in a 
sexual relationship with an older man with a criminal his -
tory, whom mother had first invited into the home.
 A review hearing set for April 2025 was reset to 
June and, at the hearing, the hour allotted was scarcely 
enough time for the testimony of the only witness for ODHS, 
supervisor James. She testified that mother had been 
engaging in services but that, as to domestic violence ser -
vices, there were some concerns about “how much internal 
change” mother had made and about “her understanding of 
the concerns” that led to the children’s removal. Additionally, 
parents had been in contact despite the no-contact order 
imposed as part of mother’s criminal case; the children had 
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 445
disclosed that father had been present during their weekend 
visits with mother. Accordingly, ODHS did not believe that 
mother had made sufficient progress to justify returning the 
children to her care and recommended that she continue 
with domestic violence services and show “cognitive changes 
and behavioral changes through that treatment to include 
following the conditions of her probation” as to no contact 
with father. James acknowledged that “[m]ultiple treatment 
providers have expressed concern around mother’s cognitive 
functioning” and that ODHS was offering mother a psycho-
logical evaluation to “help [the agency] determine if there 
were other ways to approach [mother]—or other services 
we can put in place for [mother] to help her make sufficient 
changes to maintain safety for the children.” However, 
James believed that a psychological evaluation was “not nec-
essary as a reasonable effort.”
 The CASA describes S as an “incredibly mature, 
self-composed, courageous” person who “knows herself.” 
S had told the CASA in March 2025 that she did not want 
to return to mother’s care because her mom “will never 
change.” Despite missing grades three through five and half 
of sixth grade, S had a 2.8 GPA in seventh grade and was 
engaging in tutoring at her resource family’s expense. Since 
residing with them, S had received glasses, medical, dental, 
and orthodontic care, and was attending therapy.
 James testified that S was “definitely having some 
struggles with the family dynamics, what her parents 
and her sister [H] are still doing,” and that ODHS offered 
S weekly visits with mother, but S “often chooses to not 
attend those” because “she doesn’t believe her parents will 
be able to meet her needs.” James described S as “one of the 
more vocal of the children” and noted that S had told her 
resource parents “that she would like to stay with them and 
not be returned” to her parents. She had “adjusted very well 
into her placement,” had a “strong bond” with her resource 
parents, and was “thriving on structure and routine.”
 The court observed that docket constraints required 
the June hearing to be continued until September 30 and 
inquired whether anyone objected to maintaining the plan 
of reunification until then. S’s counsel responded that he 
446 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
had no objection that day, but that S would be requesting a 
change of plan at the next hearing. He asserted that S had 
“made huge improvements” in school, thanks to her “won -
derful” resource home, and concurred with ODHS’s assess -
ment that a psychological evaluation for mother would be 
“helpful” but was not rationally related to the jurisdictional 
bases and should not delay permanency for S.
 Meanwhile, in August 2025, mother successfully 
completed domestic violence services. Her counselor identi-
fied her as a “secondary aggressor” and recommended that 
she continue with individual counseling and participate in 
parenting classes, given that she has “demonstrated ongo -
ing challenges in being mindful of her children’s needs, par-
ticularly in setting effective boundaries[.]”
 That same month, ODHS attempted to move S and 
L from their kith placement, but both S and her resource 
parents did not want S to move. 1 In a letter to the juvenile 
court dated September 12, 2025, James stated that ODHS 
was “not willing to use the tools necessary to force [S] to 
leave the resource home,” but “does not support this place-
ment and believes [S] should join [L]” in a new placement. 
James further stated that ODHS had “not changed its posi-
tion on moving [S]” but was “just unable to effectuate that 
move due to the resistance of the resource parent.”
 S’s therapist wrote a letter to the juvenile court 10 
days later to provide “a professional statement regarding 
[S’s] mental health and information she has consented to 
be shared relative to her foster placement.” The therapist 
explained that, for five months, S had been receiving ser -
vices to address depression and anxiety symptoms, includ -
ing suicidal ideation, low self-esteem, hopelessness, discom-
fort at school, and difficulty focusing; that S reported that 
her symptoms had reduced and felt more manageable; that 
the therapist received a crisis call to support S on the day 
 1 The resource parents, who were parenting two children of their own, both 
under six years old, were “burned out” and had previously requested that ODHS 
move both H and N due to difficult behavior. H had been temporarily reunited 
with mother before being again removed and placed in another non-relative fos -
ter home, and N had been moved to a different non-relative foster home in June 
2025. The resource parents had also requested L to be moved before the begin -
ning of the school year.
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 447
she was anticipating removal from her current placement in 
which S reported “feeling numb, very sad, and panicked”; 
that S shared that she felt very close with her current 
resource family, and she described their home as a “place to 
grow”; that S consistently expressed that she valued staying 
connected with her siblings but did not necessarily wish to 
be placed with them; and that S expressed feeling like “no 
one was listening to her” and that what she wanted “was 
being treated like it isn’t important.”
 The day before the September hearing, ODHS 
moved for a continuance because the family report was 
incomplete. The juvenile court continued the hearing to give 
the parties time to review the report. The court heard evi -
dence and argument on two additional days in October.
 The family’s caseworker, Gutierrez, testified that 
over the life of the case, the agency had offered mother 
“recovery support services, DV [domestic violence] survi -
vor resources, mental health resources,” and had “[f]acili -
tated family decision meetings and had been communi -
cating regularly to support resources that could support” 
mother. Gutierrez acknowledged that ODHS had not yet fol-
lowed up on the recommendations from mother’s DV coun -
selor or referred mother for a psychological evaluation. In 
Gutierrez’s opinion, mother had “demonstrated minimal 
change in her perceptions of what happened leading to the 
children’s removal” and “struggles between separating her-
self from her partner who currently has a no contact order, 
and becoming self-sufficient on her own for her children.” 
However, Gutierrez believed that “continued monitoring of 
[mother’s] drug use, * * * more domestic violence services, 
groups, * * * consistent mental health counseling, [and] 
parent-related resources” for mother would make it likely 
that the children could return home in a reasonable period 
of time.
 Regarding S, Gutierrez testified that mother has 
ongoing weekly visits scheduled with S and that a family 
time coordinator regularly communicates with S’s resource 
parent and S about attending, but “[t]hey’re declining vis -
its.” ODHS had not referred mother and S to family counsel-
ing “based on conversations with [S] about her readiness to 
448 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
engage,” though they had not directly asked S if she would 
participate in some type of family counseling. S has devel -
oped a strong bond with her resource family and expressed 
that she feels supported, connected, and understood in the 
home and her community, and that she views her placement 
as a positive environment where she is able to grow, main -
tain friendships, and develop her independence.
 ODHS contended that it had made reasonable 
efforts to reunify the family but that neither parent had 
made sufficient progress. The agency asserted that father 
“has not made measurable progress toward addressing his 
substance use or domestic violence concerns and has limited 
engagement with ODHS or services.” Nonetheless, ODHS 
requested that the current plan of reunification remain 
in place, explaining that while mother “has demonstrated 
meaningful engagement in services * * * she continues to 
struggle with consistency and maintaining safe boundar -
ies” and that “additional time and services are needed” to 
achieve reunification. In ODHS’s view, “the agency would 
like to get the siblings together at all costs,” and had been 
attempting to do so but only recently had identified a possi-
ble placement for all four children.
 Mother, father, H, L, and N all agreed that the plan 
should remain reunification.
 However, S’s counsel reiterated that “while she 
loves her parents, she is * * * ready to start the process of 
doing a guardianship with her current caretakers.” ODHS 
responded that it did not support a plan of guardianship 
with S’s current resource parents and questioned whether 
the court had authority to order ODHS to move forward 
with those resource parents as guardians or to compel the 
agency to file a motion to that end. S remonstrated that 
the juvenile court has discretion under ORS 419B.349 “to 
order that [S] be maintained at her current caretaker [kith] 
home” and to change S’s plan upon finding that ODHS had 
made reasonable efforts to reunify parents with S. S argued 
that the specifics of finalizing a guardianship were not yet 
before the court. ODHS conceded the latter point and, when 
the court sought its position on an order to maintain S in 
her current placement, ODHS stipulated that it would not 
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 449
remove S from her resource family “without coming to the 
Court or agreement of all parties.”
 The juvenile court determined that ODHS had 
made reasonable efforts to reunify the family and that nei -
ther parent had made sufficient progress. As to H, L, and 
N, the court maintained the plan of reunification “based on 
all the parties’ uncontested desire to keep this moving for -
ward” and “the identified potential services for mom that 
could help her to become a safe placement within a reason -
able period of time.”
 For S, the juvenile court ordered a change of plan 
to guardianship. It found that S had been in substitute care 
for more than 531 days, that she had not lived with parents 
for “a significant amount of time” prior to removal, that she 
is bonded to her resource parents, and that she has consis -
tently expressed her own desire for permanency in her cur-
rent placement, where she is thriving. The court found that 
“ODHS did not really clearly articulate their basis to con -
tinue reunification specifically to [S],” given that she has not 
recently moved placements like her siblings and given that 
ODHS had “no really identifiable plan to place the siblings 
together.” The court also determined that adoption was not 
appropriate because S has “demonstrated * * * strong bonds 
with her siblings” and a bond with her parents, albeit a 
“strained” one, such that “guardianship would allow for that 
ongoing relationship to * * * move forward.”
 Parents timely appealed the permanency judgment 
changing S’s plan to guardianship.
ANALYSIS
 A juvenile court has authority to change a child’s 
permanency plan away from reunification upon determin -
ing that ODHS has “made reasonable efforts * * * to make 
it possible for the ward to safely return home” and that the 
parent has not “made sufficient progress to make it pos -
sible for the ward to safely return home.” ORS 419B.476 
(2)(a). “In making its determination, the court shall consider 
the ward’s health and safety the paramount concerns.” Id. 
“Efforts are reasonable when the agency has taken appro -
priate steps under the circumstances to give parents a full 
450 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
and fair opportunity to remediate the bases for jurisdiction 
to become at least minimally adequate parents (and, for 
purposes of a permanency hearing, to show that they have 
made sufficient progress to make it possible for the child 
to safely return to their care).” Dept. of Human Services v. 
C. H., 373 Or 26, 50, 559 P3d 395 (2024). “[A]ssessing the 
reasonableness of [O]DHS’s efforts to assist parents in that 
endeavor is most fairly accomplished by inquiring into 
[O]DHS’s efforts over the course of the agency’s involvement 
with the family.” Id. at 51.
 “[B]oth [ODHS’s] efforts and a parent’s progress are 
evaluated by reference to the facts that formed the bases for 
juvenile court jurisdiction.” Dept. of Human Services v. N. T., 
247 Or App 706, 715, 271 P3d 143 (2012). That means that 
the court may rely only on facts that are “explicitly stated or 
fairly implied by the jurisdictional judgment” in making its 
determinations regarding ODHS’s reunification efforts and 
the parent’s progress. Id. at 715-16. “Facts are not ‘fairly 
implied’ by a jurisdictional judgment, and thus are ‘extrin-
sic’ to the jurisdictional judgment, if a reasonable parent 
would not have known from the jurisdictional judgment 
that [they] needed to address the condition or circumstance 
exemplified by those facts.” Dept. of Human Services v. T. L., 
287 Or App 753, 763, 403 P3d 488 (2017).
 In mother’s first assignment of error, she argues 
that the juvenile court erred in determining that ODHS’s 
efforts to reunify mother with S qualified as reasonable. 
Mother contends that ODHS knew by March 2025 that 
mother “suffered from some cognitive difficulties” but did 
not adjust its efforts by following through with the psycho -
logical evaluation or the DV counselor’s recommendations. 
Mother further contends that ODHS failed to offer mother 
assistance to develop skills to address S’s particular edu -
cational and mental health needs and never attempted to 
repair mother’s relationship with S so that it would be safe 
for S to return to her care.
 ODHS takes no position on appeal, except with 
regard to the correct legal standards to be applied to par -
ents’ claims of error.
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 451
 S argues that because jurisdiction was not based on 
mother’s mental health or impaired cognitive functioning, it 
is not clear how ODHS would have “the authority, let alone 
the burden,” to require mother to participate in a psycholog-
ical evaluation and that ODHS is not obligated to offer and 
provide every conceivable reunification service. Further, 
S contends that, at age 13, she was old enough to advocate 
for herself and determine how much contact and visitation 
she wanted with her parents and that, in any event, it is 
unclear how ODHS could have compelled or persuaded her 
to engage in services with mother.
 We conclude that the juvenile court did not err in 
determining that ODHS made reasonable efforts to reunify 
mother with S. ODHS provided mother with services to 
address each of the admitted jurisdictional bases: substance 
abuse treatment to comply with her criminal probation, 
domestic violence services, “hands-on parenting” training, a 
parent mentor, and housing assistance. See Dept. of Human 
Services v. K. S. S., 310 Or App 498, 504, 485 P3d 924 (2021) 
(explaining that “the specific issues of parental unfitness 
established in the jurisdictional judgment provide the 
framework for the court’s analysis of each question—that is, 
both [O]DHS’s efforts and a parent’s progress are evaluated 
by reference to the facts that formed the bases for juvenile 
court jurisdiction” (internal quotation marks omitted)).
 Although we agree with mother that referring her 
for a psychological evaluation and following up with her DV 
counselor’s recommendations would certainly benefit her, 
we cannot say that ODHS’s failure—thus far—to do so ren-
ders its efforts unreasonable in the totality of the circum -
stances over the life of the case. Mother’s mental health was 
not a jurisdictional basis. By all accounts, mother had been 
complying with the case plan and engaging in services, and 
she achieved trial reunification with H and expanded fam -
ily visits before she began to struggle upon moving into her 
own apartment. Even after H was again removed and visits 
restricted, mother successfully completed domestic violence 
services in August 2025. As for the recommendations for 
additional services, mother’s DV counselor provided those 
only two months before the permanency hearing concluded.
452 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
 Finally, we disagree with mother’s contention that 
ODHS did not sufficiently tailor its efforts to reunify her 
with S, specifically with regard to S’s particular educational 
needs. S’s educational needs, as with her siblings, are sim -
ply to be enrolled in and regularly attending school. ODHS 
implemented a family protection plan to address parents’ 
failure to maintain the children in school two years before 
it sought jurisdiction, and the agency worked with the fam -
ily to get S enrolled in and attending school before remov -
ing her from parents’ care. Further, ODHS provided mother 
with weekly assistance from November 2024 to April 2025 to 
develop “hands-on parenting” skills, such as providing orga-
nization and structure in her home. We also reject mother’s 
contention that ODHS failed to tailor its efforts to S’s par -
ticular mental health needs and never attempted to repair 
mother’s relationship with S. To the extent S has particular 
mental health needs, her symptoms arise in periods of uncer-
tainty and instability and are best supported through struc-
ture, routine, and stability that mother has not yet demon -
strated an ability to provide. S’s relationship with mother 
had suffered well before S was placed in substitute care and 
continues to suffer due to S’s understandable perception that 
mother is not ameliorating the jurisdictional bases.
 We turn to mother’s second and father’s single 
assignment of error, both of which challenge the juvenile 
court’s ruling changing S’s plan from reunification to guard-
ianship. We reject mother’s second assignment without fur-
ther discussion because she argues only that the juvenile 
court’s predicate legal determination that ODHS made rea-
sonable efforts was erroneous, a contention that we have 
already rejected.
 Father argues that the juvenile court’s ruling 
changing S’s plan erroneously relied on S’s particular cir -
cumstances and preferences, which, in father’s view, are not 
part of the jurisdictional judgment and therefore “are not 
things upon which a change in the permanency plan may be 
based.” Father also contends that the juvenile court’s find -
ing, “at least with regard to mother, that additional services 
would make it likely that [H, L, and N] could be returned 
home in a reasonable amount of time” is inconsistent with 
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 453
its finding that “it’s really hard to calculate that there’s a 
reasonable amount of time that this will all turn around 
and [S] can be reunified with mother.”
 S responds that the juvenile court correctly iden -
tified the jurisdictional allegations and made permanency 
findings based on the record before it, which included S’s 
unique permanency needs and satisfaction with her kith 
placement. S points out that the court’s determinations with 
regard to her siblings were uncontested and that the court 
expressly found that ODHS’s reasons for not seeking a plan 
change for S’s siblings—because they each had recently 
moved placements, and the agency wanted more time to 
place them together—did not apply to S.
 ODHS contends that the juvenile court may consider 
a child’s preferences regarding their permanency plan. It 
points to federal law, which requires the court to “consult[ ], 
in an age-appropriate manner, with the child regarding the 
proposed permanency or transition plan for the child[.]” 42 
USC § 675(5)(C)(iii). ODHS also observes that because S had 
been in substitute care for more than 17 months at the con-
clusion of the permanency hearing, ODHS is required to file 
a petition to terminate parental rights, ORS 419B.498(1)(a) 
and (2), unless “[t]here is a compelling reason, which is doc-
umented in the case plan, for determining that filing such 
a petition would not be in the best interests of the child or 
ward,” ORS 419B.498(2)(b), including that “[a]nother per -
manent plan is better suited to meet the health and safety 
needs of the child or ward, including the need to preserve 
the child’s or ward’s sibling attachments and relationships,” 
ORS 419B.498(2)(b)(B). And because “ORS 419B.476(5) and 
ORS 419B.498(2) call for a ‘child-centered’ determination 
based on a current evaluation of the child’s circumstances,” 
Dept. of Human Services v. S. S., 283 Or App 136, 142, 388 
P3d 1178 (2016), the juvenile court “was required to consider 
[S’]s particular circumstances when determining whether 
a compelling reason existed to forgo changing her perma -
nency plan to adoption.”
 The juvenile court did not err. As we understand its 
ruling, the court did not rely on extrinsic facts in making 
its determinations that ODHS made reasonable efforts to 
454 Dept. of Human Services v. C. A. W. / T. W.
reunify the family and that parents failed to make sufficient 
progress under ORS 419B.476(2)(a). The court expressly 
found that ODHS offered father a number of services to 
address his two jurisdictional bases and that, aside from 
supervised parenting time, father had not actively engaged 
in any of them. As to mother, the court found that she had 
participated in offered services but “has not demonstrated 
enough change to allow the children to be returned safely 
home,” particularly in her perception of the circumstances 
leading up to the children’s removal and her “continued 
struggle to separate herself from her partner” despite the 
existence of the no-contact order. Thus, the juvenile court’s 
reasonable efforts and sufficient progress determinations 
were not based on facts extrinsic to the jurisdictional 
judgment.
 In seeking a different result, father argues that this 
case is controlled by T. L. We disagree. In that case, the 
father had undisputedly ameliorated the sole jurisdictional 
basis—his substance abuse—and the juvenile court none -
theless concluded that he had not made sufficient progress 
for his daughter to safely return home because his daughter 
was alienated from him, did not want to be reunified with 
him, and would regress to unsafe behaviors if reunification 
was pursued. 287 Or App at 765. We held that a juvenile 
court cannot base its permanency determinations on the 
“consequences” of a jurisdictional basis if that condition 
“no longer persists and the consequences themselves are 
not expressly stated in, and cannot be fairly implied from, 
the jurisdictional judgment.” Id. at 766. Here, by contrast, 
father does not challenge the juvenile court’s determination 
that he has not ameliorated the jurisdictional bases, and 
sufficient evidence supports the juvenile court’s determina-
tion that the conditions underlying the jurisdictional bases 
continue to exist.
 We next address father’s argument that the court’s 
findings regarding further efforts were inconsistent. We 
agree that the court exercised its discretion to determine 
that further efforts will make it possible for H, L, and N 
to return home within a reasonable period of time. ORS 
419B.276(4)(c). And it did so expressly because all involved 
Cite as 351 Or App 439 (2026) 455
parties stipulated to maintaining the plan of reunification 
as to H, L, and N.
 But we disagree that the juvenile court affirma -
tively made that determination with regard to S, and it was 
not required to do so. See Dept. of Human Services v. C. K., 
351 Or App 13, 16-19, ___ P3d ___ (2026) (clarifying that a 
juvenile court has discretion whether or not to determine if 
further efforts will make it possible for the ward to return 
home within a reasonable time and, if it does so, that deter-
mination is reviewed for legal error). Rather, as we under -
stand the juvenile court’s ruling, its reliance on S’s particular 
circumstances and preferences related to its determinations 
under ORS 419B.476(5)(e) “that the permanency plan for 
[S] should be establishment of a legal guardianship” and, 
concomitantly, “why neither placement with parents nor 
adoption is appropriate.” As noted, those determinations are 
“child-centered.” S. S., 283 Or App at 143. Thus, the juvenile 
court correctly considered S’s particular circumstances and 
preferences in making those determinations, and there is 
ample evidence in the record to support them as a result of 
S’s persistent efforts to advocate for herself. We therefore 
reject father’s assignment of error.
 Affirmed.
