A185876
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/15/hellman_v._tucker_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10933176/hellman-v-tucker/
Caption: Hellman v. Tucker
Date: 2026-07-15

No. 668 July 15, 2026 519
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
Andrew Joseph HELLMAN,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Miranda Rose TUCKER,
Defendant-Appellant.
Lane County Circuit Court
24CN01924; A185876
Clara L. Rigmaiden, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 8, 2026.
Lorena Reynolds argued the cause and filed the brief for 
appellant.
No appearance by respondent.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
O’CONNOR, J.
Reversed and remanded.
520 Hellman v. Tucker
 O’CONNOR, J.
 Mother appeals from an order denying her motion to 
set aside or vacate the judgment of contempt entered against 
her.1 Mother raises two assignments of error. In her first 
assignment, mother argues that the trial court erred when 
it determined that mother’s mistake, inadvertence, surprise, 
or excusable neglect was not grounds for relief from the con-
tempt order pursuant to ORCP 71 B and C. In her second 
assignment, mother argues that the trial court erred when 
it determined that gross inequity was not grounds for relief 
from the contempt order. On the first assignment of error, 
we conclude that mother’s neglect was excusable pursuant 
to ORCP 71 B(1). Because that is dispositive, we do not reach 
the second assignment of error. Accordingly, we reverse and 
remand for the trial court to exercise its discretion whether 
to grant or deny relief from the contempt judgment under 
ORCP 71 B(1).
STANDARD OF REVIEW
 ORCP 71 B(1) provides, in relevant part, “On motion 
and upon such terms as are just, the court may relieve a 
party or such party’s legal representative from a judgment 
for the following reasons: (a) mistake, inadvertence, sur -
prise, or excusable neglect[.]” Whether a party’s conduct 
or inaction constitutes mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or 
excusable neglect presents a question of law. Hoddenpyl v. 
Fiskum, 281 Or App 42, 46, 383 P3d 432 (2016). “[W]e review 
a trial court’s ultimate decision to grant or deny relief under 
ORCP 71 B(1) for abuse of discretion[.]” Id. In doing so, “we 
set out the undisputed facts in the light most favorable to 
the moving party,” in this case, mother, and “we accept the 
trial court’s findings of disputed fact, if there is evidence to 
support those findings.” Union Lumber Co. v. Miller, 360 Or 
767, 769, 388 P3d 327 (2017).
FACTS
 Mother and father were parties to a domestic rela -
tions matter, which included a pending modification of cus-
tody and parenting time. We refer to that matter as the 
domestic relations matter. Father, through counsel, filed a 
 1 Father has not made an appearance on appeal.
Cite as 351 Or App 519 (2026) 521
complaint that alleged that mother was in contempt of court 
for willfully disobeying terms of a supplemental judgment 
issued in the domestic relations matter and requesting 
remedial sanctions, a motion for an order requiring mother 
to appear and show cause why she should not be found in 
contempt, and a declaration in support of that motion. The 
complaint, motion, and declaration were filed as a new pro-
ceeding with a new case number, different from the domes-
tic relations matter. We refer to that new proceeding as the 
contempt matter.2
 The complaint asked for an order for mother to show 
cause why she should not be held in contempt for willfully 
disobeying the provisions of a supplemental judgment in 
the domestic relations matter that provided that “[n]either 
parent shall move [child, K] from [the Springfield School 
District] without a written mutual agreement of the parties 
or a Court order.”
 Father submitted a declaration with the complaint. 
Father identified the pending motion to modify parenting 
time in the domestic relations matter and wrote, “My attor-
ney informs me that we will be filing a motion to consol -
idate both cases.” According to father, the parties agreed 
to the relocation provisions in the supplemental judgment 
“to address father’s concerns related to the instability for 
[K] caused by mother’s frequent relocations and her history 
of withholding parenting time.” Mother violated the sup -
plemental judgment by moving to Albany, Oregon, without 
father’s agreement or a court order and by failing to provide 
her current address to father, according to father.
 On May 3, 2024, mother was served with the com -
plaint, motion, declaration, and an order to show cause 
signed by the trial court, all of which were filed in the con -
tempt matter. The order to show cause in the contempt 
matter stated that “[i]t is hereby ordered that [mother] 
appear before the above mentioned court at Lane County 
Courthouse * * * at 9:00 a.m. on July 8, 2024.” At the same 
time mother was served with that order, she was also served 
 2 We refer to the parties as mother and father, because that is how mother 
refers to the parties on appeal and how the trial court referred to the parties 
below. 
522 Hellman v. Tucker
with a separate motion for order to show cause regarding 
a motion for modification that father filed in the domestic 
relations matter.
 Mother failed to appear at the show-cause hearing 
on July 8 in the contempt action. At the hearing on July 8, 
the trial court and father’s attorney expressed that they had 
been surprised to learn that the contempt matter was a sep-
arate case from the domestic relations matter. Father pre -
sented a prima facie case to show that mother had violated 
the supplemental judgment by moving from Springfield to 
Albany without father’s agreement and without a court order 
permitting her to do so. The trial court found mother in con-
tempt. The court acknowledged that father had a pending 
request for modification in the domestic relations matter. As 
a remedy for the contempt, the trial court awarded father 
more parenting time with K until father’s request for modi-
fication in the domestic relations matter was resolved.
 On July 10, mother’s attorney filed a motion to 
reopen the record or set a new trial in the contempt matter. 
On July 12, the trial court entered a judgment of contempt 
against mother, finding that she was in default for failing 
to appear at the show cause hearing on July 8 and mak -
ing the changes to the parties’ parenting time that father 
had requested in the contempt matter.3 The trial court also 
denied mother’s motion to reopen the record or set a new 
trial.
 On July 25, mother filed a motion for relief from 
default in the contempt matter. In a declaration in sup -
port of the motion, mother set forth the following facts that 
describe the actions mother took after she was served. On 
May 3, mother was served with the show cause orders in the 
contempt case and the domestic relations case on the same 
day. Father had previously moved for an order to find mother 
in contempt in the domestic relations case. Mother thought 
that the contempt issue would be handled in the domestic 
relations matter, like it had been previously, and she did not 
realize that there were now two separate matters.
 3 The record suggests that father also had requested the same changes in the 
pending domestic relations matter.
Cite as 351 Or App 519 (2026) 523
 Mother’s declaration also stated that mother had 
hired an attorney in response to being served and that 
she provided her attorney with case information that she 
believed would allow her attorney to access all court-related 
documents and dates, although mother in fact provided 
only information related to the domestic relations matter. 
Mother’s attorney did not search the Oregon eCourt Case 
Information (OECI) system for other cases involving mother 
because she was only aware of the domestic relations mat -
ter. Mother believed that her attorney would notify her when 
she needed to attend a hearing.
 In the declaration, mother also wrote that, on 
July 9, she told her attorney that she believed there had been 
a court date on July 8. Mother’s attorney could not locate a 
July 8 court date in the domestic relations matter. Mother 
then sent a copy of the order to show cause in the contempt 
matter to her attorney, which finally alerted mother’s attor-
ney to the separate contempt matter.
 Mother also explained in her declaration that she 
believed she had not violated the prohibition against relo -
cation in the supplemental judgment by moving to Albany. 
Mother had moved less than 60 miles from Springfield, and 
K had remained enrolled in the Springfield School District. 
Mother drove K to and from school when K stayed with 
mother, mother explained.
 On July 30, the trial court granted father’s motion 
to consolidate the domestic relations matters and the con -
tempt matter.
 On September 11, at a hearing on mother’s motion 
for relief from default the trial court heard arguments but 
did not take evidence. The court determined that the sum -
mons for the hearing on July 8 on the order to show cause in 
the contempt matter was “not confusing” and that mother 
did not establish excusable neglect. The court explained 
that “most of the case law boils down to * * * that parties 
are expected to exercise reasonable care in managing their 
legal obligations,” and that reasonable care “means knowing 
when court is set when you’re served with paperwork that 
tells you very clearly in the first two lines when court is set.” 
524 Hellman v. Tucker
Thus, the trial court denied mother’s motion to set aside or 
vacate the contempt judgment.
 The trial court entered a written order deny -
ing mother’s motion to set aside or vacate. In the written 
order, the trial court included findings that the order to 
show cause was unambiguous and that it was reasonable 
to expect mother to read and comprehend the obligation to 
appear on July 8. Additionally, the trial court determined 
that mother did not meet the standard for “reasonable care” 
in managing one’s legal obligations when she failed to thor-
oughly read the summons. Mother filed this appeal.
ANALYSIS
 ORCP 71 permits a trial court to relieve a party 
from a judgment when there was a “mistake, inadvertence, 
surprise, or excusable neglect[.]” ORCP 71 B. “A motion 
under ORCP 71 B(1) may be granted if (1) the judgment 
was entered by virtue of mistake, inadvertence, surprise, 
or excusable neglect; (2) the defendant acted with reason -
able diligence after learning about the judgment; and (3) 
the defendant asserts a meritorious defense to the action.” 
Hoddenpyl, 281 Or App at 46. Additionally,
“[w]hen considering a motion for relief from default, ‘it is the 
[trial] court’s responsibility to liberally construe ORCP 71 
B(1)(a) so as to avoid the harsh result of depriving a party 
of its day in court. As an aspect of that liberal construction, 
the [trial] court views the facts in the light most favorable 
to the party seeking relief from the default.’’’
Id. (quoting Saldivar v. Roberts, 240 Or App 371, 375, 246 
P3d 91 (2011)). Here, the trial court determined that mother 
had failed to establish excusable neglect, and it did not reach 
the questions of whether mother acted with reasonable dili-
gence after learning about the judgment or whether mother 
asserted a meritorious defense.
 As stated above “whether certain conduct or inac -
tion constitutes ‘excusable neglect’ is a question of law, and 
we review the trial court’s answer to that question for legal 
error.” Johnson v. Sunriver Resort Limited Partnership, 252 
Or App 299, 306, 287 P3d 1153 (2012), rev den, 353 Or 280 
(2013). “[T]he probative issue” when evaluating whether a 
Cite as 351 Or App 519 (2026) 525
party’s negligence was excusable “is whether there were 
reasonable steps taken to respond to the complaint, even 
if one of those steps was negligently undertaken” and “the 
process later broke down.” Hoddenpyl, 281 Or App at 45-46; 
see also Johnson, 252 Or App at 306-07. In contrast, “when 
a defendant did not take any reasonable steps to respond to 
a complaint, we have held, the defendant’s neglect was inex-
cusable.” Id.
 We have held that a party’s conduct was excusable 
neglect when an insurance adjuster who worked for a defen-
dant’s insurer misread a notice of intent to take a default 
judgment that was accompanied by a copy of the summons 
and complaint to instead be a courtesy copy of a summons 
and complaint that had not been filed. Terlyuk v. Krasnogorov, 
237 Or App 546, 550, 240 P3d 740 (2010), rev den, 349 Or 603 
(2011). As a result of that mistake, the adjuster did not refer 
the matter to defense counsel, because under the insurer’s 
claims handling process, a file was referred to litigation only 
after actual service of the summons. Thus, the insurer did 
not take action on the defendant’s behalf to timely appear 
and defend the action and a default judgment was entered 
against the defendant. Id. We explained that “[a]lthough 
mistaken, the adjuster’s conduct was neglectful in the sense 
that she failed to carry out the responsibilities of her job.” 
Terlyuk, 237 Or App 546. “Her actions were not a deliberate 
disregard of plaintiffs’ claim or a failure to act, but a failure 
to take the correct action.” Id. at 555.
 Additionally, we have held that there was excusable 
neglect when a defendant’s attorney attempted to respond 
to a complaint but sent the response to the wrong address. 
Mailing the response, albeit to the wrong address, consti -
tuted a reasonable step to respond to the complaint and thus 
was excusable neglect. Hoddenpyl, 281 Or App at 46.
 Applying those principles here, we conclude that 
mother took reasonable steps to respond to the contempt 
complaint and, therefore, mother’s conduct constituted 
excusable neglect.
 When mother was served with the show cause orders 
in the contempt and domestic relations matters, mother hired 
526 Hellman v. Tucker
an attorney to respond. Mother mistakenly assumed that 
all the documents related to the same matter. That mistake 
was reasonable. The contempt matter arose from a supple -
mental judgment in the domestic relations matter, and the 
show cause order in the domestic relations matter involved 
the same underlying facts—mother’s move from Springfield 
to Albany. Previously, when a dispute arose about mother 
moving, father had asked the trial court to hold mother in 
contempt in the domestic relations matter. Indeed, the trial 
court and father’s attorney expressed that they had been 
surprised that the contempt matter was separate from the 
domestic relations matter at the start of the July 8 hearing.4 
The trial court consolidated the contempt and domestic rela-
tions matters after entering the default contempt judgment 
against mother, while the request for modification was still 
pending in the domestic relations matter. For those reasons, 
mother’s mistaken belief that the contempt had been filed in 
the domestic relations matter was reasonable.
 Mother also mistakenly believed that her attor -
ney would access and see all relevant case information and 
appearances on OECI. Mother’s attorney’s failure to access 
the case information for the contempt action was a “break -
down in the process” that stemmed from mother’s failure to 
provide all of her case documents or case information to her 
attorney. Mother’s failure was negligent. She should have 
carefully reviewed the documents, provided all the docu -
ments to her lawyer, and checked in with her lawyer about 
the July 8 court date listed on the summons. The question is 
whether her negligence was excusable. And, like sending a 
response to the wrong address in Hoddenpyl or misreading 
the notice of intent to take a default judgment in Terlyuk, 
mother’s mistaken belief that she did not need to provide 
 4 The Uniform Trial Court Rules (UTCRs) in effect at the time that father 
initiated the contempt matter provided that “[i]f a party is initiating a contempt 
proceeding under ORS 33.055 (remedial) and a related circuit court case exists, 
the party must initiate the contempt proceeding by filing a motion in the related 
case.” UTCR 19.020(2) (effective Aug 1, 2023). That provision was removed from 
the version of the UTCRs that went into effect on August 1, 2024, shortly after 
the trial court entered the default judgment against mother. It does not appear 
that father initiated the contempt proceeding by filing a motion in the domestic 
relations case. Mother, however, does not rely on the UTCR, and we thus do not 
rely on it when evaluating whether her failure to appear on July 8 was excusable 
neglect.
Cite as 351 Or App 519 (2026) 527
her lawyer with more information because there was only 
one case—the domestic relations case—and that her lawyer 
would notify her of upcoming court appearances because her 
lawyer knew of the domestic relations case was excusable 
neglect.
 In finding that mother did not take reasonable steps 
to respond to the contempt action, the trial court focused on 
the fact that mother had read that there was a hearing on 
July 8 and failed to attend that hearing, and it determined 
that that was not excusable. However, as we held in Terlyuk, 
a party’s negligent misunderstanding of the significance of 
a pleading may constitute excusable neglect when the party 
took reasonable steps based on their misunderstanding. In 
this case, mother held the mistaken belief that there was only 
one matter, and she hired an attorney to represent her and 
respond in that matter, which was a reasonable step. Mother, 
through counsel, responded in the domestic relations matter 
to the same allegation underlying the contempt matter, at the 
same time as the contempt matter proceeded without her or 
her attorney’s knowledge. This is not a case where the party 
seeking relief from default simply ignored the court. Like the 
excusable neglect in Terlyuk, mother’s “actions were not a 
deliberate disregard of [father’s] claim or a failure to act, but 
a failure to take the correct action.” Id. at 555.
 Therefore, we reverse and remand for the trial 
court. On remand, the trial court should determine whether 
mother satisfied the other two requirements of ORCP 71 B(1). 
See Hoddenpyl, 281 Or App at 46 (setting out requirements 
for ORCP 71 B(1) motion). If mother did so, the court should 
decide whether to exercise its discretion to grant relief from 
the contempt order under ORCP 71 B(1).5 Thus, we reverse 
and remand for the further proceedings consistent with this 
opinion.
 Reversed and remanded.
 5 Based on the record before us, there does not appear to be a reason for the 
trial court to exercise its discretion to deny relief. See Hoddenpyl, 281 Or App at 
46 n 3 (noting that under the circumstances of that case, “if [the] defendant estab -
lished excusable neglect, there was no reason for the [trial] court to exercise its 
discretion to deny relief”). But we are mindful that the trial court did not have an 
opportunity to exercise its discretion and thus the record before us may not reflect 
the entire range of circumstances relevant to the trial court’s exercise of discretion. 
