A183081
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/15/state_v._key_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10933167/state-v-key/
Caption: State v. Key
Date: 2026-07-15

No. 667 July 15, 2026 507
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
NICOLAS ALEXANDER KEY,
Defendant-Appellant.
Klamath County Circuit Court
22CR35469; A183081
Stephen R. Hedlund, Judge.
Submitted May 9, 2025.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Rond Chananudech, Deputy Public Defender, 
Oregon Public Defense Commission, filed the brief for 
appellant.
Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General, and Greg Rios, Assistant Attorney 
General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Hellman, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
O’CONNOR, J.
Vacated and remanded.
508 State v. Key
 O’CONNOR, J.
 Defendant appeals a judgment revoking his proba -
tion. In a combined argument, defendant raises four assign-
ments of error. He contends that the trial court erred when 
it found that defendant (1) failed to report as directed to 
his probation officer on September 7, 2023; (2) committed 
a new crime by failing to appear in behavioral interven -
tion court on September 12, 2023; and (3) committed a new 
crime by failing to appear in behavioral intervention court 
on October 10, 2023. Defendant also argues that the trial 
court erred when it revoked defendant’s probation on those 
bases. Defendant acknowledges that he did not make those 
arguments below but contends that preservation should be 
excused because the trial court deprived him of an oppor -
tunity to make closing argument, where he could have pre -
served the issues that he raises on appeal. Alternatively, 
defendant requests plain-error review. The state does not 
defend the trial court’s probation violation findings. Instead, 
the state argues that we should not excuse preservation and 
that, if we conclude that the trial court plainly erred, we 
should not exercise our discretion to correct the error.
 We do not excuse the requirements of preservation. 
The record supports a reasonable inference that defense 
counsel did not intend to give a closing argument during 
the probation revocation hearing. Thus, we cannot say on 
this record that the trial court deprived defendant of an 
opportunity to preserve the issues he raises on appeal. The 
trial court plainly erred, however, when it found defendant 
in violation of the conditions of his probation, as defendant 
argues. The error is not harmless because we cannot deter-
mine whether the trial court would have exercised its dis -
cretion to revoke defendant’s probation absent the erroneous 
findings. We exercise our discretion to correct the error, and 
we vacate the probation revocation judgment and remand 
for further proceedings.
I. STATEMENT OF FACTS
 Defendant was convicted of attempted second-
degree assault, ORS 161.405 (attempt); ORS 163.175 (second-
degree assault), based on a no contest plea. On August 15, 
Cite as 351 Or App 507 (2026) 509
2023, during a change of plea and sentencing hearing, the 
parties informed the court that they had reached an agree -
ment to resolve three cases: the case at issue in this appeal 
and two cases involving misdemeanor charges. In this case, 
defendant told the court that he wanted to plead guilty and 
that he did not remember the events that gave rise to the 
attempted second-degree assault charge. Defense coun -
sel interjected that defendant would plead no contest, that 
defendant “had a guilty except for insanity option that he 
did not want to exercise,” and that defense counsel would 
provide the court with the factual bases for the no contest 
plea. Defense counsel told the court that someone confronted 
defendant at a grocery store because they suspected him of 
shoplifting. “[T]here were words exchanged[.]” Defendant 
held what appeared to be “a cutting instrument,” and he 
waved “it around close enough to one person” that the per-
son almost drew a firearm to defend themselves. Defendant 
calmed down, hugged one of the alleged victims, “said thank 
you[,] and scampered off. He was not well that day.” The 
court accepted the no contest plea on that factual basis.
 The court imposed a sentence consistent with the 
plea agreement. The court imposed a downward dispositional 
departure from the presumptive prison sentence under the 
felony sentencing guidelines “because of defendant’s enroll-
ment in behavioral intervention court.” The court imposed 
36 months of probation. The parties agreed that, if the court 
revoked defendant’s probation, it would sentence defendant 
to 36 months in prison, a sentence within the presumptive 
guidelines range. The court imposed conditions of probation, 
including that he obey all laws and “follow all rules, regula-
tions and requests of the supervisory authority,” “attend all 
court hearings at such times and locations as may be fur -
ther directed by the court,” and “[w]ork with the specialty 
court team, supervising officer[,] and treatment providers to 
achieve a successful outcome for both defendant and victim.”
 Defendant appeared in behavioral intervention 
court on August 29, 2023, and September 5, 2023. Defendant 
was told to report to his probation officer on September 7, 
2023. His probation officer testified that defendant reported 
510 State v. Key
to him on September 7. On September 12, defendant did not 
appear in behavioral intervention court.
 On September 13, the state moved to revoke defen-
dant’s probation on those grounds, alleging that defendant 
“fail[ed] to obey all laws by committing new offense(s) of: 
FTA warrant on 9/12/23;” “[n]o showed [for counseling/treat-
ment] on 9/6/23 and hung up the phone on mental health pro-
vider on 9/11/23;” and “fail[ed] to report as directed: 9/7/23.” 
Defendant was arrested for the alleged probation violations 
on September 20. On September 27, he was released on a 
release agreement and agreed to appear in the behavioral 
intervention court on October 3. He appeared in behavioral 
intervention court on that date.
 The following week, October 10, defendant once 
again failed to appear in behavioral intervention court. 
The state filed an addendum to its motion to revoke pro -
bation, alleging that defendant violated probation by com -
mitting the “new offense” of “FTA [failure to appear] war -
rant on 10/10/23” and by leaving treatment on October 5, 
2023, despite being “directed to respite from jail and not to 
leave[.]”
 The court held a hearing on the motion to revoke 
probation. The state presented the evidence summarized 
above. Defendant told the court that he was “not admitting 
violations” and wanted “to go through with the hearing.” 
Defendant testified that he felt “disrespected” and “lied to” 
in behavioral intervention court. After defendant concluded 
his testimony, the trial court immediately made findings 
without asking for the parties’ closing arguments:
 “[DEFENDANT]: I’m not asking mercy here. * * * I’m 
just speaking the truth. I’m speaking my side of the story.
 “[DEFENSE COUNSEL]: Nothing further, Your Honor.
 “THE COURT: All right. [Prosecutor], any questions?
 “[PROSECUTOR]: Thank you. No, Your Honor.
 “THE COURT: Okay. [Defendant], I’m finding you 
in violation. So the Court notes are very clear. You failed 
to appear to make it to [behavioral intervention] court 
on September 12 and October 10. You failed to report to 
Cite as 351 Or App 507 (2026) 511
your probation officer, and then on the 7th as [defendant’s 
probation officer] has testified to. And then you ran from 
[another probation] Officer * * * when he saw you. I also find 
that there was a treatment violation in regards to this. So 
I do find it in violation of the allegations.”
II. ANALYSIS
 Defendant argues that the trial court erred when 
it revoked his probation, as noted above. Defendant con -
tends that the state failed to prove that he did not report to 
his probation officer on September 7 because his probation 
officer, in fact, testified that he did report on September 7. 
Defendant also argues that the state failed to prove that 
he committed a new crime of failure to appear. The offense 
of failure to appear requires evidence that a defendant was 
released from custody pursuant to a release or security 
agreement and, he argues, the record shows that he was 
not released from custody pursuant to a release or security 
agreement when he did not appear at behavior intervention 
court on September 12 and October 10.
 Defendant did not make those arguments below. He 
argues that his arguments are preserved or that we should 
excuse preservation, as we did in State v. Barajas, 247 Or 
App 247, 251, 268 P3d 732 (2011), because he contested 
the probation violations and the trial court did not pro -
vide him with an opportunity to present closing argument 
before finding him in violation of the conditions of probation. 
Alternatively, defendant requests plain-error review.
 As noted above, the state does not defend the trial 
court’s findings on the merits. It responds that defendant’s 
challenges are unpreserved and that, even if we conclude 
that the error is plain, we should not exercise our discretion 
to correct it.
A. Defendant did not preserve the arguments he raises on 
appeal.
 We begin with preservation. Defendant did not pre-
serve the issues he raises on appeal, and we will not excuse 
preservation on this record. A defendant does not preserve a 
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence by exercising his 
statutory and constitutional rights to a contested probation 
512 State v. Key
revocation hearing. See State v. Wilson, 313 Or App 166, 167, 
493 P3d 1129 (2021) (concluding that a defendant’s chal -
lenge to the sufficiency of the evidence of a probation vio -
lation was unpreserved when the defendant did not make 
that challenge). A defendant must alert the trial court to 
the alleged deficiencies in the state’s evidence to preserve 
the issue for appeal. State v. Paragon, 195 Or App 265, 268, 
97 P3d 691 (2004) (explaining that even a generic motion for 
judgment of acquittal does not preserve a specific challenge 
to the sufficiency of the state’s evidence). Here, defendant 
did not make any particular challenge to the sufficiency of 
the evidence, as he acknowledges. Thus, his arguments on 
appeal are unpreserved.
 The requirements of preservation are not excused 
on this record. In Barajas, the claimed error on appeal was 
the denial of closing argument. 247 Or App at 249-50, 253. 
We concluded that the defendant had done all they could 
to preserve the issue for appeal because the trial court 
expressly cut off defense counsel’s two attempts to give clos-
ing argument, which also prevented defense counsel from 
preserving an objection to foreclosing closing argument. Id. 
at 253. By contrast, in this case, defendant asks us to assume 
that defense counsel would have made the same argument 
regarding the legal sufficiency of the evidence that he raises 
on appeal if the court had permitted closing argument. That 
is not the same scenario as Barajas, and we will not excuse 
the requirements of preservation in this case.
B. The trial court plainly erred.
 However, as we explain in more detail below, we 
conclude that the trial court plainly erred, and we exercise 
our discretion to correct the error. We vacate the judgment 
revoking probation and remand to the trial court for further 
proceedings.
 “Generally, an issue not preserved in the trial court 
will not be considered on appeal.” State v. Wyatt, 331 Or 335, 
341, 15 P3d 22 (2000). However, we have discretion to cor -
rect a “plain” error. ORAP 5.45(1). An error is “plain” when 
it is an error of law, the legal point is obvious and not rea -
sonably in dispute, and the error is apparent on the record 
Cite as 351 Or App 507 (2026) 513
without our having to choose among competing inferences. 
State v. Vanornum, 354 Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013). If 
we conclude that a plain error occurred, the next question is 
whether it was harmless, as we cannot reverse a judgment 
based on harmless error. State v. Ortiz , 372 Or 658, 671, 
554 P3d 796 (2024). An error is harmless if there is “little 
likelihood” that it affected the verdict. State v. Davis, 336 Or 
19, 32, 77 P3d 1111 (2003). Finally, if an error is both plain 
and not harmless, we must decide whether to exercise our 
discretion to correct it. Ortiz, 372 Or at 672.
 The Supreme Court has identified a nonexclusive 
list of factors that may be relevant in deciding whether to 
exercise our discretion to correct a plain error: “the compet-
ing interests of the parties; the nature of the case; the grav-
ity of the error; the ends of justice in the particular case; 
how the error came to the court’s attention; and whether 
the policies behind the general rule requiring preservation 
of error have been served[.]” Ailes v. Portland Meadows, Inc., 
312 Or 376, 382 n 6, 823 P2d 956 (1991). “Those factors do 
not comprise a necessary or complete checklist; they merely 
are some of the permissible considerations.” Id.
 Here, the error is plain. First, whether the record 
contains sufficient evidence to establish a violation of a con-
dition of probation presents a legal question. State v. Austin, 
344 Or App 368, 370, 580 P3d 348 (2025).
 Second, the errors are obvious on the face of the 
record. Defendant was convicted of a felony and sentenced 
to probation. In a felony case, a trial court may revoke a 
defendant’s probation “upon a finding that the offender has 
violated one or more of the conditions of probation, or that 
the offender has participated in new criminal activity.” OAR 
213-010-0001; see also State v. Kelemen , 296 Or App 184, 
186, 437 P3d 1225 (2019). Here, the state’s evidence did not 
establish that defendant committed a crime when he failed 
to appear at behavioral intervention court. And the state’s 
evidence did not establish that defendant did not report to 
his probation officer on September 7. The insufficiency of the 
evidence on both alleged violations is obvious and not rea -
sonably in dispute, as we explain in more detail below.
514 State v. Key
 Defendant was subject to a general condition of 
probation that required him to “[o]bey all laws, municipal, 
county, state and federal[.]” ORS 137.540(1)(h). The state 
alleged and the court found that defendant committed new 
criminal activity when he failed to appear at behavioral 
intervention court on September 12 and October 10. The 
question for us on plain-error review is whether it is reason-
ably in dispute that defendant committed a new crime when 
he failed to appear at behavioral intervention court on those 
dates.
 The state and the trial court did not identify the 
statutory basis for defendant’s alleged crime of failure to 
appear, and the state makes no attempt to do so on appeal. 
The crime that might apply is failure to appear in the first 
degree, ORS 162.205, which provides:
 “(1) A person commits the crime of failure to appear in 
the first degree if the person knowingly fails to appear as 
required after:
 “(a) Having by court order been released from custody 
or a correctional facility under a release agreement or secu-
rity release upon the condition that the person will sub -
sequently appear personally in connection with a charge 
against the person of having committed a felony; or
 “(b) Having been released from a correctional facility 
subject to a forced release agreement under ORS 169.046 
in connection with a charge against the person of having 
committed a felony.”1
 The offense of failure to appear generally applies 
when a defendant is released from pretrial custody or 
 1 Failure to appear in the second degree, ORS 162.195, is identical except 
that it prohibits the failure to appear in connection with a misdemeanor charge. 
As noted above, defendant was charged with and convicted of a felony and thus 
first-degree failure to appear is the potentially applicable offense. 
 In the trial court, neither the parties nor the court cited to a particular 
statute for the proposition that defendant had committed the crime of failure to 
appear. On appeal, defendant cites to ORS 162.195 and our case law interpreting 
that statute to argue that the evidence is insufficient to establish that he com -
mitted the offense. As we discuss in the body of the opinion, we have previously 
explained that the legislature intended ORS 162.195 and ORS 162.205 to have 
the same meaning, except that ORS 162.195 applies when a person is charged 
with a misdemeanor and is a misdemeanor offense and ORS 162.205 applies when 
a person is charged with a felony and is a felony offense. Accordingly, we address 
the merits of defendant’s argument under the correct statute, ORS 162.205.
Cite as 351 Or App 507 (2026) 515
released from custody pending appeal pursuant to a release 
agreement. State v. Tally, 184 Or App 715, 719, 57 P3d 592 
(2002) (interpreting “release agreement” in ORS 162.195); 
see also State v. Crawford, 208 Or App 340, 347-48, 144 P3d 
1073 (2006) (noting that our statutory construction of ORS 
162.195 in Tally applies equally to ORS 162.205). Applying 
that understanding of the statute, we held in Tally that a 
defendant does not commit a failure to appear when he fails 
to appear for a probation violation hearing because a defen-
dant’s “obligations under his pretrial release agreements” 
did not “extend beyond entry of judgment of conviction.” 
Crawford, 208 Or App at 348 (citing Tally). Similarly, “forced 
release” as used in ORS 162.205(1)(b) refers to a defendant’s 
release from custody when the local jail population exceeds 
capacity as set forth in ORS 169.046.
 Here, it is not reasonably in dispute that the state 
failed to produce evidence that defendant violated ORS 
162.205. Defendant failed to appear after entry of the judg-
ment of conviction, while on probation. He had not been 
released from custody pursuant to a release agreement or 
security release as those terms are used in ORS 162.205 
(1)(a). Tally, 184 Or App at 719. He had not been subject 
to “forced release” as that term is used in ORS 162.205 
(1)(b). The state does not argue on appeal that the evidence 
was sufficient to establish that defendant committed the 
crime of failure to appear, as noted above. Under the cir -
cumstances, it is obvious that the trial court erred when 
it determined that defendant violated his probation by 
committing the crime of failure to appear when he did not 
appear at behavioral intervention court on September 12 
and October 10.2
 The trial court also plainly erred when it found 
that defendant failed to report as directed to his probation 
officer on September 7. That finding is directly contrary to 
the evidence in the record that defendant did, in fact, report 
on that day. Defendant’s probation officer testified on direct 
examination that defendant had reported on September 7:
 2 Defendant’s failure to appear might have violated some other condition of 
probation. The state did not allege a violation of a different condition based on 
defendant’s failure to appear at behavioral intervention court, however, and that 
issue is not before us on appeal. 
516 State v. Key
 “[THE PROSECUTOR]: Q: * * * Did you give [defen -
dant] a specific direction to report to you and the probation 
office on the 7th of September 2023?
 “[PROBATION OFFICER]: A: Yes.
 “Q: And did he show up on that date?
 “A: Yeah.”
Whether the record contains sufficient evidence to establish 
a probation violation presents a legal question. Austin, 344 
Or App at 370. The error is obvious, and it is apparent on the 
face of the record. We do not understand the state to argue 
otherwise on appeal.
C. The errors were not harmless.
 The errors prejudiced defendant. The state alleged, 
and the trial court found, five probation violations. We have 
concluded that three of those violations were not supported 
by legally sufficient evidence. Defendant does not challenge 
the other violations on appeal. The trial court did not explain 
whether it would have revoked defendant’s probation based 
on any single violation. We cannot determine on this record 
whether the trial court would have exercised its discretion 
to revoke defendant’s probation and impose 36 months in 
prison if it had considered only the probation violations sup-
ported by legally sufficient evidence. See Austin, 344 Or App 
at 373-74 (explaining that an erroneous probation violation 
finding was prejudicial under similar circumstances). Thus, 
the errors are not harmless.
D. We exercise our discretion to correct the errors.
 That leaves the question of whether we should exer-
cise our discretion to correct the errors. As both defendant 
and the state recognize, we have previously exercised our 
discretion to correct a trial court’s plainly erroneous pro -
bation violation findings when a trial court relies on the 
erroneous findings, at least in part, to exercise its discretion 
to revoke a defendant’s probation. See, e.g., State v. Rivera-
Waddle, 279 Or App 274, 280, 379 P3d 820 (2016) (explain -
ing that the gravity of the error weighed in favor of exer -
cising our discretion to correct the error because we could 
not determine the extent to which the trial court relied on 
Cite as 351 Or App 507 (2026) 517
an erroneous basis to revoke probation). The gravity of the 
errors also weighs in favor of exercising our discretion here 
for the same reasons that the errors are not harmless, given 
the ends of justice in this case.
 The state argues that we should not exercise our 
discretion to correct the error because it is “unlikely that the 
trial court will change its revocation decision on remand.” 
The state points to defendant’s personal statements to the 
court in which defendant said he was “fine” with the court 
continuing probation or revoking probation, arguing that 
defendant’s statements illustrate that he held an “implausi-
ble belief that his participation in treatment and probation 
was ‘voluntary.’ ” The state also notes that his probation offi-
cer’s report said that defendant did not report as required 
on September 7. As noted, however, the probation officer 
testified at the probation revocation hearing that defendant 
did report as direct on September 7. The state argues that 
a defense objection “could have obviated the error” because 
if “defendant had objected” then the probation officer “could 
have clarified if he was mistaken in his testimony.” We are 
unpersuaded by those arguments.
 First, as noted above, we cannot determine whether 
the trial court would have revoked defendant’s probation 
if it had not erroneously found three of the five probation 
violations before it. In this case, the trial court knew that 
defendant struggled with mental illness. The parties told 
the court when defendant pleaded no contest that defen -
dant’s mental illness had played a role in the offense, and 
the plea agreement recognized that by recommending a 
downward departure to probation with a condition that 
defendant attend behavioral intervention court. The trial 
court sentenced defendant consistent with the plea agree -
ment. Throughout defendant’s probation, the trial court 
knew that defendant was supposed to be attending treat -
ment. One of defendant’s problems on probation was that he 
was not attending treatment, and thus the parties and the 
trial court were aware that defendant’s mental illness was 
very likely untreated. In that context, the trial court may 
have viewed defendant’s “implausible beliefs” about behav-
ioral intervention court and probation as symptoms of his 
518 State v. Key
mental illness, and we thus cannot say that the trial court 
would have relied on defendant’s statements to revoke pro -
bation and impose a 36-month prison sentence if the court 
had found only two violations.
 Second, we disagree with the state that an objection 
from defense counsel might have changed the evidentiary 
record. The probation officer was asked directly whether 
defendant reported on September 7. He responded, “Yeah.” 
The state had the burden to establish a probation violation, 
and it plainly failed to meet it on this record. We understand 
the state to mean that a defense argument that the evidence 
was insufficient would have alerted the state to the error, 
the trial court would have permitted the state to re-call the 
probation officer, and the probation officer would have testi-
fied that defendant did not report on September 7, contrary 
to the probation officer’s testimony on direct examination . 
That argument does not persuade us to decline to exercise 
our discretion in the circumstances of this case.
 In sum, defendant’s probation was revoked, and he 
was sentenced to 36 months in prison based on three pro -
bation violation findings that were not supported by legally 
sufficient evidence. We cannot say on this record whether 
the trial court would have revoked defendant’s probation if it 
had not relied on the erroneous findings. The gravity of the 
error, the ends of justice, and the competing interests of the 
parties persuade us to exercise our discretion to correct the 
error.
 For the reasons explained above, we conclude that 
the trial court plainly erred, and we exercise our discretion 
to vacate and remand for further proceedings.
 Vacated and remanded.
