A176763
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/08/continental_casualty_co._v._argonaut_ins._co._a176763_2.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928060/continental-casualty-co-v-argonaut-ins-co-a176763/
Caption: Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
Date: 2026-07-08

No. 639 July 8, 2026 301
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
CONTINENTAL CASUALTY COMPANY 
and Transportation Insurance Company,
Plaintiffs-Respondents,
v.
ARGONAUT INSURANCE COMPANY 
et al.,
Defendants,
and
INSURANCE COMPANY OF THE 
STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA,
Defendant-Respondent,
and
EMPLOYERS INSURANCE COMPANY OF WAUSAU,
Defendant-Appellant.
INSURANCE COMPANY OF NORTH AMERICA,
Third-Party Plaintiff,
v.
ARGONAUT INSURANCE COMPANY 
et al.,
Third-Party Defendants.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
16CV14319; A176763
David F. Rees, Judge.
Argued and submitted March 5, 2026.
David C. Linder (Minnesota) argued the cause for appel-
lant. Also on the briefs were Larson • King, LLP (Minnesota) 
and Thomas W. Sondag, Carter M. Mann, and Lane Powell 
PC.
Laurie J. Hepler (California) argued the cause for respon-
dents Continental Casualty Company and Transportation 
Insurance Company. Also on the brief were Rachel A. Beyda 
and Greines, Martin, Stein & Richland LLP (California) 
302 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
and Lawrence Gottlieb, Jeremy R. Schulze, H. Matthew 
Munson, and Betts Patterson & Mines PS (Washington).
Thomas W. Brown, Julie A. Smith, and Cosgrave Vergeer 
Kester LLP; Stephen R. Wong, Kenneth H. Sumner, and 
Sinnott, Puebla, Campagne & Curet APLC (California); 
Timothy R. Macdonald, Robert Reeves Anderson, and 
Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP (Colorado); and William 
C. Perdue, Samuel I. Ferenc, and Arnold & Porter Kaye 
Scholer LLP (Washington, D.C.) filed the brief for respon -
dent Insurance Company of the State of Pennsylvania.
Louis A. Ferreira, Cameron Zangenehzadeh, and Stoel 
Rives LLP, filed the brief amicus curiae for Schnitzer Steel 
Industries, Inc., and MMGL, LLC.
Before Kamins, Presiding Judge, Egan, Judge, and 
DeVore, Senior Judge.
DeVORE, S. J.
Reversed in part; affirmed in part; and remanded for 
reconsideration of allocation.
Kamins, P. J., dissenting.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 303
304 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
 DeVORE, S. J.
 This case is a contribution action by plaintiffs 
Continental Casualty Company and Transportation 
Insurance Company (collectively, Continental) that arises 
under the Oregon Environmental Cleanup Assistance Act 
(OECAA) in the context of the Portland Harbor Superfund 
Site cleanup. The case is on remand to us from the Oregon 
Supreme Court. Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut 
Ins. Co., 373 Or 389, 567 P3d 1059, adh’d to as modified 
on recons , 374 Or 144, 574 P3d 476 (2025) ( Continental 
Casualty II), to address Employers Insurance Company of 
Wausau’s (Wausau) remaining assignments of error. To con-
tinue, we recount portions of the prior proceedings where 
relevant to each of the remaining assignments of error. We 
reverse in part, affirm in part, and remand for reconsider -
ation of the allocation to be made in contribution.
I. RESOLVED ISSUE
 Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. (SSI), and MMGL 
Corp (formerly Schnitzer Investment Corp) (SIC) (collec -
tively “Schnitzer”) were named as potentially liable parties 
for cleanup of the Portland Harbor. Schnitzer designated 
Continental as the “targeted” insurer under ORS 465.480 
(3)(b). That statute permits an insured to choose a more sig-
nificant general liability insurer among others to respond 
to a loss to the extent of its policies. In 2018, Continental 
paid the defense costs of Schnitzer for the Portland Harbor 
claims and then, under the OECAA, sought contribution 
from Schnitzer’s other insurers, including Wausau.
 In our original opinion on Wausau’s appeal, we held 
that the trial court had erred in denying Wausau’s motion 
to dismiss Continental’s claim for contribution because 
the claim was barred by ORS 465.480(4)(a). Continental 
Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763), 331 Or App 38, 
51, 545 P3d 173 (2024) (Continental Casualty I). As relevant, 
ORS 465.480(4)(a) provides:
“An insurer that has paid all or part of an environmental 
claim may seek contribution from any other insurer that is 
liable or potentially liable to the insured and that has not 
entered into a good-faith settlement agreement with the 
insured regarding the environmental claim.”
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 305
Under that statute, we held that Wausau’s settlement with 
its insured Schnitzer barred Continental’s claim for contri-
bution. Because we agreed with Wausau’s first assignment 
of error, we did not reach the other assignments. Continental 
Casualty I, 331 Or App at 51.
 On Continental’s petition for review, the Supreme 
Court reversed our opinion and reinstated the trial court’s 
ruling rejecting Wausau’s motion to dismiss. Continental 
Casualty II, 373 Or at 404. The Supreme Court focused on 
the meaning of the phrase “the environmental claim” in 
ORS 465.480(4)(a), which, as noted, provides that an insurer 
that has paid all or part of an environmental claim may 
seek contribution from another insurer that has coverage 
and that has not made a good-faith settlement with the 
insured “regarding the environmental claim.” Id. at 400-02. 
The Supreme Court determined that
“Schnitzer’s settlement with Wausau was not a settlement 
of the environmental claim that Continental, as the tar -
geted insurer, had already paid. Thus, it is not a settlement 
that extinguishes Continental’s right to contribution.”
Id. at 403 (emphasis in original). The Supreme Court 
explained:
“[T]o the extent that Schnitzer recovered the defense costs 
that had been reduced to judgment against Continental, 
Schnitzer had no remaining claim for those costs against 
Wausau that it could settle.”
Id. at 403-04. The Supreme Court concluded:
“Thus, Wausau has not ‘entered into a settlement with 
the insured regarding the environmental claim,’ and 
Continental’s right to contribution is not barred. The Court 
of Appeals’ contrary conclusion was in error.”
Id. at 404 (paraphrasing ORS 465.480(4)(a)). The Supreme 
Court remanded the case to us for consideration of the four 
remaining assignments of error.
 Those assignments ask: (2) whether the recover -
able costs allocated among insurers should include (a) attor-
ney fees awarded under ORS 742.061 in favor of Schnitzer 
against Continental in the preceding policy claim or 
306 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
(b) prejudgment interest under ORS 82.010 on unpaid attor-
ney fees incurred in defense of the underlying environmen -
tal claim; (3) whether a fee limitation under ORS 465.483 
(3)(a) on the rates of independent counsel applied to the fees 
of nonlocal attorneys who defended the environmental claim; 
(4) whether certain Wausau policies contained an aggregate 
liability limit; and (5) whether other Wausau policies should 
be excluded from the contribution calculations because their 
liability limits had been exhausted.
II. SECOND ISSUE
 Did the trial court err, when including among the 
“recoverable costs” that are allocated in contribution under 
ORS 465.480(5), (a) Continental’s debt for Schnitzer’s attor-
ney fees under ORS 742.061 in the policy claim against 
Continental and (b) Continental’s debt for prejudgment 
interest under ORS 82.010 on unpaid attorney fees from 
defense of the underlying environmental claim?
A. Attorney Fees Under ORS 742.061
 In the underlying contract claim on Continental’s 
policy, the federal court had awarded Schnitzer $3,756,037 
in attorney fees to be paid by Continental, not under the 
terms of its policy promising a defense of the environmental 
claim, but under ORS 742.061 for Continental’s failure to 
have settled within six months of the claim on its policy. 1 
In this contribution case, the trial court deemed those stat -
utory fees to be properly included as the recoverable costs 
under ORS 465.480(5) so as to be apportioned among insur-
ers. The trial court did not engage in statutory analysis of 
terms, but the court did observe that “[w]hen the Legislature 
drafted the OECAA, it was certainly aware of an insured’s 
ability to recover attorney fees under ORS 742.061.” For that 
reason, the trial court declared that the legislature must 
have intended to include statutory fees as recoverable costs 
under ORS 465.480(5). Because claims on policies may vary, 
 1 ORS 742.061(1) provides, in relevant part:
 “[I]f settlement is not made within six months from the date proof of loss 
is filed with an insurer and an action is brought in any court of this state 
upon any policy of insurance of any kind or nature, and the plaintiff’s recov -
ery exceeds the amount of any tender made by the defendant in such action, 
a reasonable amount to be fixed by the court as attorney fees shall be taxed 
as part of the costs of the action and any appeal thereon.”
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 307
the trial court assumed it was the judge’s task to decide 
“whether it is fair to apportion these costs to other insurers.”
 In the policy claim against Continental, the prob -
lem had been a failure to pay the full amount of the bills of 
Bingham McCutchen, Schnitzer’s California defense attor-
neys, due to a dispute over whether the California firm had 
billed at rates that were more than were reasonable and 
necessary in defense of the local environmental claim. Other 
insurers, including Wausau, had not been made defendants 
in Schnitzer’s action against Continental. Nevertheless, 
because the nonparty insurers privately shared Continental’s 
opinion that the Bingham fees were too high, the trial court 
concluded it was “fair” to impose Continental’s liability for 
Schnitzer’s litigation with Continental on other insurers, 
specifically Wausau, under ORS 465.480(5).
 We review the trial court’s interpretation of ORS 
465.480(5) as a question of law. State v. Gaines, 346 Or 160, 
171-72, 206 P3d 1042 (2009). Our interpretation of the stat-
ute is governed by a three-part test. Id. The first and most 
important step is an examination of the text and context of 
the statute itself. Id. at 171. That is followed by a consider-
ation of the legislative history if it is useful for our analysis. 
Id. at 172. If the legislature’s intent remains unclear after 
examining text, context, and legislative history, we may 
resort to general maxims of statutory construction to aid in 
resolving the uncertainty, if any. Id.; State v. Moore, 319 Or 
App 136, 140, 510 P3d 907, rev den, 370 Or 303 (2022).
 Both parties agree that the term “recoverable costs” 
in ORS 465.480(5) is not defined by statute. Neither party 
offers legislative history on point, and we are aware of none.
 Wausau challenges the trial court’s interpretation of 
ORS 465.480(5), relying on statutory context. Citing several 
other provisions of the OECAA, Wausau contends that the 
term “recoverable costs,” which may be allocated under ORS 
465.480(5), refers to the defense costs of the claim against 
the insured and the indemnity costs from payment of dam -
ages that an insured owes. Wausau reasons that defense 
and indemnity costs—referenced in ORS 465.480(5) and 
elsewhere—are what policies pay; that insurers’ policies are 
308 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
parallel contractual obligations to their common insured; 
and it is the commonality of parallel policies that gives rise 
to the contribution action under the OECAA. In other words, 
what the insurers collectively owe the insured under their 
policies is what the term “recoverable costs” means.
 Continental supports the trial court’s conclusion by 
referring to a general sense of purpose, albeit with less spec-
ificity, but with an appeal to equity. Taking in the scope of 
the OECAA, Continental argues that, as a targeted insurer, 
it had a duty to pay “all sums” due under its own policies 
and was reassured of its prospect to seek contribution later 
from other insurers; that it was equitable to include sums 
Continental owed under ORS 742.061 in the action on its pol-
icy; that inclusion of those fees in the contribution calcula -
tion is compelling when the other insurers happened to have 
agreed with Continental about unreasonably high attorney 
fees; and that the trial judge should have discretion to deter-
mine what are “recoverable costs” under ORS 465.480(5).
 Our construction of that statute begins with one 
of the express definitions in the OECAA, considers related 
subsections, and finds meaning with a synonymous phrase 
within ORS 465.480(5) itself. First, ORS 465.475(1) provides:
 “ ‘Environmental claim’ means a claim for defense or 
indemnity submitted under a general liability insurance 
policy by an insured facing, or allegedly facing, potential 
liability for bodily injury or property damage arising from 
a release of pollutants onto or into land, air or water.”
In so saying, the OECAA defines an “environmental claim” 
in terms of the demand for the “defense or indemnity” that 
a policy provides.
 Next, the OECAA declares an insurer’s duty to “pay 
all costs” but does so with specific reference to the defense 
or indemnity costs owed under that policy. At ORS 465.480 
(3)(a), the statute provides:
 “An insurer with a duty to pay defense or indemnity 
costs, or both, to an insured for an environmental claim 
under a general liability insurance policy that provides 
that the insurer has a duty to pay all sums arising out of a 
risk covered by the policy, must pay all defense or indemnity 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 309
costs, or both, proximately arising out of the risk pursuant 
to the applicable terms of its policy, including its limit of 
liability, independent and unaffected by other insurance 
that may provide coverage for the same claim.”
(Emphases added.) Thus, contrary to Continental’s argu -
ment, the “all costs” language is not written so broadly as to 
contemplate an insurer’s statutory liability for later attor -
ney fees owed for delayed settlement under ORS 742.061; 
instead, the “all costs” language refers to an insurer’s duty 
to pay an insured’s defense costs and to indemnify the 
insured for damages that the insured owes.
 It is certainly true that the OECAA allows an insured 
to choose to sue fewer than all insurers with coverage and 
that the targeted insurer may not refuse payment because 
other insurers with coverage have not paid. ORS 465.480 
(3)(b).2 Presumably, the insured targets the insurer with the 
greatest coverage. That is because ORS 465.480(3)(b) requires 
the insured to choose that insurer based on the insurer’s time 
on the risk, policy limits, and appropriate coverage. Id. Even 
when targeted, however, that insurer’s exposure is limited by 
its policy. At ORS 465.480(3)(d), the statute assures that:
“An insurer chosen by an insured under paragraph (b) of 
this subsection may not be required to pay defense or 
indemnity costs in excess of the applicable policy limits, 
if any, on such defense or indemnity costs, including any 
exclusions to coverage.”
The statute gives that reassurance in terms of what the 
insurer owes as “defense or indemnity costs” under its policy, 
and that reference to “defense or indemnity costs” further indi-
cates that the costs to be paid and reallocated, as we shall see, 
are the defense and indemnity costs promised in the policy.
 It is also true that the targeted insurer who has paid 
part or all of an environmental claim may seek contribution 
 2 In relevant part, ORS 465.480(3)(b) provides:
“If * * * the insured files suit on the claim against less than all the insur -
ers, the insured may choose which of the general liability insurance policies 
respond to the loss if not all are required to satisfy the insured’s claim. * * * 
[A]n insurer that has an obligation to pay may not fail to make payment 
to the insured on the grounds that another insurer has not made payment, 
unless the insurer has no obligation to respond to a claim until the limits of 
the underlying policy have been paid.”
310 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
from other insurers who provide coverage to the insured. As 
noted above, ORS 465.480(4)(a) provides:
“An insurer that has paid all or part of an environmental 
claim may seek contribution from any other insurer that is 
liable or potentially liable to the insured and that has not 
entered into a good-faith settlement agreement with the 
insured regarding the environmental claim.”
(Emphasis added.) That provision, of course, must be read in 
context. What the targeted insurer has paid is an “environ-
mental claim,” and, as defined in ORS 465.475(1), an “envi-
ronmental claim” is a “claim for defense or indemnity” under 
a policy. Later attorney fees for failure to settle within six 
months of a claim are not awarded under terms of a pol -
icy but instead are awarded under the separate statutory 
authority of ORS 742.061.
 Next, we recognize that the legislature used a syn -
onymous phrase when referring to apportioning “recoverable 
costs” between insurers. In relevant part, ORS 465.480(5) 
provides:
 “If a court determines that the apportionment of recov-
erable costs between insurers is appropriate, the court shall 
allocate the covered damages between the insurers before 
the court, based on the following factors:
 “(a) The total period of time that each solvent insurer 
issued a general liability insurance policy to the insured 
* * *;
 “(b) The policy limits, including any exclusions to cov -
erage, of each of the general liability insurance policies 
* * *;
 “(c) The policy that provides the most appropriate type 
of coverage for the type of environmental claim;
 “(d) The terms of the policies that related to the equi -
table allocation between insurers * * *.”
(Emphases added.) When that provision speaks of “appor -
tionment of recoverable costs” and “allocating covered dam-
ages,” the provision is using the phrases interchangeably. 
As written, the phrase “recoverable costs” is synonymous 
with “covered damages.” To apportion “recoverable costs” 
is to allocate “covered damages.” What is “covered” by a 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 311
policy, as indicated throughout the OECAA, is the insurer’s 
promise of “defense or indemnity” under a general liability 
insurance policy. See ORS 465.475(1) (definition of an “envi-
ronmental claim”); ORS 465.480(3)(a) (“duty to pay defense 
or indemnity costs”); ORS 465.480(3)(d) (shall not pay more 
than limits of “defense or indemnity costs”).
 Our consideration of a provision’s context includes 
related provisions and, here especially, words within the same 
sentence. “It is a familiar rule that the meaning of words 
in a statute may be clarified or confirmed by other words 
in the same sentence or provision.” Goodwin v. Kingsmen 
Plastering, Inc., 359 Or 694, 702, 375 P3d 463 (2016) (refer -
ring to the canon of noscitur a sociis). This is not an occasion 
in which to invoke the canon that, when the legislature uses 
different words, the legislature intends a different meaning. 
See Marshall v. PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP , 371 Or 536, 
555-56, 539 P3d 766 (2023) (recognizing that such “rules” 
of interpretation are mere assumptions that “always” give 
way to better evidence of legislative intent). Rather, this is 
an occasion in which the legislature used “recoverable costs” 
synonymously with “covered damages” while elsewhere 
using “defense or indemnity costs” to mean what is covered.
 Taken together, text and context indicate that 
the term “recoverable costs” to be allocated under ORS 
465.480(5) are the “covered damages”—that is, the “defense 
or indemnity costs”—that are covered under the terms of 
the several insurers’ general liability policies. Because 
attorney fees awarded under ORS 742.061 are awarded 
independently under authority of a statute, not an insurer’s 
policy, they are not “recoverable costs” subject to realloca -
tion in contribution.
 That is a logical and not absurd construction of the 
statute. See Kupillas v. Sage and Social LLC, 337 Or App 67, 
77, 563 P3d 394 (2024), rev den, 373 Or 444 (2025) (“Avoiding 
absurd results is a maxim of statutory construction that 
courts use when the statute is truly ambiguous and the 
result is truly absurd.” (Emphasis in original; internal quo-
tation marks omitted.)). As the trial court recognized, under-
lying coverage cases may be as different as the different rea-
sons insurers may deny or delay defense or indemnity. In 
312 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
the prior case, Continental and nonparty insurer Wausau 
happened to share the opinion that the rates of California 
counsel were not necessary and reasonable. However, litiga-
tion on one insurer’s policy may turn on facts, promises, lim-
its, or exclusions that differ from other, nonparty insurers 
on their coverage. The reasons one insurer delays payment 
and incurs liability under ORS 742.061 may be unique.
 Consequently, the legislature could sensibly choose 
to provide for allocation of “recoverable costs” when they 
are a shared liability for “covered damages” under applica-
ble policies. The legislature could sensibly choose to leave 
statutory liability under ORS 742.061 to the litigating 
insurer that chose not to settle within six months of proof 
of a claim—particularly the leading insurer with the most 
coverage. The risk of solo liability under ORS 742.061 would 
pressure that insurer to promptly settle rather than litigate 
in hopes of later shifting attorney fees from its coverage lit-
igation off to nonparty insurers in contribution.
 Moreover, the legislature enacted no statutory pro-
vision to empower the trial judge to redefine “recoverable 
costs” on a case-by-case basis so as to decide what added 
expenses, beyond shared policy coverage, are subject to real-
location to other insurers. Continental’s appeal to a general 
sense of purpose is ungrounded and contrary to the statute’s 
specific language.
 We have previously rejected allocation of stat -
utory attorney fees in a contribution claim. 3 In Certain 
Underwriters v. Mass. Bonding and Ins. Co. , 245 Or App 
101, 260 P3d 830 (2011), the plaintiff insurers asserted a 
contribution claim against defendant insurers that arose 
out of their insured’s underlying environmental cleanup 
action. We agreed with the defendant insurers’ arguments 
that an attorney fee award under ORS 742.061 is not the 
 3 We appreciate that ORS 465.480(4)(d) provides:
“Contribution rights by and among insurers under this section preempt all 
common law contribution rights, if any, by and between insurers for environ -
mental claims.”
However, no provision of the OECAA preempts the principle that it is the shared 
obligation for defense and indemnity that is subject to contribution. Rather, the 
terms of ORS 465.475(1) and ORS 465.480(3) and (5) confirm the principle of a 
shared obligation.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 313
type of common liability among insurers that gives rise to 
equitable contribution—at least in the posture of that case. 
245 Or App at 107. We observed that the plaintiff insurers’ 
liability for attorney fees under ORS 742.061 did not arise 
out of a contractual obligation shared with other insurers; 
“rather, the liability is statutory and * * * is not a liability 
that plaintiffs and defendants have ever shared.” Id. at 109. 
We held that the trial court had not erred in granting sum-
mary judgment for the defendant insurers. Id.
 Here, the attorney fees awarded to Schnitzer 
against Continental under ORS 742.061 were awarded for 
Continental’s failure to settle or to pay Schnitzer within six 
months of a proof of claim against Continental, and that lia-
bility for attorney fees was not attributable to conduct by 
Wausau. Continental is obligated to pay the fees for its own 
resistance to Schnitzer’s federal claim on the Continental 
policy. By reason of precedent and statutory construction, we 
conclude that the trial court erred in including Continental’s 
obligation for attorney fees under ORS 742.061 in the contri-
bution calculation.4
 A reasonable, dissenting opinion reaches a different 
conclusion. We are unpersuaded for reasons that need no 
repetition. Yet, three particular responses are necessary.
 First, in Continental Casualty II, the Supreme Court 
did not make an “interpretation of ‘environmental claim’,” 
351 Or App at 337, 341 (Kamins, J., dissenting), that implies 
that Continental’s newly incurred obligation for attorney fees 
under ORS 742.061 in the federal action is recoverable in con-
tribution. The Supreme Court did not interpret the scope of 
the contribution right nor the meaning of “recoverable costs” 
in ORS 465.480(4)(a) and (5). Rather, the Supreme Court 
recognized that Schnitzer had an environmental claim, as 
everyone agreed, and held that Wausau’s settlement did not 
bar Continental’s contribution suit. 373 Or at 404. If the 
Supreme Court had interpreted an “environmental claim” 
for purposes of “recoverable costs,” there would have been no 
need to remand the case for us to determine whether stat -
utory attorney fees under ORS 742.061 in the contribution 
 4 We add that the particular prejudgment interest on attorney fees awarded 
under ORS 742.061 is also not subject to allocation.
314 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
action were “recoverable costs,” or, that is, “covered damages” 
under ORS 465.480(5). (Emphasis added.)
 Second, the dissenting opinion dismisses Certain 
Underwriters, where, in its context, we held that attorney 
fees under ORS 742.061 in the contribution suit were not 
the sort of common liability among insurers that is recov -
erable in contribution. The dissent underscores our inciden-
tal acknowledgement that OECAA preempts common law. 
See 351 Or App at 312 n 3. The salient point, however, is 
that Certain Underwriters was a decision under the OECAA, 
and the statutory terms—environmental claim, recover -
able costs, and covered damages—were the same statutory 
terms that governed then and now.
 Third, the dissent offers an alternative analysis in 
which “recoverable costs” and “covered damages” are inter -
preted to mean two different things, rather than two differ -
ent ways to say the same thing, in ORS 465.480(5). 351 Or 
App at 341-45 (Kamins, J., dissenting). As discussed, a court 
can understand terms to be synonymous. The dissent, how -
ever, reads “recoverable costs” to be a broader term than “cov-
ered damages,” thereby allowing “recoverable costs” to include 
statutory attorney fees in the contribution action, whereas 
“covered damages” would not. The problem with the dissent’s 
construction is that it makes the statutory factors for appor -
tioning contribution applicable only to “covered damages” and 
not to “recoverable costs.” The result is that the supposedly 
larger term, “recoverable costs,” would not be governed by con-
sideration of time on the risk, type of coverages, policy limits, 
policy terms, or other factors that might have had a great deal 
to do with generating a multitude of disputes. A reasonable 
construction requires reading “recoverable costs” and “covered 
damages” synonymously and, as the same things, all subject to 
the factors for apportioning contribution.
B. Prejudgment Interest Under ORS 82.010
 In the prior action on Continental’s policy, the fed-
eral court awarded Schnitzer $2,812,185 in prejudgment 
interest on the unpaid portion of the bills of the California 
defense counsel. In this contribution claim, the trial court 
included that prejudgment interest among “recoverable 
costs” to be apportioned among insurers.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 315
 Generally, prejudgment interest for breach of con -
tract is imposed under ORS 82.010(1), which provides, in 
relevant part:
“The rate of interest for the following transactions, if the 
parties have not otherwise agreed to a rate of interest, is 
nine percent per annum and is payable on:
 “(a) All moneys after they become due[.]”
We have recognized that prejudgment interest
“begins to run when (1) the exact amount of damages is 
either ascertained or readily ascertainable; and (2) the 
time from which the interest runs is easily ascertained.”
Cascade Corp. v. American Home Assurance Co. , 206 Or 
App 1, 15, 135 P3d 450 (2006), rev dismissed, 342 Or 645 
(2007) (internal quotation marks omitted). When those con-
ditions are satisfied, an insurer owes prejudgment interest 
on unpaid bills to defend the insured. See id. (holding that 
the trial court erred in denying the insured recovery of pre-
judgment interest).
 Although the determination of the amount of pre -
judgment interest was a matter of elaborate calculation by 
an accountant testifying for Schnitzer, as well as a jury’s 
determination of when prejudgment interest began to run, 
Wausau does not claim here that the unpaid defense bills 
were not readily ascertainable or that the time from which 
interest would run cannot be ascertained. Wausau’s only 
argument is that prejudgment interest should not be included 
in “recoverable costs” under ORS 465.480(5). Continental 
disagrees.
 So do we. The duty to defend the insured is one of the 
shared duties of insurers with coverage, be they Continental 
or Wausau. Accordingly, sums due on unpaid bills defend -
ing the insured are likewise within the scope of “covered 
damages” or “recoverable costs” under ORS 465.480(5). See 
generally Cascade Corp., 206 Or App at 15-16 (prejudgment 
interest on unpaid fees). 5 Therefore, we conclude that the 
 5 Because prejudgment interest is a matter of statute, ORS 82.010(1), the 
dissenting opinion views our conclusion as inconsistent with our treatment of 
attorney fees under ORS 742.061.351 Or App at 341 n 2 (Kamins, J., dissenting). 
There is no inconsistency. The difference is that the duty to defend is an insurer’s 
316 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
trial court did not err in apportioning prejudgment interest 
among the insurers for purposes of contribution.
III. THIRD ISSUE
Did the trial court err in determining that the communi -
ty-rate limitation on attorney fees of independent coun -
sel, provided in ORS 465.483(3)(a), was not applicable to 
Schnitzer’s California counsel?
A. Prior Case
 Wausau’s third assignment turns on the dispute in 
the prior case over the unpaid portion of the attorney bills of 
the California firm that defended Schnitzer. That was a dis-
pute about whether Continental should have paid the rates 
of attorneys charging more than local attorneys. We recount 
the facts of that case—those which are not now contested—
in order to explain how the dispute here becomes a question 
of statutory construction.
 When agencies identified the Schnitzer entities 
as potentially responsible parties in 1999 and 2000, Stoel 
Rives, a Portland law firm, was retained to defend Schnitzer. 
In 2001, Continental, Wausau, and other insurers reached a 
temporary agreement to share those defense costs. In 2003, 
however, Stoel Rives advised that it was unable to con -
tinue representation due to professional standards involv -
ing a conflict of interest. Continental proposed a different 
Portland attorney and firm and, if they were not acceptable 
to Schnitzer, then an alternate Portland attorney and firm.
 Schnitzer responded that it was not satisfied that 
either local counsel had the same experience as Stoel Rives 
and that such experience was necessary for Superfund liti -
gation. Schnitzer reported that it had chosen the California 
firm of Bingham McCutchen “for outside counsel.” After much 
disagreement, Continental and other insurers eventually 
obligation under a policy and is within the meaning of “recoverable costs,” i.e. 
“covered damages” within the scope of contribution under ORS 465.480(5). 
(Emphasis added.) When failing to timely pay defense fees in the underlying 
claim of the injured parties, an insurer becomes obligated for prejudgment 
interest as part and parcel of the original defense fees. Later arising attorney 
fees resulting from resisting an environmental claim of the insured under ORS 
742.061 are not under a policy and are not the same as prejudgment interest, for 
the reasons previously explained.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 317
acquiesced in Schnitzer’s choice of California counsel, but 
the insurers insisted that they would only pay attorney fees 
comparable to local attorneys’ rates, and Schnitzer insisted 
that it reserved its rights to seek payment for defense work 
at full rates later.
 In 2010, Schnitzer filed the prior claim against 
Continental over delays and short payment of the defense 
bills. In a pretrial ruling, made before the effective date of 
ORS 465.483(3), Magistrate Judge Papak determined that, 
because an insurer has a duty to defend and use reason -
able care, an insured may recover attorney fees based on 
rates higher than those within the litigation’s locale, if the 
insured can show it to be necessary to retain outside coun -
sel. Schnitzer Steel Industries, Inc. v. Continental Cas. Co. , 
CV 3:10-1174-PK, 2012 WL 3879276 at *16-18 (D Or Mar 9, 
2012). Judge Mosman adopted that ruling. Schnitzer Steel 
Industries, Inc. v. Continental Cas. Co., No 3:10-cv-01174-PK, 
2012 WL 3879250 (D Or Sep 5, 2012).
 Before the case went to trial, the Oregon legislature 
passed Senate Bill (SB) 814 in early 2013. Or Laws 2013, 
ch 350, §§ 1-9. We will quote the terms of that legislation, 
now ORS 465.483, when we turn to examine its several pro-
visions later. Among other things, the legislation created an 
insured’s right to “independent counsel” in environmental 
claims in certain circumstances and addressed the rates of 
those attorney fees. Or Laws 2013, ch 350, § 7. Schnitzer 
considered the specifics of the legislation more favorable 
than the generality of the Papak ruling and filed a motion in 
limine on the issue; so did Continental. As it happened, how-
ever, Schnitzer had previously argued on a discovery issue 
that the California firm had a confidential relationship with 
insurers. Due to that argument, the federal court declared 
Schnitzer to be judicially estopped from asserting that the 
California firm was “independent counsel” within the mean-
ing of the new statute, ORS 465.483(3).
 When the case came to trial in 2014, the jury was 
instructed about nonlocal fees according to the terms of the 
Papak ruling in that case, not the terms of the new legisla -
tion. The jury was instructed that Schnitzer would be enti -
tled to be repaid at rates higher than rates of local attorneys, 
318 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
if no local counsel could reasonably have been expected to 
provide competent representation and a reasonable effort to 
find nonlocal counsel to work at local rates would not have 
succeeded. The jury found in favor of Schnitzer and awarded 
Schnitzer $8,601,700 in unpaid, nonlocal attorney fees to 
the date of that trial.
 In this case, Wausau argued that the new ORS 
465.483(3) limited the rates of “independent counsel” to the 
customary rates of local counsel. Wausau did so by way of 
a motion in limine, a motion to dismiss akin to ORCP 60, 
and a written closing argument. The trial court denied the 
motions, stating, “That’s not what the statute says.”
 In its findings of fact and conclusions of law, the 
court recounted that the jury in the prior case had rejected 
Continental’s argument that qualified local counsel were 
available and found that the higher rates of the California 
firm were reasonable. The trial court wrote:
 “Wausau argued that had Continental argued in the 
federal case that [Schnitzer’s] lawyers were ‘independent 
counsel’ under ORS 465.483, this would have changed the 
result in the federal trial because the statute ‘caps’ rates 
for independent counsel at the prevailing rates in the 
community where the claim arose. This is a misreading 
of the statute, which requires independent counsel that is 
competent to handle the complexity of the claim, and also 
expressly states that out-of-forum counsel must be consid -
ered if there are no available local counsel competent to 
handle the claim. ORS 465.483(2). Given the jury found 
no local attorneys were available to represent [Schnitzer] 
competently, the application of this statute would not have 
changed the outcome.”
Apparently, the trial court read ORS 465.483, not only to 
provide for nonlocal counsel in the absence of experienced 
local counsel, but to permit reimbursement at reasonable 
and necessary rates higher than the rates of attorneys in 
the litigation’s locale. The trial court did not specifically 
indicate whether Schnitzer’s California counsel should be 
considered as independent counsel, but the court did find 
that the fees of Bingham McCutchen were reasonable and 
necessary. The court concluded that Wausau owed in contri-
bution its proportionate share of the full amount of attorney 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 319
fees of the California firm from April 28, 2010 to May 15, 
2018.
 On appeal, Wausau argues, in terms of the new 
statute, that the insurers had a duty to defend under their 
policies; that the California firm took over the defense of 
the environmental claims; that Schnitzer, not the insurers, 
chose the California firm in its belief that qualified local 
counsel was unavailable; and that the federal jury agreed. 
Wausau notes that, whatever unique reason precluded 
Schnitzer from arguing that Bingham McCutchen was 
“independent counsel,” Wausau was not a party to the prior 
case and is not estopped here from insisting that the new 
ORS 465.483(3) applies to limit attorney fees of nonlocal 
“independent counsel.”
 Continental responds that the trial court inde -
pendently determined that “under the circumstances the 
out-of-market rates charged by the Bingham firm and its 
successors were reasonably necessary for competent repre -
sentation of [Schnitzer] at the PHSS.” Continental asserts:
“The statute does not contain a ‘rate cap’ that prevents 
insureds from obtaining covered defense costs from their 
insurers where those costs are reasonable and necessary to 
secure a competent defense, but greater than what Oregon 
lawyers typically charge.”
That is so, claims Continental, because it would “mean lit -
tle” if the insured had to pay the difference between local 
and nonlocal rates. In Continental’s view, the statute’s pro-
vision for competent counsel would be “illusory” if insureds 
must pay the difference in rates.
B. Independent Counsel
 We conclude that the statutory text is plain in its 
limitation on attorney fees, even if not so plain as to the 
new role of “independent counsel” who undertakes the com-
plex role of defending the insured while interacting with 
the insurer on behalf of the insured, who still has a duty to 
cooperate with the insurer. To explain, we take the statute’s 
subsections in turn.
320 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
 The statute begins simply with the provision that 
triggers the right to “independent counsel” where an insurer 
who defends warns that coverage may be problematic. At 
subsection (1), ORS 465.483, the statute provides:
“If the provisions of a general liability insurance policy 
impose a duty to defend upon an insurer, and the insurer 
has undertaken the defense of an environmental claim on 
behalf of an insured under a reservation of rights, or if the 
insured has potential liability for the environmental claim 
in excess of the limits of the general liability insurance pol-
icy, the insurer shall provide independent counsel to defend 
the insured who shall represent only the insured and not the 
insurer.”
(Emphases added.) Subsection (1) contains several features. 
First, it is the risk that an insured may have uninsured 
exposure that triggers the right to independent counsel. 
Second, independent counsel serves “to defend” against the 
environmental claim, not simply to serve as separate counsel 
to the insured on the potential problem of coverage. Third, 
independent counsel shall represent the insured, not the 
insurer—hence the term, “ independent counsel.” (Emphasis 
added.)
 The role of independent counsel is a shift from 
the typical form of defense counsel provided by an insurer. 
Generally, “[w]hen an insured is represented by attorneys 
provided by the insurer, the insured relinquishes control 
over the defense of the claim, and a fiduciary relationship is 
created between the insured and insurer[.]” FountainCourt 
Homeowners v. FountainCourt Develop. , 360 Or 341, 354, 
380 P3d 916 (2016). A tripartite relationship arises among 
the insurer who undertakes to defend, the attorney who is 
hired to defend, and the insured who has a duty to cooperate 
with the insurer in defense. See OSB Formal Ethics Op No. 
2005-121 (rev 2026) (“As a general proposition, a lawyer who 
represents an insured in an insurance defense case has two 
clients: the insurer and the insured.”).6 In that situation, the 
 6 The ethics opinion posits that:
 “Any assumption that a tripartite relationship exists can be over -
come by the specific facts and circumstances in a particular matter. See 
In re Weidner, 310 Or 757, 801 P2d 828 (1990) (articulating the test for an 
attorney-client relationship); Evraz Inc., N. A. v. Continental Ins. Co., Civ No 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 321
defense lawyer must treat the insured as the “primary cli -
ent” whose protection must be the lawyer’s “dominant” con-
cern. Id.
 Subsection (1) of ORS 465.483 makes the role of 
“independent counsel” different than typical insurance 
defense insofar as it provides that “independent counsel 
* * * shall represent only the insured and not the insurer.” 
Before concluding, however, subsection (4) of ORS 465.483 
reassures that:
“The provisions of this section do not relieve the insured of 
its duty to cooperate with the insurer under the terms of 
the insurance contract.”
To avoid unintended change, subsection (4) preserves the 
insured’s duty to cooperate with its insurer in the processing 
and defense of the claim. Cf. Bailey v. Universal Underwriters 
Ins., 258 Or 201, 218-28, 474 P2d 746 (1970) (coverage lost 
due to breach of insured’s duty to cooperate).
 Because the insured must cooperate with the 
insurer, so too must “independent counsel,” to the extent 
necessary to defend, seek payment of experts, and facilitate 
settlement before judgment. That is so because, as a prac -
tical matter, the insurer still retains control of its purse in 
paying experts or a settlement before judgment. Put another 
way, nothing in ORS 465.483 forbids “independent counsel” 
from periodic reporting and communicating confidentially 
with the client’s insurer on behalf of the insured as neces -
sary for trial strategy or pretrial settlement, presumably 
done within the confidentiality of “work product doctrine” 
of ORCP 36 B(3), if nothing else. In part, ORCP 36 B(3)(a) 
provides:
 “[A] party may obtain discovery of documents and tan -
gible things otherwise discoverable under subsection B(1) 
of this rule and prepared in anticipation of litigation or for 
trial by or for another party or by or for that other party’s 
representative (including an attorney, consultant, surety, 
indemnitor, insurer, or agent) only on a showing that the 
3:08-cv-00447-AC, 2013 WL 6174839 (D Or Nov 21, 2013) (finding no tripar -
tite relationship when insurer did not hire lawyer and when lawyer had made 
it clear to insurer that she only represented insured).”
OSB Formal Ethics Op No. 2005-121 at 2 n 1.
322 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
party seeking discovery has substantial need of the mate -
rials in the preparation of such party’s case and is unable 
without undue hardship to obtain the substantial equiv -
alent of the materials by other means. In ordering dis -
covery of such materials when the required showing has 
been made, the court shall protect against disclosure of the 
mental impressions, conclusions, opinions, or legal theories 
of an attorney or other representative of a party concerning 
the litigation.”
(Emphases added.) See, e.g., Lectrolarm Custom Sys., Inc. v. 
Pelco Sales, Inc., 212 FRD 567, 572 (ED Cal 2002) (granting 
protective order against subpoenaed communications where 
independent counsel defended insured, because the policy 
imposed insured’s duty to insurer and the commonality of 
interest meant privilege and work product doctrine were not 
waived).7
 Subsection (2) of ORS 465.483 addresses the quali-
fications of independent counsel and the potential to retain 
counsel from elsewhere. Subsection (2) provides in part:
 “(a)(A) Independent counsel retained by the insurer 
to defend the insured under the provisions of this section 
must be experienced in handling the type and complexity 
of the environmental claim at issue.
 “(B) If independent counsel who meet the require -
ments specified in this paragraph are not available within 
the insured’s community, then independent counsel from 
outside the insured’s community who meet the require -
ments of this paragraph must be considered.
 “* * * * *
 “(c) As used in this subsection, ‘experienced’ means an 
established environmental practice that includes substan -
tial defense experience in the type and complexity of envi -
ronmental claim at issue.”
 7 We do not here determine the protection from disclosure that may be 
afforded communications of independent counsel with an insured’s insurer. 
Rather, we note the potential for confidentiality insofar as the trial court in 
these circumstances is asked, after-the-fact, to determine whether Bingham 
McCutchen was independent counsel. We caution that the fact that the firm may 
have interacted with the insurer, in whatever way confidentially, may not fore -
close a post hoc determination that the firm was independent counsel. 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 323
Subsection (2) resembles the pivotal jury instruction in the 
prior case concerning the need for “competent representa -
tion” and the reasonableness of seeking nonlocal counsel, 
but subsection (2) addresses the concern with more specific-
ity. Subsection (2) requires that counsel have an “established 
environmental practice” and “ substantial defense experi -
ence in the type and complexity of the environmental claim 
at issue.” (Emphases added.)8
 Paragraph (3)(a) of ORS 465.483 provides the lim -
itation on the rates that are at issue here. That paragraph 
provides:
“The obligation of the insurer to pay fees to independent 
counsel and environmental consultants is based on the reg-
ular and customary rates for the type and complexity of 
environmental claim at issue in the community where the 
underlying claim arose or is being defended.”
The trial court seems to have read the fee limitation of para-
graph (3)(a) only to apply to local counsel. We respectfully 
disagree. Subsection (1) provides generally the “obligation of 
the insurer” to provide independent counsel under specified 
circumstances, and that general obligation includes the spe-
cific circumstance in which subparagraph (2)(a)(B) requires 
consideration of nonlocal counsel when necessary to assure 
experienced independent counsel. The fee limitation in sub-
section (3) on the “obligation of the insurer” applies to all of 
ORS 465.483. To say that the obligation “is based” on reg -
ular and customary rates of attorneys in the community 
where the claim is litigated is a polite way of saying that 
the obligation is to pay at the community rate. Therefore, 
the statute does contain a limitation on attorney fees of 
 8 Testimony before legislative committees stressed the concern for an 
insured’s right to experienced, independent counsel, including consideration of 
nonlocal counsel when qualified local counsel is unavailable. Joan Snyder of Stoel 
Rives, who had been Schnitzer’s defense attorney in the early years of the claim, 
was the leading witness expressing this concern and explaining the bill to legis -
lative committees. Audio Recording, Senate Committee on General Government, 
Consumer and Small Business Protection, SB 814, Mar 22, 2013, at 23:60-24:09, 
https://olis.oregonlegislature.gov (accessed Mar 13, 2026); Testimony, Senate 
Committee on General Government, Consumer and Small Business Protection, 
SB 814, Mar 22, 2013 (written statement of Joan Snyder); Audio Recording, 
House Committee on Consumer Protection and Government Efficiency, SB 814, 
May 9, 2013, at 13:00-24:12, https://olis.oregonlegislature.gov (accessed Mar 13, 
2026).
324 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
independent counsel, whether local or nonlocal. Accordingly, 
the trial court erred when construing ORS 465.483 to pro -
vide no limitation on nonlocal attorney fees.
 It is not clear from the trial court’s findings, how -
ever, whether the trial court took the step to determine 
if California counsel was serving as independent counsel 
after the statute took effect. 9 Wausau urges us to do so. 
Considering the earmarks of independent counsel in ORS 
465.483, there appears to be no dispute on this record 
that Continental undertook the defense of Schnitzer; that 
Continental issued a reservation of rights or warned of a 
potential shortfall of coverage; that Schnitzer rejected coun-
sel proffered by insurers; that Schnitzer did so based on con-
cerns about the experience of local counsel to defend com -
plex environmental claims; that Schnitzer chose Bingham 
McCutchen as “outside counsel”; and that California coun-
sel qualified as “experienced.” Also, there appears to be no 
dispute for purposes of this case as against Continental—a 
party here and in the prior case—about the adverse effect 
of the jury’s determination about the reasonableness and 
necessity of retaining Bingham McCutchen as nonlocal, 
competent counsel.10
 Nevertheless, it remains the task for the trial 
court to determine in the first instance whether Bingham 
McCutchen served, in substantial form, as independent 
counsel as we have described that role, or instead served as 
traditional insurance defense counsel.11 Also, the trial court 
should address in the first instance the effect of the stat -
ute’s limitation on fees incurred before the statute became 
 9 Because Wausau was not a party in the prior case, Wausau was not bound 
by the federal court’s determination that Schnitzer was estopped from asserting 
that California counsel was independent counsel.
 10 The trial court indicated in colloquy on cross-motions for summary judg -
ment that the insurers here are not in a position to “second-guess the jury 
verdict.” 
 11 By “substantial form,” we recognize that the statute prescribes what “inde-
pendent counsel” should be. That prescriptive perspective looks forward. Here, 
however, the court is given the task to look backward to characterize the role of 
counsel retained before ORS 465.483 was enacted. We recognize the challenge 
of a retrospective characterization, particularly where the original relationship 
was created before and continued after, enactment of the statute, however imper-
fectly and in whatever form.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 325
effective on June 10, 2013. 12 Therefore, we remand to the 
trial court to make those determinations.
IV. FOURTH ISSUE
Did the trial court err in concluding that certain Wausau 
policies did not contain aggregate liability limits and so 
should be included in the calculations for contribution?
 Wausau’s fourth assignment of error challenges 
the trial court’s granting of Continental’s motion for partial 
summary judgment on the availability of Wausau’s 1965-
70 policies for inclusion in the contribution calculations. In 
opposition to the motion, Wausau had contended that the 
policies had “aggregate limits” and that those limits had 
been exhausted by Wausau’s previous indemnity settlement 
payment of $400,000 to Schnitzer. Wausau contended that 
those policies should not be counted for contribution. After 
reviewing those policies, we agree with Continental that the 
policies did not contain an applicable aggregate limit and 
that the trial court did not err in granting its motion for 
summary judgment.
 Each of those Wausau policies issued to Schnitzer 
included a potential “aggregate limit” of $100,000 under its 
“Limits of Liability” with respect to property damage for 
operations pertaining to the appropriate policy periods. The 
later policies (1967-70), akin to the earlier policies (1965-67), 
described their aggregate limit with these terms:
“[T]he total liability of the company for all damages 
because of property damage to which this coverage applies 
* * * shall not exceed the limit of property damage liability 
stated in the schedule as ‘aggregate’:
“1. all property damage arising out of premises or opera -
tions rated on a remuneration basis[.]”
(Boldface omitted; emphasis added.) Read carefully, the 
aggregate limit was one that applied to property damage 
arising out of operations “rated on a remuneration basis.” 
The parties agree that the question whether an aggregate 
 12 Or Laws 2013, ch 350, §§ 7-9 (section 7 added ORS 465.483; section 8 
applied section 7 to environmental claims arising before, on or after the effec -
tive date of the act; section 9 provided the effective date of the act is its passage, 
June 10, 2013). 
326 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
limit governs property damage from operations depends 
on whether the operations were rated on a “remuneration 
basis,” and the parties further agree that “remuneration” 
means payroll.
 There is no dispute that the declarations pages 
provide one column that describes the “premium bases” for 
“operations and premises” with several printed options, but 
the form instead stated in manuscript form, in typewritten 
capital letters, that the premium base was “ESTIMATED 
SALES,” not remuneration (i.e., payroll). The next column 
on the page pertains to “Rates” for property damage lia -
bility with several printed options, but the form instead 
stated again in capital letters “PER $1000,” reflecting that 
the rates were determined for estimated sales per $1,000 in 
sales.
 Wausau contends that the declarations’ statement 
of the premium base was not dispositive. Wausau argues 
that the calculation of premiums and the rating of risks are 
different things. Assuming that there was no rating of risks 
in the declarations, Wausau says that policy terms require 
reference to Wausau manuals. A retired Wausau under -
writer had declared that Wausau’s practice, according to its 
manuals, was to develop a composite premium in which the 
rating for operations was remuneration. Wausau concludes 
that the declarations’ purported silence on rating and a ref-
erence to manuals together should mean that the policies’ 
aggregate limits applied.
 Continental responded, and the trial court agreed, 
that the aggregate limit provisions were not applicable, 
because the aggregate limits applied only when the risk 
of loss was rated on a remuneration basis, and the policies 
plainly stated premiums and rates that were rated based on 
estimated sales, not remuneration. Because that was so, the 
trial court explained, there was no need for reference to the 
manuals.
 We review the trial court’s ruling on summary 
judgment for whether there is a genuine issue of material 
fact and whether Continental was entitled to judgment as a 
matter of law. ORCP 47 C; Lewis v. Carson Oil Company, 204 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 327
Or App 99, 101, 127 P3d 1207, rev den, 341 Or 245 (2006). 
The interpretation of an insurance policy is a question of 
law to be decided by the court. Allianz Global Risks v. ACE 
Property & Casualty Ins. Co ., 367 Or 711, 734, 483 P3d 
1124 (2021), adh’d to as modified on recons, 368 Or 229, 489 
P3d 115 (2021). Contracts of insurance are to be construed 
according to the plain meaning of the terms and conditions 
of the policy, according to the “four-corners” rule, which 
excludes consideration of evidence outside the “four corners” 
of the policy itself. Id. (citing West Hills Development Co. v. 
Chartis Claims, 360 Or 650, 653, 385 P3d 1053 (2016)); ORS 
742.016(1).
 We understand the policies as did the trial court. 
The earlier policies (1965-67), like the later policies (1967-
70), provided that the aggregate limits apply to claims aris-
ing out of injury “caused by the ownership, maintenance, or 
use of the premises or operations rated on a remuneration 
premium basis[.]” (Emphasis added.) The declarations stated 
that the premium basis was to be estimated sales and the 
declarations further provided that the rates for that deter -
mination would be “per $1,000” of sales. It is true that the 
policies contained a potential reference to the manuals, but 
they did so stating,
 “The premium bases and rates for hazards described 
in the declarations are stated therein. Premium bases and 
rates for hazards not so described are those applicable in 
accordance with the manuals in use by the company.”
(Emphases added.) Because the declarations did state the 
bases for premiums and rating—that is, estimated sales 
and per $1,000, the declarations were not silent. Therefore, 
as Continental contends, it was not necessary or appropri -
ate for the trial court to consider Wausau’s manuals or its 
practice of rating on remuneration. The trial court did not 
err in finding that those policies lacked an aggregate limit, 
were not exhausted by the payments made, and were prop -
erly included in the contribution calculation.
V. FIFTH ISSUE
Did the trial court err in determining that Wausau had 
failed to prove that aggregate indemnity limits had been 
reached on its Northwest Pipe policies?
328 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
 In its fifth assignment, Wausau contends that the 
trial court erred in finding, after trial, that Wausau’s two 
policies from 1983 to 1985 for Schnitzer’s tenant, Northwest 
Pipe—policies in which Schnitzer was an additional 
insured—were not exhausted by a December 2014 settle -
ment, as well as prior indemnity payments by Wausau for 
Northwest Pipe. The settlement agreement between Wausau 
and Northwest Pipe stated:
“Northwest Pipe and Wausau agree that the above 
[$500,000] payment shall fully and finally exhaust the lim-
its of the Wausau policies, such that Wausau shall have no 
further obligations of defense, indemnity, or any further 
obligations of any kind under the Wausau policies with 
regard to these or any other claims. Northwest Pipe and 
Wausau further agree that the payment is final and nonre-
fundable. $80,236.59 of the settlement is allocable through 
indemnity and exhausts the remaining indemnity limits of 
the Wausau policies.”
In the Northwest Pipe case, the federal court had granted a 
motion from Wausau for entry of a good-faith finding on the 
settlement and a contribution bar under ORS 465.480(4).
 At trial, Wausau presented the settlement agree -
ment and the testimony of the claims adjuster who had 
signed the agreement and explained its contents. He also 
explained a spreadsheet document, which he identified as a 
“loss run.” It had been prepared by Wausau’s financial office 
at his request based on payment records, and it reflected 
payments made by Wausau on the Northwest Pipe policy 
claims. The document identified by code the type of payment 
on a claim such as a defense cost, an indemnity cost, or a 
litigation cost.
 The adjuster testified that he understood the stat -
utes that applied to the differentiation of payments as 
indemnity or defense and that he applied that understand -
ing in determining the code to be applied to each payment 
made by Wausau to Northwest Pipe. He explained that 
he would review an invoice on a claim and authorize pay -
ment in a particular amount and under a particular pay -
ment code, whereupon staff would issue the check. He tes -
tified that the insurer maintained a payment record in an 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 329
electronic database like a checkbook and that a report could 
be issued for payments made on a policy. He testified that he 
had requested the loss-run document on the Northwest Pipe 
policies and that payments with the code 531-1 reflected 
indemnity payments. The adjuster testified that the two 
policies issued to Northwest Pipe each had aggregate limits 
of $100,000, and that, between indemnity payments made 
on the policies, as reflected on the loss-run document, and 
the indemnity payment of $80,236.59 made under the set -
tlement agreement, Wausau’s payments to Northwest Pipe 
under the policies exceeded aggregate limits. Continental 
did not present any contrary evidence or argue that the pay-
ments were not, in fact, made for indemnity.
 The trial court concluded that Wausau had not 
proven its limits were exhausted. The court stated that, 
although Wausau’s adjuster testified that Wausau had paid 
Northwest Pipe $200,000 that it described as indemnity, 
“Wausau presented no evidence to allow the Court to deter-
mine what payments to Northwest Pipe were for indemnity, 
and specifically how the approximately $80,000 payment to 
Northwest Pipe in connection with [the settlement agree -
ment] reimbursed Northwest Pipe for indemnity payments 
it made.”
 Wausau argues that the trial court erred as a mat -
ter of law, because the uncontroverted evidence required the 
finding that the policies had been exhausted.
Continental responds that Wausau’s evidence was “limited 
and conclusory” and failed to describe why the payments 
should be considered as indemnity payments. Continental 
argues that the trial court was entitled to disbelieve the 
claims adjuster’s testimony although it had not been chal -
lenged in any way.
 We review the trial court’s findings to determine 
whether they are supported by any evidence in the record, 
Vukanovich v. Kine, 268 Or App 623, 633, 342 P3d 1075, 
adh’d to as modified on recons, 271 Or App 133, 349 P3d 
567 (2015), viewing the evidence, “as supplemented and but-
tressed by permissible derivative inferences, in the light 
most favorable to the trial court’s disposition and assess[ing] 
330 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
whether, when so viewed, the record was legally sufficient to 
permit that outcome.” Wilson v. Gutierrez, 261 Or App 410, 
411, 323 P3d 974 (2014) (internal quotation marks and cita-
tion omitted).
 We are unable to conclude that the record is legally 
sufficient to support the trial court’s adverse determination 
as to Wausau’s payments for indemnity. The trial court did 
not explain how it found the evidence to be insufficient; and 
the court did not find that the witness lacked credibility. 
Instead, the court appeared to state that, without more 
detail or corroboration, it could not confirm that the pay -
ments were indeed for indemnity. Be that as it may, the 
court could not avoid the indemnity evidence before it.
 Wausau put on uncontroverted testimony and docu-
mentation that Wausau had treated the payments as indem-
nity at the time they were made, and Continental did not 
dispute or disagree with that evidence. Further, the settle -
ment agreement reflected that the indemnity limit had been 
reached, and Continental did not challenge that evidence, 
either.
 In the trial court, Continental’s question on cross-
examination of Wausau’s adjuster had been whether the 
adjuster recalled that, in earlier litigation with Northwest 
Pipe, a judge had denied Wausau’s motion for partial sum-
mary judgment that, “as a matter of undisputed fact,” the 
Wausau policy limits had been exhausted. The adjuster 
did not recall. Continental does not pose the question as an 
argument on appeal, and that is no oversight. The denial of 
summary judgment in April 2014 predated the Northwest 
Pipe settlement agreement in December 2014—not to men -
tion its statement agreeing that the indemnity limits had 
been exhausted. 13 On appeal, Continental inveighs that 
the court’s finding of a good-faith settlement in the earlier 
Northwest Pipe litigation did not actually decide whether 
limits had been exhausted. Be that as it may, that distinc -
tion does not draw into question the adjuster’s testimony or 
documentation.
 13 Northwest Pipe Co. v. RLI Ins. Co. , No 3:09-CV-01126-BR, 2014 WL 
1406595 at *10 (D Or Apr 10, 2014) (denying motion in part because no judgment 
or settlement had occurred yet).
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 331
 In this case, Wausau’s evidence amounted to a 
prima facie showing that the settlement payments were for 
indemnity, and there was no evidence to dispute that show-
ing. As a result, the record does not support the trial court’s 
determination contrary to Wausau’s characterization of the 
payments as indemnity. Consequently, we conclude that the 
trial court erred in finding that Wausau had failed to estab-
lish that the aggregate limits on Northwest Pipe’s policies 
had been exhausted. Those policies should not have been 
included in the contribution calculation.
VI. CONCLUSION
 The complexity of the trial court’s task has been 
substantial, and this review does not tell the breadth of that 
court’s careful work. That said, we conclude that the trial 
court erred in including Continental’s attorney fee obliga -
tion under ORS 742.061 in the allocation of “covered dam -
ages.” The trial court did not err in considering prejudg -
ment interest in that allocation. The trial court erred in 
determining that the cap on attorney fees in ORS 465.483 
(3)(a) would make no difference in limiting the fees of non -
local counsel. On remand, the trial court should determine 
whether, in substantial form, California counsel served as 
“independent counsel” and, if so, calculate the impact of the 
community-rate cap on fees, when it became applicable. The 
trial court did not err in including, as without aggregate 
limits, certain Wausau 1965-70 policies in the contribution 
calculation. The court did err in including Wausau’s poli -
cies on Northwest Pipe in the contribution calculation. On 
remand, the trial court should reconsider the allocation for 
contribution among the insurers accordingly.
 Reversed in part; affirmed in part; and remanded 
for reconsideration of allocation.
 KAMINS, P. J., dissenting.
 I concur with the majority’s decision in every 
respect except for its conclusion that the trial court erred 
in including the federal environmental claim attorney fees 
as “recoverable costs” to be allocated under ORS 465.480(5). 
The majority reaches that conclusion because, in its view, 
the text and context of ORS 465.480(5) limit the term 
332 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
“recoverable costs” to only “defense or indemnity costs” that 
are covered under the terms of the insurers’ general liability 
policies. Because the federal environmental claim attorney 
fees are awarded under ORS 742.061 rather than an insur-
er’s policy, the majority reasons that they are not subject to 
reallocation in a contribution action.
 In my view, the text and context of the relevant pro-
visions of the Oregon Environmental Cleanup Assistance 
Act (OECAA) indicate that the legislature intended to 
include within the scope of the contribution right attorney 
fees awarded to the insured under ORS 742.061 because 
those fees are a necessary and foreseeable cost paid on the 
environmental claim. Here, where Wausau and Continental 
were both responsible for the defense costs; argued for the 
same position as to what those costs should be in communi-
cations with Schnitzer; and Schnitzer targeted Continental 
under a provision of the OECAA to successfully recover costs 
in the federal action beyond what Wausau and Continental 
decided to pay, the trial court did not err in allocating the 
federal environmental claim attorney fees in the contribu -
tion action. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
I. BACKGROUND
 The key difference between the majority’s view of 
the facts and mine is that Continental did not just “happen[ ] 
to share” the same position as “nonparty insurer Wausau” in 
the federal environmental claim. 351 Or App at 312. Rather, 
both insurers fought together vigorously for years in sup -
port of that position but, because and only because of the 
OECAA, Continental was required to sit alone in defense 
of that shared position in the federal court action. In those 
circumstances, because the OECAA was designed to com -
pensate a targeted insurer for costs it bore solely because 
it was the targeted insurer under the OECAA, Continental 
was entitled to contribution for all of those costs, including 
attorney fees under ORS 742.061.
 A little background helps clarify the extent of the 
insurers’ “shared position.” Continental and Wausau, along 
with a third insurer, Century, issued comprehensive gen -
eral liability policies to Schnitzer. After the Environmental 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 333
Protection Agency identified Schnitzer as a potentially 
responsible party for contamination of the Portland Harbor 
Superfund Site, Schnitzer tendered its legal defense to 
its insurers. Those insurers, including Continental and 
Wausau, “in an attempt to agree on a method for sharing 
the costs of defense,” “coordinated their efforts to determine 
the reasonable hourly rates to pay Schnitzer’s defense coun-
sel.” The insurers entered into a cost-sharing agreement 
where Continental would pay 70 percent of the defense costs 
incurred, Wausau would pay 20 percent, and Century would 
pay 10 percent.
 In 2003, the Portland law firm that had been defend-
ing Schnitzer determined that it could no longer continue 
the representation due to a conflict of interest. Schnitzer 
selected a Los Angeles-based firm to represent it after con -
cluding that there were no suitable local firms. The insur -
ers, including Wausau and Continental, collectively objected 
because the rates charged by the Los Angeles firm were 
much higher than Oregon firms, and argued that local qual-
ified counsel was available. Ultimately, Schnitzer retained 
the Los Angeles firm and the insurers agreed to reimburse 
Schnitzer at the lower hourly rate charged by the Oregon 
firms, with Schnitzer reserving the right to seek complete 
reimbursement from all insurers, including Wausau, at a 
later date.
 Between approximately 2003 to 2014, Continental, 
Wausau, and Century generally paid Schnitzer’s defense 
costs at the reduced hourly rates, splitting the bills as set 
out in the cost-sharing agreement. In 2010, Schnitzer filed 
a federal action to recover past defense costs at the Los 
Angeles firm’s full rates, as well as future defense costs 
based on those rates. As noted, leading up to the federal 
action, Schnitzer’s coverage disputes involved all three 
insurers. However, in the federal action, rather than fil -
ing a claim against all three insurers, Schnitzer targeted 
Continental under the provision of the OECAA that autho -
rizes an insured to choose one of its general liability policies 
to respond to the entire loss if not all policies are required to 
satisfy the insured’s claim. ORS 465.480(3)(b). Thus, under 
that provision, Schnitzer sought all of its unpaid defense 
334 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
costs from Continental and a declaration that Continental 
would pay 100 percent of Schnitzer’s defense costs going 
forward, subject to its policy limits. Thus, Schnitzer sought 
reimbursement for Wausau’s payment at the reduced rates 
via a federal lawsuit from Continental alone, not Wausau.
 In that federal action, Continental took the same 
position that it and the other insurers, including Wausau, 
had taken when Schnitzer first retained the Los Angeles 
firm—that it was not required to pay the Los Angeles firm’s 
higher rates because less expensive local counsel was avail-
able and qualified. A jury found in favor of Schnitzer, deter-
mining that Schnitzer had been justified in hiring the Los 
Angeles firm and that the firm’s higher rates were reason -
able under the circumstances. The district court awarded 
Schnitzer a judgment in the amount of $8.6 million, which 
represented all of the unpaid defense costs up to that point. 
The district court also awarded Schnitzer $3,756,037 in 
attorney fees under ORS 742.061 and $2,812,185 in prejudg-
ment interest under ORS 82.010. ORS 742.061 (providing for 
attorney fees as costs in an action after an insurer’s failure 
to settle or pay within six months of a proof of claim); ORS 
82.010 (providing for the accrual of prejudgment interest).
 Continental satisfied the federal judgment and 
subsequently brought this contribution action against its 
co-insurers, including Wausau. ORS 465.480(3)(b) (if the 
insured files suit against one insurer, the targeted insurer 
has a right to contribution under ORS 465.480(4) from all 
other insurers whose policies are triggered); ORS 465.480 
(4)(a) (“An insurer that has paid all or part of an environ -
mental claim may seek contribution from any other insurer 
that is liable or potentially liable to the insured and that has 
not entered into a good-faith settlement agreement with the 
insured regarding the environmental claim.”).
 Below, Wausau argued, among other things, that the 
federal environmental claim attorney fees that Continental 
paid to Schnitzer under ORS 742.061 are not subject to allo-
cation as “recoverable costs” under ORS 465.480(5) because 
“recoverable costs,” for purposes of that statute, include only 
defense or indemnity costs. See ORS 465.480(5) (“[i]f a court 
determines that the apportionment of recoverable costs 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 335
between insurers is appropriate, the court shall allocate the 
covered damages between the insurers” based on certain 
factors). The trial court rejected that argument, reasoning 
that when the legislature enacted the OECAA, “it was cer -
tainly aware of an insured’s ability to recover attorney fees 
under ORS 742.061,” and thus the legislature intended those 
fees to be “recoverable costs” subject to apportionment under 
ORS 465.480(5). The trial court indicated that whether 
the federal environmental claim attorney fees should be 
allocated in a contribution action is a matter of discretion 
and depends on circumstances such as the “conduct of the 
defendant insurer in the underlying litigation.” The court 
found that Wausau shared Continental’s position in the fed-
eral case that the Los Angeles firm’s rates were too high 
and thus concluded that the environmental-claim-litigation 
attorney fees should be included as “ ‘recoverable costs’ sub-
ject to equitable apportionment among insurers who have 
duties to defend [Schnitzer].”
II. ANALYSIS
 With that background in mind, I turn to my dis -
agreement with the majority’s conclusion that Continental 
was not entitled to contribution from Wausau for the attor-
ney fees that Continental paid to Schnitzer in the federal 
action. Determining the scope of a targeted insurer’s con -
tribution rights under the OECAA is a question of statu -
tory construction. In construing a statute, we “begin with a 
review of the statute’s text and context because they are the 
best evidence of the legislature’s intent * * * [and] consider 
relevant legislative history or statutory development, when 
helpful.” Progressive Universal Ins. Co. v. Voyles, 337 Or App 
381, 387, 563 P3d 371, rev den, 373 Or 736 (2025) (citation 
omitted).
A. Overview of Relevant Statutes
 The relevant provisions that refer to and govern 
the right to contribution include ORS 465.480(3)(b), ORS 
465.480(4)(a), and ORS 465.480(5). ORS 465.480(3)(b) allows 
an insured with multiple policies to target one insurer to 
respond to the entire loss if not all are required to satisfy the 
insured’s claim and provides that the targeted insurer has 
336 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
a right to contribution from other insurers whose policies 
are triggered. That statute provides that “[i]f the insured’s 
claim is not fully satisfied and the insured files suit on the 
claim against less than all the insurers,” the insured may 
choose which of the policies respond to the loss. (Emphasis 
added.) The next sentence provides that the “insured or the 
insurers have a right to contribution [under ORS 465.480(4)] 
from all other insurers whose policies are triggered.” Thus, 
by its plain terms, that provision contemplates a suit filed 
by an insured against a targeted insurer—a suit in which 
that targeted insurer may be liable for attorney fees under 
ORS 742.061—and refers to the targeted insurer’s right to 
contribution in that context.
 Turning to ORS 465.480(4)(a), that statute provides 
that “[a]n insurer that has paid all or part of an environ -
mental claim may seek contribution from any other insurer 
that is liable or potentially liable to the insured and that 
has not entered into a good-faith settlement agreement with 
the insured regarding the environmental claim.” The term 
“environmental claim” is defined in ORS 465.475(1) as “a 
claim for defense or indemnity submitted under a general 
liability insurance policy by an insured facing, or allegedly 
facing, potential liability for bodily injury or property dam -
age arising from a release of pollutants onto or into land, air 
or water.”
 As construed by the Supreme Court, the first 
clause of ORS 465.480(4)(a) “permit[s] an insurer that has 
paid ‘all or part of an environmental claim’ to seek con -
tribution, and, in barring contribution if there has been a 
settlement ‘regarding the environmental claim,’ the second 
use of the term should be understood to refer to the envi -
ronmental claim that has been paid.” Continental Casualty 
Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co., 373 Or 389, 401-02, 567 P3d 1059 
(2025) (Continental Casualty II) (emphases in original). In 
other words, an environmental claim, for purposes of ORS 
465.480(4)(a), is an insured’s claim for defense or indemnity 
costs that has been paid by the targeted insurer, including a 
claim that has been reduced to judgment and recovered on.
 Finally, ORS 465.480(5) directs a court who has 
“determine[d] that the apportionment of recoverable costs 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 337
between insurers is appropriate” to “allocate the covered 
damages between the insurers” based on certain factors, 
such as time on the risk, policy limits, and type of cover -
age under the policies. That is, when a targeted insurer who 
has paid an environmental claim and brings a contribu -
tion action under ORS 465.480(4)(a) against other insurers 
whose policies have been triggered, the court must deter -
mine which costs or “covered damages” the insurer is enti-
tled to recover and allocate those costs according to the 
mandatory factors.
B. “Environmental Claim” for Purposes of ORS 465.480 
(4)(a)
 To summarize, under the OECAA, an insured with 
multiple policies can sue one targeted insurer for an envi -
ronmental claim—defense or indemnity costs covered under 
those policies—and after the targeted insurer has paid that 
environmental claim, which has been reduced to a judgment 
as a result of litigation, the targeted insurer is authorized 
to seek contribution from other liable or potentially liable 
insurers for the environmental claim that it has paid. The 
OECAA does not define the scope of the contribution right. 
However, in my view, for purposes of ORS 465.480(4)(a), 
which is the operative statute that authorizes a targeted 
insurer to seek contribution, the “environmental claim” 
that the insurer has paid and may seek contribution for 
includes the necessary and foreseeable costs (including an 
attorney fee judgment) that the targeted insurer has paid 
to the insured on that claim. I reach that conclusion based 
on the context of ORS 465.480(4)(a), including the reference 
to the contribution right in ORS 465.480(3)(b), the Supreme 
Court’s interpretation of “environmental claim” in ORS 
465.480(4)(a), and the express purpose of the OECAA.
 First, as noted, ORS 465.480(3)(b) refers to the con-
tribution right in the context of an insured targeting one 
insurer— i.e., bringing its environmental claim against 
that insurer in a lawsuit. Presuming that the legislature 
was aware that the insured would be entitled to statutory 
attorney fees and interest in a lawsuit that it brought to 
enforce the targeted insurer’s defense obligation, that con -
text suggests that the legislature intended those costs to be 
338 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
recoverable in a contribution action. See Blachana, LLC v. 
Bureau of Labor and Industries , 354 Or 676, 691, 318 P3d 
735 (2014) (for purposes of statutory interpretation, “[w]e 
presume that the legislature was aware of existing law”).
 Second, the Supreme Court interpreted the term 
“environmental claim” in ORS 465.480(4)(a) to include all 
or part of a claim for defense or indemnity costs that the 
targeted insurer paid to the insured after the insured’s 
claim was reduced to a judgment in a coverage-litigation 
suit—specifically here, the federal environmental claim. 
Continental Casualty II , 373 Or at 403 (holding that an 
insurer that has paid all or part of an environmental 
claim, including a claim for defense costs reduced to a judg-
ment, has a right to contribution for those costs from other 
non-settling insurers). That interpretation, in combination 
with the legislature’s reference to the contribution right in 
the context of an insured bringing an environmental claim 
against a targeted insurer, indicates that the legislature 
intended to encompass necessary costs paid to the insured 
on the environmental claim—such as attorney fees and pre-
judgment interest—within the targeted insurer’s right to 
contribution.
 Third, the express purpose of the OECAA, which 
is to “promot[e] the fair and efficient resolution of environ -
mental claims” in order to address the “many insurance 
coverage disputes involving insureds who face potential lia-
bility for their ownership of roles at polluted sites in this 
state,” indicates that the legislature intended the contribu-
tion right to include costs directly associated with the envi-
ronmental claim. See ORS 465.478 (legislative findings); see 
also Sundermier v. PERS, 269 Or App 586, 595, 344 P3d 
1142, rev den, 357 Or 415 (2015) (“Statements of statutory 
policy are also considered useful context for interpreting a 
statute.”).
 Specifically, the OECAA promotes efficiency “by 
permitting an insured to target one among multiple insur -
ers for payment of all or part of an environmental claim,” 
and by encouraging settlement of environmental claims. 
Continental Casualty II, 373 Or at 402-03 (pointing to leg -
islative history showing that the legislature intended ORS 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 339
465.480(4)(a) to encourage settlement of environmental 
claims). And the OECAA promotes fairness by permitting 
“a targeted insurer that has borne more than its share of 
the cost of the environmental claim” to bring an action for 
contribution. Id. at 403.
 The context of those legislative goals indicates 
that the legislature intended to include within the scope of 
the contribution right the necessary and foreseeable costs 
paid by a targeted insurer to the insured on an environ -
mental claim. That interpretation promotes both fairness 
to the targeted insurer and efficiency by encouraging a non- 
targeted insurer with a shared obligation under its policy to 
settle with the insured. By contrast, allowing a non-settling 
insurer to receive a windfall by virtue of not being targeted 
by the insured in a lawsuit directly contravenes those legis-
lative goals. Absent the targeting provision in the OECAA, 
Wausau would have been a defendant in the federal action. 
Thus, in my view, under the OECAA, Continental is entitled 
to contribution from Wausau for the costs Continental paid 
to Schnitzer on the environmental claim, including attorney 
fees and interest.
 In the majority’s view, the text and context of ORS 
465.480(5) indicate that the terms “recoverable costs” and 
“covered damages” refer to defense or indemnity costs that 
are covered under the terms of the several insurers’ gen -
eral liability policies, and because attorney fees under ORS 
742.061 are awarded independently under a statute rather 
than an insurer’s policy, they are not “recoverable costs” 
subject to allocation in a contribution action. 1 351 Or App 
at 310-11. To support that conclusion, the majority points 
to references in the OECAA to “defense or indemnity costs” 
paid under a policy. See O R S 4 6 5 . 4 7 5 ( 1 ) ( d e fi n i n g “ e n v i-
ronmental claim” as a “claim for defense or indemnity 
 1 The majority also relies on Certain Underwriters v. Mass. Bonding and Ins. 
Co., 245 Or App 101, 260 P3d 830 (2011), in which we rejected allocation of statutory 
attorney fees in a contribution claim. As the majority acknowledges, however, under 
ORS 465.480(4)(d), which was enacted after Certain Underwriters , “[c]ontribution 
rights by and among insurers under this section preempt all common law contribu -
tion rights, if any, by and between insurers for environmental claims.” 351 Or App at 
312 n 3; Or Laws 2013, ch 350, § 4. Thus, the scope of an insurer’s contribution rights 
is purely a statutory question, and, as discussed, the text and context of the OECAA 
indicate that the legislature intended to include within the scope of the contribution 
right attorney fees awarded to an insured under ORS 742.061.
340 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
submitted under a general liability insurance policy”); 
ORS 465.480(3)(a) (requiring an insurer with a duty to pay 
“defense or indemnity costs” under a policy that provides 
that the insurer must pay all sums, to pay all “defense or 
indemnity costs” regardless of other insurance that may 
provide coverage for the same claim); ORS 465.480(3)(d) 
(providing that a targeted insurer “may not be required 
to pay defense or indemnity costs in excess of the applica -
ble policy limits”); 351 Or App at 307-09. That context, in 
the majority’s view, indicates that “environmental claim” 
in ORS 465.480(4)(a), and “recoverable costs” and “covered 
damages” in ORS 465.480(5) refer only to the defense and 
indemnity costs promised in the policy.
 In my view, the majority’s conclusion is inconsistent 
with the context of the OECAA. First, the provisions that 
the majority relies on for the proposition that the contribu -
tion right is limited to defense or indemnity costs covered 
under a policy do not govern or even refer to the contribution 
right. Rather, the references to “defense or indemnity costs” 
in those provisions are in the context of the insurer’s duties 
under the policies.
 By contrast, ORS 465.480(3)(b), which expressly 
refers to the contribution right, does so in the context of a 
lawsuit brought by the insured against the targeted insurer. 
In determining what the legislature intended the scope of 
the contribution right to be, a provision that specifically 
references the contribution right provides more relevant 
context in which to make that determination than provi -
sions that do not reference the contribution right. And as 
discussed above, ORS 465.480(3)(b)’s reference to a targeted 
insurer’s right to contribution in the context of a lawsuit 
brought by the insured—a lawsuit that may expose the 
targeted insurer to attorney fees under ORS 742.061— 
indicates that the legislature intended to include in the 
scope of the contribution right the necessary costs associ -
ated with the lawsuit.
 Second, the Supreme Court’s interpretation of 
“environmental claim” in ORS 465.480(4)(a) to include a 
judgment paid by the targeted insurer suggests a broader 
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 341
meaning of that term that would include not just defense 
and indemnity costs covered under the policy, but also the 
necessary and foreseeable costs that the targeted insurer 
paid to the insured on the claim. In the appeal of this case, 
the Supreme Court determined that the federal claim 
that Schnitzer brought against Continental under the 
OECAA and the ensuing judgment that Continental paid 
to Schnitzer was an “environmental claim” for purposes 
of Continental’s right to contribution under the OECAA. 
Continental Casualty II, 373 Or at 401. In other words, the 
“environmental claim” was not just the costs owed under the 
policy but was the federal litigation that resulted in a judg-
ment against Continental. Accordingly, under that inter -
pretation, the “recoverable costs” and “covered damages” 
subject to allocation under ORS 465.480(5) would include 
attorney fees and prejudgment interest paid to the insured 
as part of the environmental claim—here, the federal claim 
brought under the OECAA—notwithstanding the fact that 
those costs are awarded under separate statutes and not the 
insurer’s policy.2
 Third, as discussed above, the purpose of the 
OECAA is to promote the fair and efficient resolution of 
environmental claims and to encourage settlement. As dis -
cussed above, the limitation that the majority places on the 
contribution right is inconsistent with that purpose because 
it would reward a non-settling insurer who shared the same 
obligations as the targeted insurer. Thus, I conclude that the 
more consistent and equitable interpretation of the relevant 
provisions of the OECAA indicate that an “environmental 
claim” for purposes of the contribution right includes the 
necessary and foreseeable costs paid by the targeted insurer 
to the insured.
 2 Although prejudgment interest is awarded under a separate statute, the 
majority concludes that because the “duty to defend the insured is one of the 
shared duties of insurers with coverage, * * * sums due on unpaid bills defending 
the insured are likewise within the scope of ‘covered damages’ or ‘recoverable 
costs’ under ORS 465.480(5).” 351 Or App at 315-16. That conclusion, in my view, 
is inconsistent with the majority’s conclusion that attorney fees awarded under 
ORS 742.061 are not within the scope of the contribution right. Both prejudg -
ment interest and attorney fees arise out of the insurers’ shared duties because 
they are incurred in enforcing the insured’s right to unpaid defense costs covered 
under a policy.
342 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
C. Alternatively, “recoverable costs” are not limited to “defense 
or indemnity costs” owed under the policy.
 Alternatively, if the majority is correct that “envi -
ronmental claim” for purposes of the contribution right 
under ORS 465.480(4)(a) includes only defense and indem -
nity costs covered under the policy, the legislature’s use of 
“recoverable costs” in ORS 465.480(5) provides an alterna-
tive construction of the OECAA that would permit a trial 
court to include attorney fees awarded to the insured under 
ORS 742.061 as costs to be allocated in a contribution action.
 That statute provides that “[i]f a court determines 
that the apportionment of recoverable costs between insurers 
is appropriate, the court shall allocate the covered damages 
between the insurers before the court,” based on certain fac-
tors. (Emphases added.) Adhering to the principle that when 
the legislature uses different terms, we generally assume 
that it intends different meanings for those terms, it is sig -
nificant that the legislature used “recoverable costs” in the 
first clause and “covered damages” in the second clause. See 
State v. Newell, 238 Or App 385, 392, 242 P3d 709 (2010) (“If 
the legislature uses different terms in statutes, we generally 
will assume that the legislature intends different meanings 
for those terms.” (Internal quotation marks omitted.)).
 In the first clause, the statute refers to “recoverable 
costs” in the context of the costs that a court determines are 
appropriate to apportion between insurers. In the second 
clause, the statute directs the trial court to allocate “covered 
damages” between the insurers based on certain mandatory 
factors. Assuming, as we “generally” do, that the legislature 
intended those terms to have different meanings, “recover-
able costs” refers to the broad category of costs that a court 
has discretion to determine is appropriate to apportion 
between insurers, and “covered damages” refers to a specific 
subset of those costs that the legislature intended to be allo-
cated based on mandatory factors. 3 Id. Had the legislature 
 3 In my view, under this alternative construction of ORS 465.480(5), the 
statute’s reference to a trial court’s “determin[ation] that the apportionment of 
recoverable costs between insurers is appropriate,” suggests that the legislature 
intended to grant the court discretion to not only determine that certain costs 
that are not “covered damages” are “recoverable,” but also to deviate from the 
mandatory factors in allocating those costs if appropriate. (Emphasis added.)
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 343
intended for only “covered damages” to be allocated in a con-
tribution action, it would have used “covered damages” in 
both clauses.
 The majority justifies reading different terms in 
the same sentences to mean the same thing through the 
proposition that rules of interpretation, including the rule 
that when the legislature uses different words, we assume 
it intends those words to mean different things, “are mere 
assumptions that ‘always’ give way to better evidence 
of legislative intent.” 351 Or App at 311; see Marshall v. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP , 371 Or 536, 555-56, 539 
P3d 766 (2023) (rejecting plaintiffs’ argument that because 
the legislature used different terms in the same statute it 
intended different meanings because “the text and legisla -
tive history supply more direct evidence” of the legislature’s 
intent). I am not persuaded that there is “better” or “more 
direct” evidence of legislative intent that overcomes the 
assumption that the legislature’s use of different terms— 
“recoverable costs” and “covered damages”—indicates that 
the legislature intended those terms to have different mean-
ings. To begin with, as the majority notes, we are not aware 
of any legislative history that sheds light on what the leg -
islature intended when it used “recoverable costs” in ORS 
465.480(5). Thus, the majority’s conclusion that “recover -
able costs” and “covered damages” mean the same thing— 
notwithstanding the general assumption that when the leg-
islature uses different words it intends those words to have 
different meanings—rests on the proposition that there is 
“better” evidence that the legislature intended those terms 
to mean the same thing, and that “better evidence” is the 
context of ORS 465.480(5) that indicates that “covered dam-
ages” are defense or indemnity costs.
 In my view, the context of the statute supports the 
opposite conclusion—that the term “recoverable costs” is 
not synonymous with “covered damages” and thus does not 
refer only to “defense or indemnity costs.” First, none of the 
relevant statutes expressly limit an insurer’s contribution 
rights to “defense or indemnity costs.” See, e.g., Blacknall v. 
Board of Parole, 348 Or 131, 140-41, 229 P3d 595 (2010) (leg-
islative silence can be an indicator of policy choices). I begin 
344 Continental Casualty Co. v. Argonaut Ins. Co. (A176763)
with ORS 465.480(3)(b), which, as noted, provides that “[i]f 
the insured’s claim is not fully satisfied and the insured files 
suit on the claim against less than all the insurers,” the 
insured may target one insurer, and that insurer has a right 
to contribution [under ORS 465.480(4)]. Notably, the statute 
does not expressly provide that insurers have a “right to con-
tribution for defense or indemnity costs .” Thus, the statute 
contemplates a lawsuit brought by an insured against a tar-
geted insurer and provides that the targeted insurer has a 
“right to contribution” for the costs incurred due to its being 
targeted from other insurers whose policies are triggered, 
and the statute does not expressly limit the scope of that 
“right to contribution” to defense or indemnity costs.
 Similarly, ORS 465.480(4)(a) provides that “[a]n 
insurer that has paid all or part of an environmental claim 
may seek contribution from any other” non-settling insurer, 
but it does not expressly provide that an insurer “may seek 
contribution for defense or indemnity costs .” And although 
it references an “environmental claim,” which is defined 
as “defense or indemnity” costs, it does so for the purpose 
of prescribing who may seek contribution, not for the pur -
pose of limiting the scope of the costs an insurer may seek 
from other insurers in a contribution action. ORS 465.475(1) 
(defining environmental claim).
 That subsection is followed by subsection (5), which, 
as discussed above, refers to the trial court’s “deter- 
min[ation] that the apportionment of recoverable costs 
between insurers is appropriate” and directs the court to 
allocate “covered damages” based on certain mandatory fac-
tors. Again, similar to every other provision in the OECAA 
that governs or refers to contribution rights, that provision 
does not expressly limit allocation to “defense or indemnity 
costs.” Rather, it refers to “recoverable costs” and then nar-
rows that term to “covered damages.” Thus, the absence 
of an express limitation on the scope of a targeted insur -
er’s contribution rights indicates that the legislature did 
not intend to restrict “recoverable costs” to just defense or 
indemnity costs and not any of the costs associated with 
defense or indemnity.
Cite as 351 Or App 301 (2026) 345
 Second, the stated purpose of the OECAA, which, 
as noted, is to “promot[e] the fair and efficient resolution 
of environmental claims,” provides additional context that 
supports the contention that “recoverable costs” are not lim-
ited to just defense or indemnity costs. ORS 465.478. As dis-
cussed above, in the context of that express purpose, allow-
ing a targeted insurer to broadly recover the costs it paid 
to the insured in litigating the insured’s claim—including 
attorney fees and prejudgment interest—is consistent with 
that purpose.
III. CONCLUSION
 In sum, I construe “environmental claim” for pur -
poses of the contribution right to include attorney fees and 
prejudgment interest paid to the insured by the targeted 
insurer, or, alternatively, that the term “recoverable costs” 
in ORS 465.480(5) refers to a broader category of costs than 
defense or indemnity costs covered under a policy. And under 
the circumstances here, where both Wausau and Continental 
underpaid on the environmental claim (Schnitzer’s defense 
costs); Wausau shared Continental’s position in the federal 
environmental claim targeting Continental that the insur -
ers should not be required to reimburse Schnitzer at the 
higher rates; and Continental paid the entire claim as the 
targeted insurer, including fees and interest, after Schnitzer 
prevailed in the federal environmental claim, the trial court 
did not err in allocating the attorney fees in the federal 
action. Thus, I respectfully dissent.
