A184470
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/01/atwood_v._dept._of_transportation_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928106/atwood-v-dept-of-transportation/
Caption: Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
Date: 2026-07-01

No. 596 July 1, 2026 77
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
Jim A. ATWOOD, 
 individually and in his capacity as Trustee of the 
Jim A. Atwood Trust dated August 10, 2017, 
and J.A. Atwood Corporation, an Oregon corporation,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
OREGON DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, 
an administrative agency; 
Kris Strickler, an individual; 
and Debbie Lund, an individual,
Defendants-Respondents.
Marion County Circuit Court
21CV05571; A184470
Lindsay R. Partridge, Judge.
Argued and submitted October 15, 2025.
Nicholas A. Kampars argued the cause and filed the 
briefs for appellants.
Carson L. Whitehead, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondents. Also on the brief were Dan 
Rayfield, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor 
General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
JOYCE, J.
Affirmed.
78 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 79
 JOYCE, J.
 Plaintiffs appeal from the trial court’s dismissal of 
their first amended complaint (FAC), arguing that it erred 
in (1) determining that the court lacked subject matter 
jurisdiction to hear all six of plaintiffs’ claims, and (2) find -
ing that plaintiffs failed to state claims of relief for their two 
tort claims. We affirm with respect to plaintiffs’ first three 
claims because plaintiffs did not assign error to the trial 
court’s alternative bases for dismissal. As for the remaining 
claims, we conclude that the trial court did not err in grant-
ing defendants’ motions to dismiss those claims for lack of 
subject matter jurisdiction and affirm.
I. FACTS
A. Plaintiffs’ FAC Facts
 “We state the facts as alleged in plaintiff[s’] com -
plaint, accepting as true [their] well-pleaded allegations 
with the benefit of all favorable factual inferences.” Wallace 
v. State ex rel PERB, 245 Or App 16, 18, 263 P3d 1020 (2011). 
Plaintiffs owned a building on West Burnside Street in 
Portland, Oregon, at all material times of the events at issue 
in this case. The building has a west-facing wall that plain-
tiffs have used for commercial advertising purposes since 
obtaining an interest in the building (Wall Sign). Over the 
years, plaintiffs have both directly leased use of the Wall 
Sign to advertisers and entered into agreements with third 
parties that would broker the lease of the use of the Wall 
Sign to specific advertisers.
 In 2009, plaintiff Atwood Corporation entered into 
a lease agreement with OnSite Advertising Services, LLC 
(OnSite), where plaintiff agreed to lease “the exterior build-
ing vertical wall * * * for the purpose of displaying painted 
mural, painted advertising sign, signage applied by way of 
other materials * * * or signage affixed by bolts or screws 
anchored into the building * * *.” OnSite was to act as both 
a lessee and as a broker or agent for plaintiffs, and both 
parties “intended for the [agreement] to provide a transitory 
right for OnSite and any successor in interest to manage 
the Wall Sign for a period of time, but never contemplated 
80 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
the outright sale of the Wall Sign or any rights associated 
therewith from plaintiffs to OnSite or its successors.”
 In 2012, defendant Oregon Department of 
Transportation (ODOT) designated West Burnside Street—
where plaintiffs’ building is located—as a state highway 
subject to the permitting requirements under the Oregon 
Motorist Information Act (OMIA). See ORS 377.700 - 377.877. 
The OMIA governs the placement of signs along Oregon 
highways and “prohibits all but certain pre-existing ‘out -
door advertising signs,’ and restricts the placement of those 
signs.” Outdoor Media Dimensions Inc. v. State of Oregon , 
331 Or 634, 638, 20 P3d 180 (2001) (citation omitted). Under 
ORS 377.712(2), “the owner of any outdoor advertising sign 
visible from a road or street that is designated as a state 
highway after May 30, 2007, is entitled to the issuance of an 
outdoor advertising sign permit for the sign upon applica -
tion by the owner.”
 In early 2014, plaintiffs consented to OnSite assign-
ing the Wall Sign lease to OnDisplay, who would act as the 
broker/lessee, and extended the lease through June 2019. 
The parties left all other lease provisions intact. Later that 
year, OnDisplay realized that the Wall Sign had been ren -
dered nonconforming due to the state highway designation 
and thus required a preexisting sign permit to comply with 
the OMIA. OnDisplay subsequently applied for a permit in 
November 2014 without notifying plaintiffs. Upon receiving 
OnDisplay’s application, ODOT emailed OnDisplay noting 
that OnDisplay needed to show proof of “landowner consent” 
on the permit application for approval.1 ODOT also informed 
OnDisplay that no formal form was necessary, as “[s]ome -
thing on letter head and signed with owner name and con -
tact info will suffice.”
 OnDisplay subsequently approached plaintiffs for a 
consent letter to obtain a permit. Plaintiff Atwood provided 
OnDisplay with a consent letter that stated (1) that Atwood 
owned the building, (2) that Atwood works with OnDisplay 
to sell advertising on the Wall Sign, (3) that OnDisplay was 
authorized to apply for a permit, and (4) that “[t]his permit 
 1 See OAR 734-060-0000(4)(e) (“All applications must include written proof 
that the landowner consents to have applicant maintain the proposed sign.”).
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 81
shall be in the name of: OnDisplay Advertising, J A Atwood, 
J A Atwood Corporation, their successors and assigns, as his 
or its interest may appear.” OnDisplay submitted another 
permit application that listed OnDisplay as the “applicant” 
and Atwood as the “property owner” and the consent letter 
to ODOT. ODOT then issued a permit for the Wall Sign (the 
2015 Permit) in the name of OnDisplay only, without notify-
ing plaintiffs or creating a public notice of the decision.
 In July 2015, OnDisplay notified Atwood that 
OnDisplay had sold its assets to Lamar and that the sale 
would result in the transfer of its lease of the Wall Sign to 
Lamar. OnDisplay did not notify plaintiffs that the 2015 
Permit had been issued to OnDisplay alone. At the same 
time, OnDisplay sent ODOT a letter requesting that ODOT 
transfer the 2015 Permit to Lamar. After receiving a trans-
fer fee from Lamar, ODOT transferred the 2015 Permit to 
Lamar without notice to plaintiffs.
 In June 2018, plaintiffs notified Lamar that it would 
be terminating its lease on June 30, 2019. Lamar responded 
that “plaintiffs would be able to use the Wall Sign for adver-
tising purposes ‘in the future with a different tenant than 
Lamar.’ ”
 In February 2019, plaintiffs first learned that they 
were not listed as the owners of the 2015 Permit. Plaintiff 
Atwood contacted ODOT and spoke with Defendant Debbie 
Lund, a program analyst for ODOT’s Outdoor Advertising 
Program, requesting that ODOT either cancel the 2015 
Permit or transfer it to plaintiffs. Lund denied the request, 
stating that the OMIA did not allow for “partial ownership 
of permits.” In May 2019, plaintiffs sent a letter to ODOT 
explaining that (1) “plaintiffs were entitled to the [2015] 
Permit because they owned the Wall Sign,” (2) “plaintiffs 
intended to own the [2015] Permit,” and (3) “plaintiffs had a 
right to use the Wall Sign as the landowner.” Plaintiffs also 
requested in the letter that the 2015 Permit be transferred 
to plaintiffs or cancelled so that plaintiffs could apply for a 
new permit. ODOT never responded to that letter.
 In June 2019, plaintiffs also sent a letter to Lamar, 
with ODOT copied, instructing Lamar to not surrender or 
82 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
apply for a relocation credit2 for the 2015 Permit “until the 
issues regarding ownership were resolved.” Shortly after 
sending that letter, plaintiffs’ lease with Lamar terminated. 
On July 22, 2019, based on a request from Lamar, ODOT 
cancelled the 2015 Permit and issued a relocation credit to 
Lamar without informing plaintiffs about either action. On 
August 9, 2019, plaintiffs provided a notice of their tort claim 
pursuant to ORS 30.275(6), and the Oregon Department of 
Administrative Services confirmed receipt of that notice 
shortly after.
B. Procedural Facts
 In September 2019, plaintiffs applied for a new 
OMIA permit (the 2019 Permit Application) to advertise on 
the Wall Sign. ODOT denied the application, and plaintiffs 
challenged that denial in a contested case hearing before 
an administrative law judge (ALJ). After the hearing, 
ODOT issued a final order, denying plaintiffs’ 2019 Permit 
Application.3 The final order distinguished the issue of the 
2019 Permit Application from the issue of the 2015 permit:
 2 “ ‘Relocation credit’ means a credit for future relocation of a permitted out -
door advertising sign issued in lieu of a relocation permit under ORS 377.767.” 
ORS 377.710(25).
 3 The final order upheld ODOT’s denial of the 2019 Permit Application 
because (1) “the dimensions of the sign described in [plaintiffs’] permit appli -
cation exceed[ed] the dimension limits set forth in ORS 377.745” and “would be 
located within 100 feet of three other outdoor advertising signs on [plaintiffs’] 
property,” and (2) plaintiffs did not “persuasively establish[ ] by the preponder -
ance of the evidence that [plaintiffs are] the owner[s] of a preexisting noncon -
forming sign entitled to a permit under the provisions of ORS 377.712.” With 
respect to the second conclusion, the final order explained:
 “With that framework in mind, it is apparent that [plaintiffs were] not 
the owner[s] of ‘the sign’ that existed in 2012 when the section of Highway 
596 at issue in this case became subject to the OMIA. To be sure, the sign at 
that time was attached to [plaintiffs’] wall in a way that rendered the wall 
part of the foundation elements for the sign, and thus a component of the ‘sign 
structure.’ But, the thing that was designed, used, or intended for advertis -
ing purposes was not the wall. The wall has a purpose completely unrelated 
to its use as a foundation element for a sign. Rather, the sign was the com -
bination of the cable system, the illuminating lights, and the printed vinyl 
material which—when mounted to the west wall space—displayed a message 
for the public to see. That [plaintiffs’] wall was part of the foundation for 
displaying that sign (along with the anchors imbedded in the wall and the 
building foundation below) does not lead to the conclusion that the wall was 
the sign; just as [plaintiffs’] building is not a sign merely because it serves as 
a foundational element for a billboard erected on its roof.”
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 83
“At issue in this hearing is whether [plaintiffs’] 
present application for a permit should be granted or denied. 
Whatever issues [plaintiffs’] may have had with actions 
taken by [ODOT] with respect to the former permit—and 
whatever grievances [plaintiffs] may have with the former 
permit holder—those matters fall outside the scope of this 
contested case. [Plaintiffs’] notice or knowledge of events 
concerning the former permit is not relevant to the matters 
at issue here: specifically whether [plaintiffs are] entitled 
to an outdoor advertising sign permit as the owner[s] of 
a preexisting sign or whether [ODOT] must deny [their] 
application under the provisions of ORS 377.715.”
Plaintiffs sought judicial review of that final order in this 
court, and we affirmed.4 Jim A. Atwood Trust v. ODOT, 341 
Or App 417, 574 P3d 479 (2025).
 Before ODOT issued its final order on the 2019 
Permit Application, plaintiffs filed the lawsuit in this case 
against ODOT, Lund, and Kris Strickler, the director of 
ODOT at the time of the events at issue in this case, raising 
six claims for relief:
(1) a claim seeking mandatory injunctive relief for viola -
tion of plaintiffs’ federal substantive due process rights 
under 42 USC section 1983 or, in the alternative, a 
declaration pursuant to ORS 28.020 that defendants’ 
actions deprived and infringed upon plaintiffs’ rights 
under the United States Constitution;
(2) a claim seeking mandatory injunctive relief for vio -
lations of plaintiffs’ federal free speech rights under 
42 USC section 1983 or, in the alternative, a declara -
tion pursuant to ORS 28.020 that defendants’ actions 
 4 We concluded that the 2015 Permit issued to OnDisplay was a final order 
“constitut[ing] ODOT’s final determination with respect to the permit ownership 
for the sign on petitioner’s building, which precluded ODOT from issuing any 
other permit for that preexisting sign.” Jim A. Atwood Trust v. ODOT , 341 Or 
App 417, 422, 574 P3d 479 (2025). With respect to the permit’s cancellation and 
issuance of relocation credits to Lamar, we assumed without deciding that “the 
removal of the vinyl display, lights, and cables was the removal of the sign for 
purposes of the relocation credit” and concluded that all the other criteria to 
qualify for a relocation credit were satisfied. Id. at 423. Thus, because the sign 
had been removed at the time plaintiffs submitted the 2019 Permit Application, 
“there was no longer any sign for which ODOT could provide a permit,” requir -
ing denial of the application. Id. at 423-24. Finally, we concluded that plaintiffs’ 
challenge to the denial of the 2019 Permit Application was an “impermissible 
collateral attack on the 2015 [P]ermit issued to Lamar.” Id. at 424.
84 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
deprived and infringed upon plaintiffs’ rights under the 
United States Constitution;
(3) a claim seeking mandatory injunctive relief for vio -
lations of plaintiffs’ state free speech rights or, in the 
alternative, a declaration pursuant to ORS 28.020 that 
defendants’ actions deprived and infringed upon plain-
tiffs’ rights under the Oregon Constitution;
(4) a claim for declaratory judgment under ORS 28.020, 
seeking a declaration stating that defendants’ conduct 
infringed on plaintiffs’ federal and state constitutional 
rights;
(5) a claim seeking compensatory damages for the tort of 
interference with prospective economic relations under 
the Oregon Tort Claims Act; and
(6) a claim seeking compensatory damages for the tort 
of interference with contractual relations under the 
Oregon Tort Claims Act.
Defendants moved to dismiss all of plaintiffs’ claims for lack 
of subject matter jurisdiction and for failure to state a claim. 
As explained in a letter opinion, the trial court dismissed 
all the claims as to the individual defendants, Lund and 
Strickler, for failure to state a claim for relief because the 
FAC lacked allegations that either defendant had “engaged 
in wrongful conduct.” The court also concluded that plain -
tiffs’ federal and state free speech claims (claims 2 and 3) 
failed to state a claim for relief because the FAC did not 
“explicitly set forth the exact relief sought other than ‘a 
declaration that [ODOT’s] conduct and its application 
of the OMIA on the facts of this case violates [plaintiffs’] 
rights under the United States and Oregon Constitutions.’ ” 
Finally, the court concluded that plaintiffs’ claim for inter-
ference with contractual relations (claim 6) failed to state 
a claim because “Atwood terminated the lease with Lamar 
prior to ODOT cancelling the permit and issuing the relo -
cation credits,” thus “[a]ny action taken by ODOT that may 
have interfered with Atwood and Lamar’s contract occurred 
after the contract was no longer in existence.”
 In the same letter opinion, the court also deter -
mined that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over all of 
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 85
the claims, concluding that the exclusive avenue for chal -
lenging the agency actions at issue was through the judicial 
review procedures outlined in the Oregon Administrative 
Procedures Act (APA), ORS 183.310 to 183.745. The court 
specifically explained:
“[T]he APA provides the exclusive remedy to challenge the 
refusal to transfer the permit or vacate the cancellation of 
the permit. To this court’s knowledge, [plaintiffs] did not 
administratively challenge ODOT’s decision regarding the 
[2015 Permit]. [Plaintiffs’] requested remedy for a man -
datory injunction and declaratory relief from this court is 
precluded because [they] had a remedy under [the] APA. 
This is true even if [plaintiffs] would not have prevailed in 
[their] attempt to obtain it.”
The court similarly found that plaintiffs’ tort claims failed 
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction because the facts nec-
essary to establish the second element of the claims “consti-
tute allegations of agency error and Oregon law requires the 
use of the APA as the exclusive procedure for challenging 
these facts.”
 The court entered a general judgment dismissing 
all of plaintiffs’ claims, and this appeal followed.
II. ANALYSIS
 On appeal, plaintiffs assign error to the trial court’s 
dismissal of all six of plaintiffs’ claims for lack of subject 
matter jurisdiction and to the trial court’s dismissal of 
plaintiffs’ tort claims for failure to state a claim.
A. Scope of the Appeal
 Before we determine whether the trial court erred 
in dismissing plaintiffs’ claims, we must answer the thresh-
old question of whether we should address the dismissal of 
all six of plaintiffs’ claims. Defendants point out that plain-
tiffs failed to assign error to the trial court’s dismissal of 
individual defendants Lund and Strickler, who were the 
only defendants5 subject to plaintiffs’ section 1983 claims 
 5 With respect to plaintiffs’ two section 1983 claims (claims 1 and 2), because 
the trial court dismissed the two individual defendants for failure to state a claim, 
ODOT was the sole remaining defendant of those claims. To bring a section 1983 
claim, a plaintiff must allege that their federal rights were violated by a “person” 
86 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
(claims 1 and 2), for failure to state a claim against them. 
Plaintiffs also failed to assign error to the trial court’s alter-
native basis for dismissal of plaintiffs’ free speech claims 
(claims 2 and 3) for failure to state a claim. As a result, 
defendants argue that the correctness of the trial court’s 
dismissal of the individual defendants and of the free speech 
claims are not before this court, and plaintiffs’ failure to 
assign error to those independent and alternative rulings 
prevent us from granting relief on those claims. See Strawn 
v. Farmers Ins. Co., 350 Or 336, 369-70, 258 P3d 1199, adh’d 
to on recons , 350 Or 521, 256 P3d 100 (2011) (concluding 
that we erred in reaching the defendants’ challenge because 
the trial court had “articulated two alternative reasons” for 
denying the defendants’ motions and, on appeal, the defen-
dants “failed to preserve any challenge [to those reasons] on 
which the trial court’s order was alternatively based”).
 Plaintiffs do not dispute that they did not assign 
error to those rulings in their opening brief. ORAP 5.45(1) 
(“Assignments of error are required in all opening briefs of 
appellants and cross-appellants. No matter claimed as error 
will be considered on appeal unless the claim of error * * * 
is assigned as error in the opening brief in accordance with 
this rule * * *.”). However, they contend that the trial court’s 
determination that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over 
all of plaintiffs’ claims nullified the court’s concurrent rul -
ings on defendants’ motions to dismiss for failure to state a 
claim. Plaintiffs argue that the trial court’s decision on sub-
ject matter jurisdiction “should have caused the trial court 
to refrain from further substantive rulings on defendants’ 
other ORCP 21 motions.” Plaintiffs point out that, had the 
trial court only ruled on defendants’ motions to dismiss for 
failure to state a claim, plaintiffs could have requested leave 
to file an amended complaint to fix the deficiencies under 
ORCP 21 A(2)(c).6 See Wallace, 245 Or App at 24 n 4 (“[I]t 
acting under color of state law, not by a state agency. Howlett v. Rose, 496 US 356, 
365, 110 S Ct 2430, 110 L Ed 2d 332 (1990) (“[T]he [s]tate and arms of the [s]tate, 
which have traditionally enjoyed Eleventh Amendment immunity, are not subject 
to suit under [section] 1983 in either federal court or state court.”). Because ODOT 
is a state agency and not a “person,” it cannot be subject to a section 1983 suit.
 6 “If the court grants a motion to dismiss, the court may enter judgment in 
favor of the moving party or grant leave to file an amended complaint.” ORCP 21 
A(2)(c).
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 87
would not be appropriate for us to resolve the case on [the 
basis of failure to state a claim] because the dismissal of 
plaintiff’s claims on jurisdictional grounds foreclosed any 
opportunity for plaintiff to replead his claims to address the 
purported deficiencies in them.”).
 “[W]hen a court’s decision or ruling is premised on 
alternative grounds, a party challenging that ruling gener -
ally must take issue with all independent and alternative 
grounds on which it is based to obtain relief.” Strawn, 350 
Or at 366. “[W]here [a party] fail[s] to challenge the alter -
native basis of the trial court’s ruling, we must affirm it.” 
Roop v. Parker Northwest Paving Co., 194 Or App 219, 236, 
94 P3d 885 (2004), rev den, 338 Or 374 (2005). In light of 
that general rule, we are not convinced that the conclusion 
in Wallace—that it would not be appropriate to resolve the 
case on the basis of failure to state a claim—applies here 
due to the differing procedural facts. In Wallace, we noted 
that, because the trial court did not “expressly address” 
whether the claims at issue also failed to state a claim for 
relief, we could not “discern whether the purported failure 
to state ultimate facts was determined by the court to be an 
independently sufficient ground on which to dismiss [the] 
plaintiff’s claims.” Wallace, 245 Or App at 24 n 4. Here, the 
trial court did expressly address whether the due process, 
free speech, and tort claims stated a claim for relief and 
ultimately concluded that they failed to do so. Furthermore, 
we also noted in Wallace that the defendant “did not argue 
on appeal that we should affirm the court’s dismissal on the 
alternative basis.” Id. Here, defendants do argue on appeal 
that we should affirm the trial court’s dismissal of those 
claims for failure to state a claim.
 Thus, because plaintiffs failed to assign error to the 
trial court’s alternative bases for dismissing their first three 
claims, we reject plaintiffs’ assignments of error challeng -
ing the trial court’s dismissal of those claims for lack of sub-
ject matter jurisdiction without further discussion.
B. Subject Matter Jurisdiction
 We now turn to whether the trial court erred in rul-
ing that it lacked subject matter jurisdiction over plaintiffs’ 
88 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
remaining three claims. We review the dismissal of an 
action on jurisdictional grounds for legal error. Parker v. 
City of Albany, 208 Or App 296, 298, 144 P3d 976 (2006).
 Plaintiffs first argue that the alleged agency actions 
forming the basis of plaintiffs’ claims on appeal are related 
only to the 2015 Permit, and the final order from the admin-
istrative hearing reviewing ODOT’s denial of the 2019 
Permit Application clearly excluded consideration of the 
agency actions underlying the 2015 Permit. In light of that 
distinction, plaintiffs argue that the trial court erred to any 
extent that it relied on the review process of the 2019 Permit 
Application in determining whether it had subject matter 
jurisdiction over the claims relating to ODOT’s conduct 
underlying the 2015 Permit. However, we do not see any -
thing in the trial court’s letter opinion indicating that the 
court relied on the administrative review of the 2019 Permit 
Application. On the contrary, the court clearly addressed 
the distinction between the two issues multiple times:
 “The Final Order makes it clear that the administrative 
hearing did not address issues regarding ODOT’s refusal 
to transfer the [2015 Permit] to [plaintiffs], cancellation 
of the [2015 Permit] or issuance of relocation credits to 
Lamar. However, ODOT argues that this court lacks juris-
diction to address [plaintiffs’] claims in the FAC because 
these claims are subject to the APA. * * *
 “Clearly, the March 3, 2021, Final Order did not address 
the ODOT’s refusal to transfer the [2015 Permit] and can-
cellation of the permit. The administrative decision spe -
cifically stated that the decision upholding ODOT’s denial 
of [the 2019 Permit Application] only applied to ODOT’s 
October 2, 2019, decision, and [plaintiffs’] argument that 
[they were] entitled to a permit based on the conditions 
existing prior to October 1, 2012. The administrative deci -
sion did not address ODOT’s refusal to transfer the 2015 
[P]ermit to [plaintiffs] or cancellation of this permit in July 
2019.”
The record thus reflects that the trial court did not consider 
the judicial review process of the 2019 Permit Application 
when it determined that it lacked subject matter jurisdic -
tion over plaintiffs’ claims relating to the 2015 Permit.
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 89
 We now turn to the question of whether the trial 
court erred in concluding that the agency actions underly -
ing the 2015 Permit were exclusively subject to the judicial 
review process under the APA and that the court therefore 
lacked subject matter jurisdiction over plaintiffs’ claims 
because plaintiffs had not first “administratively chal -
lenge[d] ODOT’s decision[s]” regarding the 2015 Permit. 
We address plaintiffs’ declaratory judgment claim first and 
then turn to plaintiffs’ two tort claims.
1. Plaintiffs’ declaratory judgment claim
 The trial court dismissed plaintiffs’ first through 
fourth claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, con -
cluding that the claims involved administrative decisions 
and the exclusive avenue for challenging the lawfulness of 
those decisions was through the APA judicial review pro -
cess. Because we affirmed the court’s dismissal of the first 
three claims, we now address the dismissal of the remain -
ing declaratory judgment claim (claim 4).
 “The [APA] establishes a comprehensive pattern for 
the judicial review of administrative decisions. The various 
APA statutes governing judicial review provide the sole and 
exclusive methods of obtaining judicial review.” Bay River 
v. Envir. Quality Comm., 26 Or App 717, 720, 554 P2d 620, 
rev den, 276 Or 555 (1976). Additionally, “[j]udicial review [of 
an administrative decision] is only available after the proce-
dure for relief within the administrative body itself has been 
followed without success.” Mullenaux v. Dept. of Revenue , 
293 Or 536, 539, 651 P2d 724 (1982).
 This general principle of APA exclusivity appears 
to apply to claims brought under the Uniform Declaratory 
Judgments Act (UDJA), ORS 28.010 to 28.160. Under ORS 
28.020 of the UDJA, “[a]ny person * * * whose rights, sta -
tus or other legal relations are affected by a constitution, 
statute, municipal charter, ordinance, contract or franchise 
may * * * obtain a declaration of rights, status or other legal 
relations thereunder.” However, “[a] court lacks subject mat-
ter jurisdiction under the [UDJA] if some other exclusive 
remedy exists to address the dispute.” Salibello v. Board of 
Optometry, 276 Or App 363, 367, 367 P3d 932 (2016). “When 
90 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
the dispute at issue involves an agency’s action, or refusal 
to act, the review provisions of the APA provide the sole and 
exclusive means of obtaining judicial review, and an action 
for declaratory relief is not available.” Id.
 The allegations in the FAC specific to plaintiffs’ 
fourth claim are somewhat unclear as to which of ODOT’s 
actions regarding the 2015 Permit they are challenging. For 
example, plaintiffs alleged that they “are entitled [to a] dec-
laration from [the trial court] that defendants’ application of 
the OMIA to plaintiffs, under the facts of this case, deprives 
and infringes upon plaintiffs’ rights under the United States 
and Oregon Constitutions[,]” where “application of the OMIA 
to plaintiffs” can be interpreted broadly. However, given that 
plaintiffs also alleged in the claim that “plaintiffs requested 
that any permit for outdoor advertising issued in relation 
to the Wall Sign be issued in plaintiffs’ names, but ODOT 
neglected or refused to do so[,]” we assume the claim is 
directed only at ODOT’s action of issuing the 2015 Permit to 
OnDisplay, as there are no other allegations associated with 
this claim that appear to be directed at ODOT’s actions of 
cancelling and issuing relocation credit for the 2015 Permit 
at Lamar’s request.
 In light of this assumption, we must now determine 
whether the issuance of the 2015 Permit to OnDisplay was 
an agency action that would be subject to the judicial review 
provisions of the APA. The APA provides for, among other 
things, the procedures for seeking judicial review of agency 
actions, which can generally be defined as either rules or 
orders. Because ODOT’s issuance of the 2015 Permit was 
“directed to a named person” 7 (OnDisplay), that action is 
properly characterized as an order. See ORS 183.310(6)(a) 
(defining “order” in part as “any agency action expressed 
orally or in writing directed to a named person or named 
persons”). Neither party disputes this characterization.
 “Orders may be issued either in contested cases 
or in less formalized circumstances, i.e., in circumstances 
‘other than’ contested cases.” Oregon Env. Council v. Oregon 
 7 “ ‘Person’ means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, gov -
ernmental subdivision or public or private organization of any character other 
than an agency.” ORS 183.310(8).
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 91
State Bd. of Ed., 307 Or 30, 36, 761 P2d 1322 (1988). A “con-
tested case” is expressly defined as a proceeding before an 
agency:
 “(A) In which the individual legal rights, duties or 
privileges of specific parties are required by statute or 
Constitution to be determined only after an agency hearing 
at which such specific parties are entitled to appear and be 
heard;
 “(B) Where the agency has discretion to suspend or 
revoke a right or privilege of a person;
 “(C) For the suspension, revocation or refusal to renew 
or issue a license where the licensee or applicant for a 
license demands such hearing; or
 “(D) Where the agency by rule or order provides for 
hearings substantially of the character required by ORS 
183.415, 183.417, 183.425, 183.450, 183.460 and 183.470.”
ORS 183.310(2)(a). The APA does not define “orders in other 
than contested cases,” but the Supreme Court has found that 
an agency action that does not fit within the statutory defi-
nitions of a “rule” or an “order in a contested case” “is—by a 
process of elimination—an order in other than a contested 
case.” Oregon Env. Council, 307 Or at 43-44. “[T]he charac -
terization of [an] order as either a ‘contested case’ order or 
an ‘order[ ][in] other than [a] contested case[ ]’ depends not 
on whether the agency actually provided petitioner with a 
contested case proceeding, but on whether the agency was 
required by a statutory provision to do so.” Rooklidge v. 
DMV, 217 Or App 172, 178, 174 P3d 1120 (2007), rev den, 
345 Or 94 (2008), cert den, 557 US 923 (2009) (first brackets 
added; remaining brackets in original).
 The parties have not addressed whether the issu -
ance of the 2015 Permit is an order in a contested case, as 
described in ORS 183.310(2)(a), or an order in other than 
a contested case. However, in either case, judicial review 
is available to “any person adversely affected or aggrieved 
by an order or any party to an agency proceeding.” ORS 
183.480(1); see also ORS 183.482 (setting out procedure for 
judicial review of orders in contested cases); ORS 183.484 
(setting out procedure for judicial review of orders in other 
than contested cases).
92 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
 For an order to be subject to the judicial review 
procedures under the APA, it must be a “final order.” ORS 
183.310(6)(b) (defining “final order” as one that is “expressed 
in writing,” and “does not include any tentative or prelim -
inary agency declaration or statement that: (A) [p]recedes 
final agency action; or (B) [d]oes not preclude further agency 
consideration of the subject matter of the statement or dec-
laration”). We conclude, and the parties do not dispute, that 
ODOT’s issuance of the 2015 Permit was a “final order,” at 
least once the time for requesting an administrative hear -
ing had passed. See Jim A. Atwood Trust , 341 Or App at 
421-22 (explaining that the issuance of the 2015 Permit 
was a final order because it was “expressed in writing, and 
constituted ODOT’s final determination with respect to the 
permit ownership for the sign on petitioner’s building, which 
precluded ODOT from issuing any other permit for that pre-
existing sign”). Thus, the APA judicial review procedures 
apply to that order, and plaintiffs were required to seek judi-
cial review of that order exclusively through that process 
but failed to do so.
 However, plaintiffs argue that the principle of 
APA exclusivity nevertheless does not apply to their claims 
because ODOT never notified plaintiffs about any of its 
actions regarding the 2015 Permit. Because, in plaintiffs’ 
view, plaintiffs were not aware of those actions until long 
after the deadline for filing a petition for review had passed, 
plaintiffs contend that the APA pathways for judicial review 
of those decisions were not “available” to them. See Lake 
County v. State of Oregon , 142 Or App 162, 166, 920 P2d 
1115 (1996) (stating APA jurisdiction is exclusive “when APA 
review is available”); see also Ashland Drilling, Inc. v. Jackson 
County, 168 Or App 624, 630, 4 P3d 748, rev den, 331 Or 429 
(2000) (“APA review is available where administrative reme-
dies are available.”). Because of that lack of notice, plaintiffs 
argue that they were not required to seek judicial review of 
ODOT’s actions in accordance with APA procedures.
 Defendants, in response, contend that any failure 
to notify plaintiffs of the agency’s actions regarding the 
2015 Permit does not affect jurisdictional requirements 
for reviewing those actions, as “the determinative issue 
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 93
is whether the agency action is the kind of action that is 
governed by the APA,” not whether “a person was aware of 
the agency’s decision.” Defendants further argue that “APA 
exclusivity applies to bar actions in circuit court even when 
APA review is no longer available because the time for filing 
a petition for judicial review has passed.” Thus, according to 
defendants, plaintiffs’ failure to challenge ODOT’s actions 
prior to the filing deadline, even if that failure was a result 
of their lack of notice of those actions, does not allow them 
to circumvent the exclusive judicial review procedures out -
lined in the APA.
 In our view, plaintiffs’ argument misunderstands 
what it means for APA review to be “available.” In our case 
law, when we discuss that APA review is exclusive when it 
is “available,” we are referring to the procedural availabil -
ity of administrative remedies with respect to the agency 
decision at issue. See Ashland Drilling, Inc., 168 Or App at 
630 (“Thus, when there is an administrative remedy, review 
of that remedy is exclusively under the APA.”). APA review 
that is available in that sense does not become “unavail -
able” solely because a particular person was not aware 
of the availability of those APA procedures at the time of 
the agency decision or was not aware of the specifics of the 
agency’s decision. Cf. Salibello, 276 Or App at 369 (explain-
ing that APA review is exclusive if the APA provides a pro -
cess for judicial review the claim); Mossberg v. University of 
Oregon, 240 Or App 490, 496-97, 247 P3d 331, rev den, 351 
Or 216 (2011) (concluding that APA review was unavailable 
to former employee where the faculty grievance process, 
which was the administrative remedy that could result in a 
final order subject to judicial review, was available only to 
current employees).
 Plaintiffs do not explain why APA review was 
unavailable to them beyond the bare assertion that ODOT’s 
failure to give them formal notice made it unavailable. We 
reject that argument for the reasons explained and con -
clude that the trial court did not err in dismissing plaintiffs’ 
fourth claim for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. To any 
extent plaintiffs are arguing that they were legally entitled 
to formal notice of the issuance of the 2015 Permit, they did 
94 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
not articulate any statutory or constitutional basis for that 
entitlement. See Beall Transport Equipment Co. v. Southern 
Pacific, 186 Or App 696, 700 n 2, 64 P3d 1193, decision clar-
ified on recons, 187 Or App 472, 68 P3d 259 (2003) (“[I]t is 
not this court’s function to speculate as to what a party’s 
argument might be. Nor is it our proper function to make or 
develop a party’s argument when that party has not endeav-
ored to do so itself.”).
2. Plaintiffs’ tort claims
 The trial court also dismissed plaintiffs’ tort claims 
(claims 5 and 6) for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. In 
doing so, the court concluded that the “intentional interfer-
ence by ODOT is established by ODOT’s refusal to transfer 
the permit from Lamar to Atwood and cancelling the per -
mit,” and because “Atwood cannot establish the [intentional 
interference] element without proving those facts” which 
“constitute allegations of agency error,” the exclusive way 
to challenge those actions was through the APA judicial 
review procedures.
 In plaintiffs’ fifth claim, they allege that ODOT 
intentionally interfered with plaintiffs’ prospective eco -
nomic relations because ODOT was “aware of plaintiffs’ past 
economic relations with tenants and plaintiffs’ prospective 
economic relations with future tenants, and that plaintiffs 
intended to enter into leases with those tenants for use of 
the Wall Sign for advertising purposes,” but nevertheless 
cancelled the 2015 Permit and issued relocation credits to 
Lamar without notifying plaintiffs. Similarly, in plaintiffs’ 
sixth claim, they allege that defendants intentionally inter-
fered with plaintiffs’ contractual relations because they were 
aware of plaintiffs’ contractual relationship with Lamar and 
of an “ownership dispute with respect to the [2015] Permit,” 
but nevertheless “worked with Lamar to prepare for the 
cancellation of the [2015] Permit and the issuance of the 
relocation credit to Lamar, without any notice to plaintiffs 
and despite plaintiffs’ request that defendants refrain from 
doing so.”
 Taking these allegations as true, both of plaintiffs’ 
tort claims for intentional interference are premised on the 
Cite as 351 Or App 77 (2026) 95
validity of ODOT’s actions of cancelling and issuing relo -
cation credit for the 2015 Permit. Because of that, if those 
actions are “final orders” subject to the APA judicial review 
process, plaintiffs were required to determine the validity 
of those orders through the APA first before bringing their 
tort claims in circuit court. See Clarke Electric, Inc. v. State 
Highway Division, 93 Or App 693, 697, 763 P2d 1199 (1988) 
(affirming trial court’s dismissal of tort claims for lack of 
jurisdiction because the “defendant’s alleged liability in tort 
is premised on a finding that [the] defendant’s order * * * 
was improper[,]” and “the exclusive procedure for review of 
such an order is under the APA”).
 The parties do not dispute that ODOT’s actions of 
cancelling and issuing relocation credit for the 2015 Permit 
were “orders” directed at Lamar, nor do they dispute that 
those orders were “final orders” “preclud[ing] further agency 
consideration of the subject matter of the statement or decla-
ration,” ORS 183.310(6)(b), thus making those orders subject 
to the APA judicial review procedures. Therefore, because 
plaintiffs’ tort claims are necessarily dependent on whether 
ODOT’s final orders of cancelling and issuing relocation 
credit were lawful, and the exclusive way to determine the 
lawfulness of an agency’s final orders is via the APA judicial 
review procedures, plaintiffs were required to seek judicial 
review of those actions first before bringing its tort claims in 
circuit court.
 Plaintiffs argue that they were not required to 
exhaust their administrative remedies under the APA 
before bringing their tort claims to the circuit court because 
the claims sought tort damages, and those damages are not 
an available remedy under the APA. See Burns v. Board of 
Psychologist Examiners, 116 Or App 422, 425, 841 P2d 680 
(1992) (“It is clear that the only kind [of monetary relief] 
sought here, tort damages, are not available under ORS 
183.486(1)(b).” (Emphasis in original.)). Although plaintiffs 
are correct that they cannot pursue a tort damages remedy 
through the APA, their tort claims are still premised on the 
validity of ODOT’s actions, which needed to be determined 
exclusively through the APA process first before plaintiffs 
could bring their tort claims in circuit court. See Muller 
96 Atwood v. Dept. of Transportation
v. Dept. of Agriculture, 164 Or App 11, 16-17, 988 P2d 927 
(1999) (“If [the plaintiff] is entitled to a remedy, he must 
establish the invalidity of the agency action in the first 
place. We merely hold that the exclusive mechanism for 
establishing the invalidity of the agency action is provided 
in the APA.”); Wallace, 245 Or App at 32 (concluding that the 
“plaintiff must exhaust his administrative remedies under 
the APA as a predicate to establishing his right to recover 
compensatory relief in the court action”). Because plaintiffs 
have not done so, the trial court properly dismissed the tort 
claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction.
 The trial court also dismissed plaintiffs’ tort claims 
for failure to state a claim, but only explained that the sixth 
claim failed because plaintiffs’ contract with Lamar had 
terminated prior to ODOT cancelling and issuing relocation 
credits for the 2015 Permit, and therefore there was no con-
tract in existence for defendants to interfere with. The trial 
court did not explain how the fifth claim for interference 
with prospective economic relations failed to state a claim. 
However, because we affirm the trial court’s ruling dismiss-
ing plaintiffs’ fifth and sixth claims for lack of subject mat -
ter jurisdiction, we do not address whether the trial court 
erred in concurrently dismissing those claims for failure to 
state a claim.
 Affirmed.
