A182315
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/01/flangas_and_flangas_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928100/flangas-and-flangas/
Caption: Flangas and Flangas
Date: 2026-07-01

118 July 1, 2026 No. 599
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of the Marriage of
Arthur George FLANGAS,
Petitioner-Appellant,
and
Jacqueline FLANGAS,
Respondent-Respondent.
Jackson County Circuit Court
19DR19637; A182315
Charles G. Kochlacs, Judge.
Submitted March 20, 2025.
Ryan P. Hunt and Garrett Hemann Robertson PC filed 
the brief for appellant.
No appearance for respondent.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Pagán, Judge, and Walters, 
Senior Judge.
WALTERS, S. J.
Appeal dismissed.
Cite as 351 Or App 118 (2026) 119
 WALTERS, S. J.
 Husband appeals from a limited judgment award -
ing spousal support to wife after entry of a general judgment 
dissolving the parties’ marriage. For the following reasons, 
we conclude that ORS 107.095(2) bars this appeal, and we 
dismiss it.
 Before briefing in this case, this court ordered hus-
band to show cause why the appeal should not be dismissed 
as taken from a limited judgment that is not subject to 
appeal under ORS 107.095(2). After considering the argu -
ments of the parties on that issue, we allowed the appeal to 
proceed but asked the parties to address the issue in their 
briefs. In the brief that husband filed, his argument is lim -
ited to the following:
“Husband acknowledges that ORS 107.095(2) provides that 
a limited judgment entered under that subsection may not 
be appealed. However, the statutory text further provides 
that ‘[a]ny decision of the court in a limited judgment sub-
ject to this subsection may be appealed as otherwise pro -
vided by law upon entry of a general judgment.’ As Husband 
argues below, this record indicates that the stipulated gen-
eral judgment was not set aside or otherwise vacated in the 
limited judgment or at any time before the limited judg -
ment. Moreover, Husband argues the trial court lacked 
subject-matter jurisdiction and jurisdiction over Husband 
when entering the limited judgment.
 “Accordingly, the limited judgment entered under ORS 
107.095 is appealable because the stipulated general judg -
ment was, as a matter of law, still in place at the time of 
the limited judgment being entered, thereby rendering the 
decision of the court in the limited judgment appealable.”
Wife did not file a brief.
 Before we consider husband’s arguments, a short 
recitation of the pertinent, uncontested facts is in order. 
In February 2021, the trial court entered a stipulated gen -
eral judgment of dissolution (the general judgment). The 
general judgment dissolved the parties’ marriage, divided 
the parties’ property, including businesses that the parties 
would continue to operate, and provided that neither party 
would receive spousal support. In December 2021, wife 
120 Flangas and Flangas
filed a motion to “reopen the property division,” citing ORS 
107.452. In an attached declaration, wife asserted that the 
general judgment failed to address a major asset owned by 
the parties during the marriage. Wife also stated that, in 
stipulating to the judgment, she had made financial conces-
sions, including waiver of spousal support, based on fraud -
ulent representations by husband. Wife requested reopen -
ing, and, alternatively, that the general judgment be set 
aside. Husband did not respond to the motion, and the trial 
court entered an order granting wife’s motion and stating 
that “the property division” was “reopened.”
 Wife then filed a motion requesting that the court 
enter a limited judgment awarding her temporary spousal 
support of $6,000 per month or control over the parties’ 
businesses. In the memorandum wife filed in support of 
her motion, she cited ORS 107.095(1) for the proposition 
that the court had authority to enter an order for spousal 
support “as may be necessary to support and maintain the 
other party.” Additionally, wife stated that she was receiv-
ing the sum of approximately $1,300 per month from hus -
band but that the payments were sporadic. Again, husband 
did not respond, and the trial court wrote the parties a 
letter awarding the requested temporary support. Shortly 
thereafter, husband filed a motion for reconsideration, 
arguing that the court’s conclusion that wife was entitled 
to temporary spousal support was contrary to Oregon law. 
Husband argued that the court did not have authority to 
order temporary spousal support after entry of a general 
judgment of dissolution, but he did not argue that the 
court’s award was void because the court lacked subject 
matter or personal jurisdiction. In September 2023, after 
considering husband’s arguments, the court entered a lim-
ited judgment incorporating its prior “opinion letter,” and 
awarding temporary spousal support of $6,000 per month, 
effective June 1, 2023. It is that limited judgment from 
which husband now appeals.
 In an action for dissolution, ORS 107.095(2) permits 
a trial court to enter a limited judgment providing for a sup-
port award or other money award. However, that statute 
also provides that “a limited judgment entered under this 
Cite as 351 Or App 118 (2026) 121
subsection may not be appealed.” Id. Husband acknowledges 
that bar but points out that that statute goes on to provide 
that “[a]ny decision of the court in a limited judgment subject 
to this subsection may be appealed as otherwise provided by 
law upon entry of a general judgment.” Id. From that text, 
husband seems to argue that the limited judgment entered 
in this case may be appealed because the earlier general 
judgment remained in place. Husband contends that, when 
the trial court entered its limited judgment, it did not set 
aside or otherwise vacate the general judgment and lacked 
subject matter jurisdiction to award spousal support and 
personal jurisdiction over husband. Accordingly, husband 
argues, “the stipulated general judgment was, as a matter of 
law, still in place at the time of the limited judgment being 
entered, thereby rendering the decision of the court in the 
limited judgment appealable.”
 Husband is incorrect about the status of the general 
judgment at the time the limited judgment was entered. 
In her declaration in support of her motion to reopen, wife 
sought to reopen the dissolution or, alternatively, to set 
aside the stipulated judgment of dissolution as fraudulently 
induced. ORS 107.452(1) provides that, in a dissolution case, 
on a motion alleging that significant assets existed and were 
not discovered until after entry of judgment, the court shall 
“reopen the case.” On a showing of fraud, ORCP 71 permits 
a court to relieve a party from a judgment. We understand 
the trial court to have set aside the general judgment when 
it granted wife’s motion under ORS 107.452(1). Although 
the trial court did not expressly set aside the general judg -
ment of dissolution, it effectively and implicitly did so, even 
if only for a limited purpose or if its authority under ORS 
107.452(1) to “reopen the case” was limited.1 Thus, when the 
court subsequently entered its limited judgment, the gen -
eral judgment was not in place, and its entry of a limited 
judgment was appropriate.
 ORS 18.005(13)(d) provides that the term “limited 
judgment” means,
 1 We do not conclude that the trial court had authority to grant the relief that 
it did, or that to “reopen the case” under ORS 107.452(1) necessarily sets aside a 
general judgment. That is a question for another day.
122 Flangas and Flangas
 “A judgment rendered before entry of a general judg -
ment in an action that disposes of at least one but fewer 
than all requests for relief in the action and that is ren -
dered pursuant to a legal authority that specifically autho-
rizes that disposition by limited judgment.”
Here, the limited judgment met that definition. It was ren -
dered after the general judgment of dissolution had been set 
aside and before entry of a subsequent general judgment; it 
addressed only one of wife’s claims—her claim for tempo -
rary spousal support—and was rendered pursuant to ORS 
107.095(2), permitting a limited judgment providing for sup-
port. Under ORS 107.095(2), that limited judgment was not 
appealable at that time.
 That does not mean that the decision reflected in the 
limited judgment was not ever appealable. As husband notes, 
the last sentence of ORS 107.095(2) provides that “[a]ny deci-
sion of the court in a limited judgment subject to this sub -
section may be appealed as otherwise provided by law upon 
entry of a general judgment.” What that means is that a party 
who contends that a limited judgment awarding temporary 
spousal support is in error must wait until a general judg -
ment is entered to appeal that ruling. See Susan Marmaduke 
& Mark Johnson, The Law of Judgments How Should A 
Concluding Decision Be Labeled?, Oregon State Bar Bulletin 
34 (May 2004) (reviewing legislative history of House Bill 
2646 (2003)—updating statutes relating to judgments—and 
explaining that “[a] judgment for temporary support before 
trial in a domestic relations case is a limited judgment, but it 
is not immediately appealable. As under the prior law, it may 
be appealed only upon entry of the general judgment in the 
action. ORS 107.095(2)”); ORS 19.425 (permitting review of 
intermediate ruling on appeal of final judgment).
 Husband does not argue that he is entitled to appeal 
the limited judgment at issue here as an intermediate rul -
ing that is appealable upon entry of a general judgment. 
Because husband appealed, instead, from the interlocutory 
limited judgment itself, his argument that ORS 107.095(2) 
permits his appeal is erroneous.
 That takes us to husband’s arguments that the trial 
court entered the limited judgment without subject matter 
Cite as 351 Or App 118 (2026) 123
or personal jurisdiction. We begin with the issue of subject 
matter jurisdiction.
 We set out the difference between legal error and 
lack of jurisdiction in Menten and Deatherage, 302 Or App 
425, 429-30, 461 P3d 1075 (2020). Doing so clearly and suc-
cinctly, we explained as follows:
 “We have noted that subject matter jurisdiction—the 
authority to exercise judicial power in a given subject 
area or dispute—is distinct from a court’s exercise of its 
authority within a given subject area or dispute. Southard 
v. Larkins, 275 Or App 89, 97, 364 P3d 1006 (2015), rev den, 
359 Or 39 (2016) (‘Even when a court might lack author -
ity, a lack of authority is not the same as a lack of juris -
diction.’). A court may have authority to exercise judicial 
power in a given case, but then exercise that authority erro-
neously. A court’s erroneous exercise of its authority within 
an area over which it has subject matter jurisdiction does 
not deprive the court of subject matter jurisdiction. Wood v. 
White, 28 Or App 175, 178, 558 P2d 1289 (1977) (erroneous 
application of procedural statute in dissolution case does 
not divest court of subject matter jurisdiction). Thus, an 
error in a dissolution judgment by a court that otherwise 
has both subject matter and personal jurisdiction does not 
divest the court of jurisdiction so as to render its judgment 
void and subject to collateral attack. Id.
 “In dissolution cases, ‘subject matter jurisdiction is 
founded on domicile.’ Watanabe and Watanabe, 140 Or App 
85, 88, 914 P2d 701, rev den, 324 Or 176 (1996); Wood, 28 
Or App at 178. An Oregon circuit court has subject mat -
ter jurisdiction over a dissolution when one of the parties 
resides in Oregon. ORS 107.075.”
302 Or App at 429-30.
 We recognize, as we also did in Menten, that when 
a court acts post-dissolution, additional statutory authori -
zation may be required to afford subject matter jurisdiction. 
See id. at 430 (so explaining and declining to decide whether 
post-judgment modification of property division was outside 
trial court’s subject matter jurisdiction or court’s author -
ity to act within its jurisdiction); Spady v. Graves, 307 Or 
483, 488, 770 P2d 53 (1989) (suggesting that modification 
of dissolution judgment’s property division would be outside 
124 Flangas and Flangas
court’s jurisdiction). Here, however, when the trial court 
entered the limited judgment, it was not necessarily exercis-
ing post-dissolution authority. Rather, as explained above, 
the trial court had reopened and effectively set aside the 
general judgment of dissolution and, viewed broadly, was 
exercising predissolution authority.
 That does not mean, of course, that the trial court 
correctly exercised its authority. A correct analysis of the 
pertinent law, as reflected in the rulings that the trial court 
made after it reopened this case, may indicate that ORS 
107.452 permits the reopening of a case only for the purpose 
of addressing property division, limiting the court’s author-
ity to award spousal support. The record may also indicate 
that wife did not seek or meet the standard to modify or 
set aside the general judgment of dissolution under ORS 
107.135 or ORCP 71.2 That does not mean, however, that the 
trial court lacked jurisdiction to make the initial rulings 
that it did. Because the trial court had statutory authority 
to exercise judicial power to decide the dispute presented, 
it had subject matter jurisdiction to enter the limited judg -
ment, even if its exercise of authority was erroneous.
 Even more obviously, the trial court had personal 
jurisdiction over husband when it entered the limited judg-
ment requiring him to pay temporary spousal support. 
Husband bases his argument for lack of personal juris -
diction on the fact that wife did not serve him with sum -
mons in accordance with ORCP 7. However, in making that 
 2 After the trial court entered its limited judgment, wife’s motion to reopen 
the property division to address omitted property remained. In March 2024, a 
judge newly assigned to the matter explained that “there is a fundamental dis -
agreement between the parties as to whether [the prior judge] ordered that the 
case be reopened under ORS 107.452 or whether he set aside the general judg -
ment under ORCP 71.” The court gave wife 14 days to submit a proposed order 
setting aside the judgment under ORCP 71 and gave husband 14 days to file 
objections. After oral argument, the court ordered that wife’s motion to reopen 
the record was filed pursuant to ORS 107.452 and that the general judgment had 
not been and would not be set aside. Shortly thereafter, in May 2024, husband 
filed a motion requesting that the court set aside its limited judgment ordering 
temporary spousal support. The court granted that motion, stating, in its order, 
that “per agreement of the parties this order is not retroactive.” Finally, in June 
2025, the court denied wife’s motion to reopen the property division. In its writ -
ten order, the court determined that there was no “omitted asset,” declined to 
award spousal support, and stated that its order was “a final appealable order.” 
Neither party appealed from that order.
Cite as 351 Or App 118 (2026) 125
argument, husband fails to cite or consider ORCP 6 or ORCP 
21 G. ORCP 6 provides that a court may exercise jurisdic -
tion over a party who appears in an action, without sum -
mons having been served, when the party appears in the 
action and waives the defense of lack of jurisdiction as pro -
vided in ORCP 21 G. ORCP 21 G provides that the defense 
of lack of jurisdiction over the person is waived if the defense 
is neither made by motion under that rule nor included in a 
responsive pleading. Husband appeared in this action with-
out ever contesting the trial court’s jurisdiction over his per-
son, and we reject husband’s argument that the trial court 
lacked personal jurisdiction over him.
 In summary, under ORS 107.095(2), the limited 
judgment that is the subject of this appeal is not appealable.
 Appeal dismissed.
