A184056
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/07/01/sergeyev_v._vasylenko_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10928092/sergeyev-v-vasylenko/
Caption: Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
Date: 2026-07-01

106 July 1, 2026 No. 598
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
Sergey Nikolayevich SERGEYEV,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
Svitlana VASYLENKO,
Defendant-Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
23CN01996; A184056
D. Charles Bailey, Jr., Judge.
Argued and submitted November 17, 2025.
George W. Kelly argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.
Daniel S. Margolin argued the cause for respondent. On 
the brief were Xian-Ling Woram and Margolin Family Law.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
HELLMAN, J.
Contempt judgment vacated and remanded; supplemen-
tal judgment vacated and remanded.
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 107
108 Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
 HELLMAN, J.
 Mother appeals from a contempt judgment and a 
supplemental judgment awarding father attorney fees. The 
contempt judgment found mother in willful violation of a 
nondisparagement clause in the parties’ parenting plan 
based on violations that occurred both before and after the 
plan was formally memorialized in a general judgment.
 On appeal, mother raises six assignments of error. 
First, she argues that the trial court erred in ruling that 
the parties’ in-court agreement as to the parenting plan 
provided a legally viable basis for holding mother in con -
tempt for her conduct occurring before the entry of judg -
ment. Relatedly, her second and third assignments chal -
lenge the court’s imposition of contempt sanctions based 
on specific instances of her prejudgment conduct. In her 
fourth and fifth assignments, mother argues that the court 
erred in holding her in contempt for her post-judgment 
actions because they did not constitute violations of the 
nondisparagement clause. Finally, her sixth assignment of 
error requests the reversal of the court’s award of attorney 
fees.
 Because a court may not hold a party in contempt 
based on violations of a private settlement agreement before 
it has been adopted in a court order or judgment, we agree 
with mother’s arguments that the trial court erroneously 
held mother in contempt for her prejudgment conduct. 
However, we conclude that the court did not err in ruling 
that mother was in contempt for her post-judgment conduct, 
because her actions clearly violated the nondisparagement 
clause contained in the general judgment.
 Because we conclude that some, but not all, of the 
bases for the court’s contempt judgment are improper, we 
vacate that judgment and remand for the trial court to enter 
a judgment consistent with this opinion. On remand, the 
court must consider whether the imposed remedial sanc -
tions remain appropriate given that mother can be held in 
contempt only for her post-judgment conduct. We also vacate 
and remand the supplemental judgment awarding attorney 
fees.
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 109
I. FACTS
 Although proof of contempt must be supported by 
clear and convincing evidence, on appeal, we “do not reweigh 
the evidence to determine anew whether there is clear and 
convincing evidence of contempt.” Keller and Holdner, 232 Or 
App 341, 343-44, 222 P3d 1111 (2009). Rather, “[w]e review 
a contempt judgment for any evidence to support the trial 
court’s findings and, if such evidence exists, we determine 
whether the court’s findings support the conclusion that a 
party is in contempt.” Lopez v. Oregon State Hospital, 342 Or 
App 190, 194-95, 575 P3d 1061 (2025).
 We recite the relevant facts with that standard in 
mind. Father and mother are parents of O, who was born in 
November 2020. At a hearing held in October 2022, parents 
agreed to a custody and parenting plan, and they placed 
their settlement agreement as to that plan on the record. In 
January 2023, the trial court entered a general judgment 
that incorporated the parenting plan “with a few exceptions” 
(January 2023 judgment). The plan includes a nondispar -
agement clause that prohibits each parent, and their family 
and friends, from “making derogatory comments about the 
other parent * * * in the presence of the child, or in any way 
diminishing the love, respect, and affection that the child 
has for the other parent.”
 Between the time that parents placed their settle -
ment agreement on the record and the trial court entered 
the January 2023 judgment that affirmed the stipulated-to 
parenting plan, mother pulled O’s hand down when O was 
attempting to wave goodbye to father after a visit and, at 
a separate exchange, allowed her older son to speak poorly 
of father in front of O. She also communicated to medical 
providers, in O’s presence, concerns that father was improp-
erly sedating O. After entry of the January 2023 judgment, 
mother continued to communicate those worries about 
father’s treatment of O to doctors. In addition, when father 
belatedly handed O off to mother during an exchange, 
mother repeatedly yelled at father, “may you be damned,” in 
front of O.
 Father filed a motion for an order compelling mother 
to show cause why she should not be held in contempt for 
110 Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
the above incidents and why remedial sanctions should not 
be imposed against her. Father alleged that both mother’s 
prejudgment and post-judgment conduct was contemptible 
because it violated the terms of the parenting plan, specifi -
cally the nondisparagement clause. He also requested attor-
ney fees.
 The trial court held a hearing, at which both mother 
and father testified as to the above events. The court found 
that mother’s testimony was not credible.
 The trial court entered a judgment of contempt 
against mother. The court ruled that it could “find a person 
in contempt prior to the entry of judgment” for violating their 
good-faith duty to “follow the terms of a settlement placed 
on the record.” It also made a number of factual findings as 
to mother’s conduct and found, by clear and convincing evi-
dence, that mother willfully violated the terms of the par -
enting plan in engaging in the above behaviors. The court 
therefore held mother in contempt of court based on both 
her prejudgment and post-judgment conduct. It imposed a 
number of remedial sanctions on mother, including restric -
tions on the channels of communications permitted between 
parents and on who can be present during exchanges of O 
between parents. The court awarded attorney fees to father 
in a supplemental judgment.
 Mother appeals from the contempt judgment and 
supplemental judgment.
II. ANALYSIS
A. The trial court erred in ruling that it could hold mother 
in contempt absent a court order or judgment.
 In her first assignment, mother argues that the trial 
court erred in ruling that it could hold mother in contempt 
for violations of the parties’ in-court settlement before that 
settlement became subject to a court order or judgment. We 
review the trial court’s determination as to the extent of its 
contempt authority for legal error. See Air Rescue Systems 
Corp. v. Lewis, 292 Or App 294, 297-99, 423 P3d 775 (2018) 
(reviewing, for legal error, a court’s authority to impose con-
tempt sanctions absent a court order).
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 111
 At the hearing, the court ruled that it can “find a 
person in contempt when there’s not an actual judgment/
order in place, but the parties have placed a settlement on 
the record, because the parties have a good-faith duty to fol-
low that settlement.” It therefore included, in the contempt 
judgment, its ruling that it can “find a person in contempt 
prior to the entry of judgment when they violate the good-
faith duty.”
 The parties agree that the court relied on ORS 
33.015(2)(b) to hold mother in contempt. That statutory pro-
vision defines contempt to include the willful “[d]isobedience 
of, resistance to or obstruction of the court’s authority, pro -
cess, orders or judgments.”1 (Emphasis added.)
 The trial court erred in ruling that it could hold 
mother in contempt based on the terms of the settlement 
agreement, absent “an actual judgment/order in place.” That 
ruling directly contradicts Air Rescue Systems Corp., a case 
in which we held that a trial court could not find a party in 
contempt under ORS 33.015(2)(b) when an oral settlement 
agreement, which was previously read into the record, had 
not yet become subject to a court order. 292 Or App at 297-99. 
We reasoned that a private settlement agreement between 
parties and a court order requiring parties to comply with 
that agreement are “fundamentally different,” and that the 
former does not by itself constitute a court “order” or “judg -
ment” within the meaning of ORS 33.015(2)(b) upon which a 
party can be held in contempt. Id. at 298-99. Thus, because 
the trial court in that case had not entered an order or judg-
ment that incorporated the oral settlement agreement’s 
terms, we concluded that it lacked authority to hold a party 
in contempt for violations of that agreement. Id. at 295, 299.
 This case is controlled by Air Rescue Systems Corp. 
Like in that case, the trial court here asserted its authority 
 1 Because neither party developed arguments as to whether mother’s pre -
judgment violations of the settlement agreement constituted disobedience of 
either the court’s “authority” or “process” under ORS 33.015(2)(b), we focus our 
analysis only on whether a court order or judgment provided a lawful basis for 
the court’s contempt judgment in this case. See also Air Rescue Systems Corp. , 
292 Or App at 298 n 4 (“[W]e are unpersuaded that reading the terms of a settle -
ment agreement into the record causes a subsequent breach of that agreement to 
become an act of disobedience of the court’s ‘authority’ or ‘process.’ ”).
112 Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
to hold mother in contempt based on the terms of a private 
settlement agreement that had been placed on the record 
but had not yet become subject to a court order or judgment. 
The parties do not dispute that they placed their settlement 
agreement on the record in October 2022. 2 However, there 
is no evidence that the stipulated-to parenting plan became 
subject to a court order or judgment until the trial court’s 
entry of the January 2023 judgment. Therefore, we conclude 
that the parenting plan did not become subject to a court 
order or judgment within the meaning of ORS 33.015(2)(b) 
until January 2023. It follows that the trial court could hold 
mother in contempt for violations of the parenting plan that 
occurred only after that judgment’s entry, and it erred in 
ruling otherwise. Irrespective of any good-faith duty that 
could be implied into the parties’ settlement agreement, 
absent a court order or judgment, their agreement could not 
alone provide the basis for finding mother in contempt.3
 We briefly address our earlier decision, Paradis and 
Keith, 147 Or App 144, 935 P2d 436 (1997), which father 
argues establishes that a trial court may find a party in 
contempt for violations of an oral court order that is sub -
sequently reduced to a written order. Even if an oral court 
order suffices for contempt purposes, the problem with 
father’s argument is that the record here does not establish 
that any court order, oral or written, existed prior to the 
entry of the January 2023 judgment upon which the trial 
court could have based its prejudgment contempt findings. 
See Air Rescue Systems Corp., 292 Or App at 298 (observing 
that plaintiffs “may be correct that a court order need not be 
 2 However, we note that the record does not include the transcript of the 
hearing at which the parties placed their settlement agreement on the record.
 3 We reject father’s attempt to distinguish Air Rescue Systems Corp. based 
on the fact that, in that case, the parties’ oral settlement did not ever become 
subject to a court order or judgment. We understand father to argue that, so long 
as a court order or judgment incorporates the oral agreement by the time of the 
contempt hearing, a party may be held in contempt for even their preorder or 
prejudgment conduct. But that position is inconsistent with Air Rescue Systems 
Corp., which stands for the proposition that a court’s authority to hold a party in 
contempt for a violation of a settlement agreement attaches at the point that the 
court subjects that agreement to a court order or judgment. 292 Or App at 298-99. 
Therefore, a court may not find preorder or prejudgment conduct to be contempt -
ible, irrespective of whether the court later adopted the agreement in an order or 
judgment prior to the contempt hearing.
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 113
in writing to support a contempt sanction”). Thus, assuming 
arguendo that father’s interpretation of Paradis is correct, it 
does not aid him here; that case does not authorize a court 
to hold a party in contempt for preorder conduct.4
 In sum, the trial court erred in ruling it could find 
mother in contempt for violations of the parenting plan that 
occurred prior to entry of the January 2023 judgment.
B. The trial court erred in holding mother in contempt for 
her prejudgment conduct.
 Our conclusion as to the first assignment requires 
us to also resolve mother’s second and third assignments 
in her favor, because those assignments challenge the trial 
court’s holding of mother in contempt for her conduct that 
occurred prior to the entry of the January 2023 judgment. 
Because the trial court lacked the legal authority to hold 
mother in contempt for her prejudgment conduct, includ -
ing that related to her preventing O from waving goodbye 
to father and her older son’s statements, the court erred in 
doing so.
C. The trial court did not err in holding mother in contempt 
for her post-judgment conduct.
 We reach a different conclusion as to mother’s 
fourth and fifth assignments, which contest the trial court’s 
holding of mother in contempt for her post-judgment con -
duct; specifically, mother’s disclosures of unfounded abuse 
allegations against father to several medical providers and 
her repeated exclamations of “may you be damned” toward 
father, both of which occurred in O’s presence.
 To establish contempt of court based on ORS 
33.015(2)(b), father needed to establish (1) the existence of 
a facially valid court order or judgment, (2) the contemnor’s 
knowledge about the court order or judgment, and (3) the 
contemnor’s voluntary failure to comply with the court order 
or judgment. Id.; see also White v. Reyes , 335 Or App 124, 
 4 Although it does not bear on our analysis, we question whether Paradis 
stands for the proposition asserted by father. In our view, Paradis is ambiguous 
as to whether the trial court issued an oral order prior to its written order. 147 
Or App at 146. That case can also be read as holding a party in contempt for their 
conduct that occurred only after entry of a written order. Id. at 146-47.
114 Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
132, 558 P3d 43 (2024), rev den, 373 Or 284 (2025) (explain-
ing that a violation is willful when made “intentionally and 
with knowledge that the act * * * was forbidden conduct” or 
when made knowing about the order but in a “state of elec -
tive ignorance” about its requirements). Further, the court 
order or judgment must be “certain and definite in its terms” 
to sustain a contempt judgment. Air Rescue Systems Corp., 
292 Or App at 299; see also Macleay Estate Co. v. Bailey, 132 
Or 350, 356, 285 P 809 (1930) (explaining that, to establish 
contempt, “the act complained of must be so clearly defined 
in the order that it will appear with reasonable certainty 
that the order has been violated”).
 We have already established that there was a valid 
court judgment, entered in January 2023, that ordered 
parents to abide by the parenting plan. And mother does 
not dispute that she knew of that judgment and its terms, 
including the nondisparagement clause. 5 In addition, she 
does not dispute that, after entry of the January 2023 judg-
ment, she expressed concern over father’s alleged sedation 
of O to multiple doctors and that she yelled “may you be 
damned” at father in front of O. Rather, mother argues on 
appeal that she cannot be held in contempt for those actions 
because they did not clearly violate the nondisparagement 
clause. Again, that clause requires that each parent “be 
restrained and enjoined from making derogatory comments 
about the other parent * * * in the presence of the child or in 
any way diminishing the love, respect, and affection that 
the child has for the other parent.”6
 5 Indeed, the record indicates that she helped draft the nondisparagement 
clause.
 6 In full, the nondisparagement clause states:
 “Each parent, and their family and friends, shall be restrained and 
enjoined from making derogatory comments about the other parent (and 
their family) in the presence of the child, or in any way diminishing the love, 
respect, and affection that the child has for the other parent. Further, neither 
parent shall make any such comments about the other parent on any public 
or semi-public social media page, app, etc.”
 The parties also dispute whether mother’s conduct violated a separate pro -
vision of the parenting plan, which reads, “Each parent shall make every effort 
to foster affection and respect between the child and the other parent.” However, 
because we determine that both forms of mother’s post-judgment conduct vio -
lated the nondisparagement clause, we need not evaluate her conduct against the 
rubric of that other provision.
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 115
 For the reasons stated below, we conclude that the 
trial court’s factual findings as to mother’s post-judgment 
actions are supported by the record and that those actions 
violated the clear terms of the nondisparagement clause. 
Therefore, the trial court did not err in ruling that her com-
munications with doctors and her exclamations of “may you 
be damned” to father, both in O’s presence, could provide 
bases for its contempt judgment against mother.
1. Communications with doctors in O’s presence
 We first address whether the trial court erred in 
holding mother in contempt for “disparag[ing] Father in 
front of [O] to doctors.” Mother raises two independent argu-
ments in contending that those communications were not 
contemptible.
 First, mother argues that because the nondisparage-
ment clause does not clearly prohibit mother from suggest -
ing to doctors that father was improperly sedating O in O’s 
presence, she cannot be held in contempt for those interac -
tions. We disagree. The nondisparagement clause expressly 
“restrain[s] and enjoin[s]” mother from making “derogatory 
comments” about father in front of O. See Webster’s Third 
New Int’l Dictionary 609 (unabridged ed 2002) (defining 
“derogatory” to include “disparaging * * * : expressive of low 
estimation or reproach”). That establishes a sufficiently cer-
tain and definite restriction on parents’ behavior upon which 
a contempt finding may be based. Further, it was legitimate 
on this record for the trial court to characterize mother’s 
repeated conveyances of unsubstantiated claims that father 
was sedating O to doctors as constituting “derogatory com -
ments” that fall under that clear prohibition.7
 7 That is, the record supports the trial court’s findings that mother’s com -
munications with doctors amounted to contemptible derogatory comments about 
father. There is evidence that mother, on multiple occasions, including after entry 
of the January 2023 judgment, expressed concerns to doctors that father was 
inappropriately sedating O in O’s presence. In addition, the court did not find 
mother’s testimony at the contempt hearing credible, including as to her abuse 
allegations against father. Niman and Niman , 206 Or App 259, 278, 136 P3d 
105 (2006) (“We defer to the trial court’s * * * credibility findings * * *.”). Bringing 
that together, we conclude that evidence supports the trial court’s finding that 
mother, in relaying unsubstantiated allegations of father’s abuse to numerous 
doctors, “disparaged father in front of [O].” See Webster’s at 653 (defining “dis -
parage” to include “to lower or degrade * * * : to lower in esteem or reputation : 
diminish the respect for”). As the court aptly observed, the derogatory nature of 
116 Sergeyev v. Vasylenko
 Second, mother argues that O needed to have com -
prehended what mother was saying to the doctors for those 
conversations to serve as a basis for contempt and, relatedly, 
that the trial court’s finding that “[O] was able to understand 
the nature of the communications to the doctors” is unsup -
ported by the record, given O’s young age and limited English 
language skills. We disagree with mother’s arguments. The 
nondisparagement clause sets clear limits on parents’ behav-
ior to promote an effective coparenting relationship, to min -
imize either parent’s ability to detrimentally impact O’s 
relationship with the other parent, and to ultimately better 
protect O’s interests. Indeed, in the January 2023 judgment, 
the trial court expressly stated that the parenting plan “is 
in the best interests of [O].” See also ORS 107.101(5) (stating 
that a policy of this state is to “[c]onsider the best interests 
of the child * * * in developing a parenting plan”). And by its 
plain terms, the nondisparagement clause requires that O be 
present when the derogatory comments are expressed, but it 
does not require that O understand the contents of those com-
ments. Therefore, the court could hold mother in contempt 
for her communications with doctors even without evidence of 
O’s comprehension. See Harris and Harris, 199 Or App 300, 
303, 111 P3d 1140 (2005) (refusing to imply additional terms 
into a court order in a contempt proceeding).
 In short, the trial court did not err in finding moth-
er’s statements to doctors constituted a violation of its order 
because doing so clearly violated the nondisparagement 
clause contained in the January 2023 judgment.8
2. Exclamations of “may you be damned” to father in 
O’s presence
 Mother also argues that the trial court could not 
hold her in contempt for her repeated yelling of “may you 
mother’s comments risked “disrupt[ing] the relationship between the Father and 
[O]” and harming father’s “credibility before the doctors.” We also note that, at 
the hearing, even mother acknowledged that “despite the language or age * * *, 
[O] shouldn’t be present when I am talking with the doctor about any of my con -
cerns of Father’s behavior.”
 8 The record indicates that some of mother’s problematic communications 
with doctors occurred prior to the entry of the January 2023 judgment, and some 
occurred afterwards. We affirm the trial court’s contempt finding only to the extent 
that it implicates mother’s post-judgment communications because, as we have 
already explained, she cannot be held in contempt for her prejudgment conduct.
Cite as 351 Or App 106 (2026) 117
be damned” toward father in O’s presence. For similar rea -
sons as those stated above, we reject her argument that her 
conduct did not flout the nondisparagement clause. Mother 
admits that she shouted that phrase toward father in front 
of O. And evidence in the record supports the court’s deter -
mination that those statements amounted to a willful vio -
lation of the nondisparagement clause. Mother’s repeated 
exclamation of the expletive “may you be damned” can 
very reasonably be interpreted as a derogatory comment; 
that action exhibited mother’s lack of respect and vitriol for 
father in O’s presence, which threatens to negatively impact 
O’s perception of father in a manner that the nondisparage-
ment clause is intended to guard against.9
D. Remedy
 We now turn to the question of remedy. Because the 
trial court found mother in contempt and imposed remedial 
sanctions based on both her prejudgment and post-judgment 
conduct, we vacate and remand the contempt judgment for 
entry of a corrected judgment in light of our determination 
that mother may not be held in contempt for her conduct 
occurring prior to the entry of the January 2023 judgment. 
On remand, the court must consider whether its imposed 
sanctions are appropriate or whether different sanctions are 
warranted. See ORS 33.105(1) (listing the types of remedia-
ble sanctions available).
 We therefore also vacate the supplemental judgment 
awarding attorney fees based on the contempt judgment and 
remand for reconsideration of that issue, which is the subject 
of mother’s sixth, and final, assignment of error. See Cirina 
and Cirina, 271 Or App 161, 167, 350 P3d 504 (2015) (vacat-
ing and remanding award of attorney fees where underlying 
dissolution judgment vacated and remanded); Cowles and 
Flormoe-Cowles, 322 Or App 741, 745, 522 P3d 557 (2022) 
(same, but in the contempt context).
 Contempt judgment vacated and remanded; supple-
mental judgment vacated and remanded.
 9 The record, which includes a video recording of the incident, indicates that 
mother not only repeatedly yelled, “may you be damned,” toward father while 
picking up O, but also at least once exclaimed, “wish you were dead.” That addi -
tional comment provides contextual support for the court’s determination that 
mother’s yelling of “may you be damned” was derogatory.
