A182049
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/17/state_v._baker_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879168/state-v-baker/
Caption: State v. Baker
Date: 2026-06-17

710 June 17, 2026 No. 558
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
ZACHARY JAMES BAKER,
Defendant-Appellant.
Yamhill County Circuit Court
22CR28753; A182049
Ladd J. Wiles, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 21, 2025.
Sara F. Werboff, Deputy Public Defender, argued the 
cause for appellant. Also on the briefs was Ernest G. Lannet, 
Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
Peenesh Shah, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Ellen F. 
Rosenblum, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Hellman, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
O’CONNOR, J.
Reversed and remanded.
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 711
 O’CONNOR, J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment of conviction for 
10 counts of second-degree encouraging child sexual abuse, 
ORS 163.686, and 10 counts of encouraging sexual assault 
of an animal, ORS 167.341. The trial court entered the judg-
ment following defendant’s entry of conditional guilty pleas 
pursuant to ORS 135.335(3), which permits a defendant to 
reserve “in writing, the right, on appeal from the judgment, 
to a review of an adverse determination of any specified pre-
trial motion.” Defendant reserved in writing the right to a 
review of the trial court’s denial of his motion to suppress.
 In a single assignment of error, defendant main -
tains that the trial court erred when it denied his motion 
to suppress evidence obtained through a warranted search 
of defendant’s residence and the seizure of his electronic 
devices.1 Defendant first contends that the warrant was 
invalid because the information contained in the support -
ing affidavit—a seven-month-old tip that a Dropbox account 
associated with defendant contained a single video of child 
sexual abuse material (CSAM)—was too stale to supply 
probable cause. Even if the affidavit was not stale, defendant 
argues that the warrant was overbroad because the affidavit 
did not establish probable cause to seize each of defendant’s 
devices. We conclude that the warrant was invalid because 
the information provided by the tip was stale and the affi -
davit did not otherwise establish probable cause to believe 
that evidence of the crimes would be found at defendant’s 
residence. Accordingly, we reverse and remand.
 We state the uncontroverted facts as recited in the 
affidavit supporting the application for the search warrant. 
State v. Meyers, 338 Or App 59, 62, 565 P3d 463 (2025). On 
December 7, 2021, Detective Winters submitted an affidavit 
in support of a search warrant application. According to the 
affidavit, on October 5, 2021, Winters received a tip from 
 1 The warrant defendant challenges on appeal did not authorize the search 
of the devices’ contents. Law enforcement seized the contents of the devices under 
the authority of the warrant defendant challenges on appeal and later searched 
them pursuant to defendant’s written consent. Defendant revoked his consent, 
and law enforcement obtained a second warrant to search the devices. On appeal, 
defendant does not challenge either the voluntariness of his consent or the valid -
ity of the second warrant. 
712 State v. Baker
the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children 
(NCMEC), an organization that processes reports of child 
sexual exploitation, including CSAM, and shares that 
information with appropriate law enforcement agencies. 
The NCMEC report stated that on May 16, 2021, a video 
depicting CSAM was uploaded to a Dropbox account asso -
ciated with defendant. Winters wrote that “the Reporting 
Electronic Service Provider,” here, Dropbox, viewed the video 
and reported it to NCMEC. NCMEC described the video as 
“contain[ing] imagery of a prepubescent minor engaging in 
a sex act.” The report identified the email address, the user-
name, and three internet protocol (IP) addresses associated 
with defendant. Comcast records connected one of those IP 
addresses to a residence in McMinnville, which matched the 
residence listed on defendant’s Oregon driver’s license.
 The December 7 affidavit recited that, after receiv-
ing the tip, Winters applied for a search warrant for the 
Dropbox account, and the magistrate issued a warrant. When 
Winters executed that warrant, Dropbox notified Winters 
that it had no records related to the account because such 
records are preserved for only 90 days and that preservation 
period had expired prior to the start of his investigation.
 The December 7 affidavit also set forth Winters’s 
training and experience relevant to CSAM investigations. 
Winters averred that “the electronic distribution” of CSAM 
“occurs through the duplication, rather than the transfer, of 
electronic data from a source computer to a destination com-
puter.” When that process is completed, “the data exists on 
both the source and destination computers.” Winters further 
averred that “CSAM is typically collected, stored, and dis -
tributed by individuals that trade in this type of illegal activ-
ity” and “contraband of this type can and is usually stored 
for indefinite amounts of time by the possessors of this ille -
gal contraband.” Winter’s affidavit also describes cloud-based 
storage. According to Winters, Dropbox “provides cloud-based 
storage of data,” which “allows access from anywhere and 
everywhere with digital devices” and permits a user to inter-
act “with the data contained within the cloud service, with -
out having to synchronize the same data between devices.” 
Even if accessed from an off-site location, a collector will 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 713
“sometimes maintain the ability to view and store [CSAM] in 
their residence or a secure and easily accessible place.” Some 
consumers of CSAM will “also conceal their illegal images 
on internet based cloud storage accounts to avoid physical 
possession of the images.” Winters averred that “[e]vidence of 
these online cloud storage accounts can still be located on the 
suspects[’] electronic device and is valuable evidence.”
 A magistrate issued the warrant, which authorized 
the search of defendant’s residence for “[a]ny electronic device 
capable of accessing, uploading to, and downloading from 
Dropbox Inc. and/or a Dropbox account for 5/1/21-6/1/21.” If 
any such device was found, the warrant authorized the sei-
zure of the device and authorized the search and seizure to 
extend to “additional hardware and storage devices located 
in the nearby vicinity.”
 On December 9, 2021, law enforcement executed the 
search warrant and seized two iPhones, two tablets, and two 
laptops from defendant’s residence. Defendant was present 
during the search, and he told officers that he watches “ani-
mal stuff” and videos labeled “petite,” although he said that 
he tried to avoid content that depicted children. Defendant 
then consented to a search of the devices’ contents. The next 
day, on December 10, 2021, defendant revoked his consent. 
By that time, law enforcement had completed a forensic 
examination of defendant’s cellphone and identified 22 files 
that either contained CSAM or depicted the sexual assault 
of an animal. Police used defendant’s statements and the 
results of the search of his cellphone to obtain a second war-
rant after defendant withdrew his consent.
 Defendant filed a motion to suppress the results of 
the search warrants, making essentially the same argu -
ments that he raises on appeal. 2 The trial court denied the 
motion, concluding that the approximately seven-month 
gap between the report from NCMEC and the application 
for the search warrant did not render the information too 
stale to provide probable cause.
 2 Below, defendant moved to suppress the results of both search warrants. 
As noted previously, on appeal, defendant does not independently challenge the 
validity of the second warrant except to the extent that the unlawful first war -
rant presumptively tainted all that followed, including the second warrant. 
714 State v. Baker
 On appeal, defendant first argues that the informa-
tion contained in the affidavit was stale, and therefore, the 
warrant lacked probable cause to justify the search of his res-
idence. In defendant’s view, the affidavit is premised on a sin-
gle, seven-month-old tip and lacks objective facts that would 
establish that defendant is a collector or persistent consumer 
of CSAM. Without the predicate fact that he is a collector 
or persistent consumer of CSAM, defendant contends that 
Winters’s training and experience is all that remains in the 
affidavit. That, by itself, does not support a conclusion that 
CSAM or any associated evidence would probably be found 
in defendant’s residence or on his devices, he argues.
 The state responds that the warrant was supported 
by probable cause that was not stale. In the state’s view, the 
affidavit provided a case-specific fact to confirm that defen -
dant’s possession of CSAM in May 2021 was consistent with a 
pattern of collection, specifically, that defendant had uploaded 
CSAM to Dropbox, a site designed for the storage of data.
 As we explain below, the information in the affida -
vit was stale, and the affidavit otherwise failed to estab -
lish the necessary factual predicate that defendant was a 
collector or persistent consumer of CSAM. Accordingly, we 
conclude that the warrant lacked probable cause.
 We review for legal error whether an affidavit sup-
porting a magistrate’s issuance of a warrant establishes 
probable cause. State v. Castilleja, 345 Or 255, 264, 192 P3d 
1283, adh’d to on recons, 345 Or 473, 198 P3d 937 (2008). A 
reviewing court “asks whether, based on the facts shown by 
the affidavit, a neutral and detached magistrate could con -
clude (1) that there is reason to believe that the facts stated 
are true; and (2) that the facts and circumstances disclosed 
by the affidavit are sufficient to establish probable cause 
to justify the search requested.” Id. Because we are in the 
same position as a trial court ruling on a motion to suppress 
that challenges a magistrate’s issuance of a warrant, we do 
not defer to the trial court’s findings or conclusions. State v. 
Klingler, 284 Or App 534, 540, 393 P3d 737 (2017). We view 
the affidavit in a “commonsense, non-technical and realis- 
tic fashion,” and “we resolve doubtful or marginal cases in 
favor of the preference for warrants.” State v. Gustafson, 300 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 715
Or App 438, 444, 452 P3d 962 (2019), rev den, 366 Or 493, 
cert den, ___ US ___, 141 S Ct 858 (2020).
 Article I, section 9, of the Oregon Constitution pro-
vides, in relevant part, “[N]o warrant shall issue but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath, or affirmation, and par -
ticularly describing the place to be searched, and the person 
or thing to be seized.”3 Probable cause exists “when the facts 
set out in the affidavit would lead a reasonable person to 
believe that seizable things will probably be found in the 
location to be searched.” Klingler, 284 Or App at 540 (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). Probable cause requires “not 
just a mere possibility that evidence would be found in a 
place to be searched, rather it demands that it is more likely 
than not.” State v. James, 336 Or App 55, 63, 560 P3d 747 
(2024) (internal quotation marks omitted).
 When the information in an affidavit describes a 
prior event or circumstance, the passage of time may make 
a fact “stale” and detract from probable cause. State v. 
Ulizzi, 246 Or App 430, 437-38, 266 P3d 139 (2011), rev den, 
351 Or 649 (2012). The purpose of the staleness analysis is 
to determine whether, “given the time between the event 
described and the issuance of the warrant, there is a rea -
sonable inference that the evidence will be where the affida-
vit suggests.” Id. at 438 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
“Staleness is an important factor when considering probable 
cause, because probable cause must exist at the time the 
order is issued.” State v. Van Osdol, 290 Or App 902, 909, 
417 P3d 488 (2018) (internal quotation marks omitted). To 
assess staleness, we have identified five factors to consider, 
although we are mindful that we consider the totality of 
facts in the affidavit: (1) the length of time; (2) the perish -
ability versus the durability of the item; (3) the mobility of 
the evidence; (4) the nonexplicitly inculpatory character of 
the evidence; and (5) the propensity of an individual suspect 
or general class of offenders to maintain and retain posses -
sion of such evidence. Id. We describe the relevant case law 
on each factor because those cases illustrate why the prob -
able cause in this affidavit was stale at the time that it was 
 3 The legislature has also codified requirements for search warrants, 
including a probable cause requirement in ORS 133.555(2). Defendant relies on 
Article I, section 9, not a statute. Thus, we discuss Article I, section 9. 
716 State v. Baker
issued by the magistrate and the cases provide important 
context for our discussion of the parties’ arguments, below.
 As to the first factor, generally, the probability of 
evidence being in a location lessens as the time lengthens 
between an event described in an affidavit and the issuance 
of a warrant. Gustafson, 300 Or App at 446. Even when 
there is a relatively long gap, probable cause may still exist 
if the totality of the circumstances permits a magistrate to 
reasonably infer that a defendant would have retained the 
evidence or would have created additional, similar evidence. 
Id. at 447. For example, in Gustafson, the defendant coached 
children at a gymnastics gym. Id. at 439. The affidavit in 
support of the search warrant established probable cause 
that the defendant had recently sexually abused four girls 
that he coached during sleepovers at the gym. Id. The affi-
davit also stated that an employee had discovered sexually 
suggestive photographs of young gymnasts on the defen -
dant’s computer 10 years earlier. Id. at 441-42. A magistrate 
issued a search warrant for police to search the defendant’s 
home, gym, and vehicles for digital devices capable of stor -
ing the type of sexually suggestive photos observed by the 
employee. Id. We concluded that, although the length of time 
between the employee’s discovery and the issuance of the 
warrant was long, the information was not stale because the 
facts in the affidavit gave rise to a “strong inference that 
[the] defendant would have kept the photographs or pro -
duced more.” Id. at 449. Specifically, additional information 
in the affidavit suggested that the defendant was still sexu-
ally attracted to young girls and that he continued using his 
gym as a means of obtaining access to them. The affidavit 
included multiple current allegations of sexual abuse occur-
ring at “sleepovers” at the gym, and the defendant stated 
that he had run those sleepovers for years. Id. at 449-50.
 As to the second and third factors, the perishabil -
ity and mobility of the evidence, we consider “the character 
of the crime and the thing to be seized.” State v. Corpus-
Ruiz, 127 Or App 666, 670, 874 P2d 90 (1994). For instance, 
information about drugs is particularly prone to staleness 
because drugs may be transported and consumed in short 
time periods. Id. Thus, in Corpus-Ruiz, we concluded that a 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 717
six-month gap between a report of heroin use at the prop -
erty in question and issuance of the search warrant made 
the probable cause stale because heroin “can be consumed 
in a short period of time and is easily moved.” Id. Digital 
evidence, by contrast, is durable. See Gustafson, 300 Or App 
at 448 (observing that “digital photographs are inherently 
durable, as opposed to perishable or subject to being used 
up, like user amounts of drugs”).
 As to the fourth and fifth factors, a defendant is 
more likely to retain evidence if possession of the item is 
not by itself illegal. See, e.g., State v. Veley, 37 Or App 235, 
238, 586 P2d 1130 (1978), rev den, 285 Or 1 (1979) (explain-
ing that condoms are not contraband, and it was therefore 
“reasonable to believe that the defendant would continue for 
some time to keep such items in” the place identified by the 
complainant). However, an affiant’s training and experience 
may prevent evidence from being stale by establishing that 
a particular class of offenders has a propensity to retain evi-
dence that is otherwise illegal to possess. State v. Daniels, 
234 Or App 533, 540, 228 P3d 695, rev den, 349 Or 171 (2010). 
In Daniels, for example, the affiant’s training and experi -
ence established that people who are sexually attracted to 
children often possess and retain sexually explicit material 
involving children. Id.
 An affiant’s training and experience by itself does 
not establish probable cause. Training and experience 
contribute to the probable cause calculus when an affiant 
connects their training and experience to a defendant’s 
“particular conduct or circumstances” and supports their 
training and experience with “objective facts derived from 
other sources.” Id. That type of evidence of an affiant’s train-
ing and experience may be sufficient to establish probable 
cause despite a significant lapse of time between the event 
described in the affidavit and the issuance of a warrant. Id. 
at 540-41.
 In Daniels, the detective who wrote the affidavit 
received a tip that the defendant had sexually abused his 
daughter 20 years prior, and on one occasion, the defendant 
had attempted unsuccessfully to videotape a sexual act with 
his daughter. Id. at 535. A young foster child was currently 
718 State v. Baker
living with the defendant in his home, and the defendant 
had sexually abused the child as recently as nine months 
before the application for the search warrant. Id. at 535-
36. The detective also averred that in his training and 
experience, “pedophiles often retain correspondence, pho -
tographs, diaries, magazines and movies in reference to 
their deviance” and that “pedophiles rarely dispose of their 
sexually explicit material[.]” Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted). A magistrate issued a search warrant authorizing 
the seizure of, among other items, any photographs, video- 
tapes, or recording devices in the defendant’s residence 
that likely contained illegal materials. Id. at 536-37. Law 
enforcement executed the warrant and seized videotapes 
that contained CSAM. Id. at 537.
 On appeal, the defendant argued that the affidavit 
failed to establish probable cause to search and seize the 
videotapes. Id. at 537. We explained that the daughter’s 
report that the defendant had once attempted to videotape 
a sexual act, by itself, would not have established probable 
cause because it “was at least 20 years old, and it involved 
only an unsuccessful attempt to create such material.” Id. 
at 539-40. However, we concluded that the officer’s train -
ing and experience that people who are sexually attracted 
to children often retain “deviant” movies, together with the 
objective fact that nine months prior, the defendant had sex-
ually abused a child who was still living in his house, logi -
cally led to the conclusion that videotapes containing CSAM 
were probably in the defendant’s residence. Id. at 541. We 
therefore concluded that the warrant was supported by 
probable cause. Id.
 If the information in an affidavit is stale, it may 
be “refreshed with more recent information that provides 
a basis for concluding that criminal activity continued at 
the stated location.” State v. Chase, 219 Or App 387, 393-94, 
182 P3d 274 (2008) (internal quotation marks and brack -
ets omitted). For example, in Van Osdol, an affidavit estab-
lished that a confidential informant engaged in two con -
trolled purchases of an undisclosed amount of heroin from 
two dealers in a 30-day period, the most recent purchase 
occurring 96 hours prior to the issuance of the warrant. 290 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 719
Or App at 904. Neither the informant nor the dealers were 
residents of the house at which the buys took place, which 
was the defendant’s residence. Id. We held that a search 
warrant authorizing law enforcement to search the property 
failed to establish probable cause that evidence of an ongo -
ing drug distribution enterprise would be in the defendant’s 
residence. Id. at 908. As previously noted, drug evidence is 
particularly prone to staleness. Id. at 908-09. Even though 
the detective averred that, in his training and experience, 
records and other evidence of drug trafficking, such as cash, 
scales, and baggies, are often kept for long periods of time 
in locations controlled or accessed by traffickers, “the facts 
in the affidavit fail[ed] to establish the necessary predicate 
on which he relies: that the dealers * * * engaged with [the] 
defendant or anyone else at the house in ‘ongoing high vol-
ume’ drug trafficking.” Id. at 910. Specifically, the affidavit 
did not establish that any additional amounts of narcotics 
beyond what was involved in the two controlled buys, or any 
other items associated with narcotics enterprises, would be 
present in the house, and “past possession of an unknown 
amount of a transportable and consumable drug by a visitor 
is not sufficient to establish that the drug probably will be 
found at the residence four days later.” Id.
 Returning to the case before us, we conclude that 
the warrant lacked probable cause because the evidence of 
defendant’s illegal activity was stale under the totality of the 
circumstances. Starting with the length of time, the warrant 
issued approximately seven months after NCMEC received 
the tip from Dropbox regarding defendant’s account. Seven 
months is not, by itself, too long to establish probable cause 
for digital evidence of an offense, as our decisions in Daniels 
and Gustafson illustrate. In this case, however, by the time 
law enforcement obtained a search warrant for the Dropbox 
account in December 2021, the video that had triggered the 
NCMEC report in May 2021 no longer existed in defendant’s 
account, and the affidavit does not establish whether the 
account was still active or contained any other files.
 As to the second factor, durability, digital evidence is 
durable. But the fact that digital evidence was once in a per-
son’s cloud-based account does not, without more, establish 
720 State v. Baker
that the digital evidence is probably on that person’s device 
seven months later. The affidavit here does not permit a rea-
sonable inference that the single digital video containing 
CSAM, or other CSAM evidence, was more likely than not on a 
device in defendant’s residence seven months after a Dropbox 
employee viewed the video. The durable nature of digital evi-
dence makes it probable the image exists somewhere. But the 
affidavit in this case established that it no longer existed in 
the location where it was originally observed—defendant’s 
Dropbox account. And the affidavit lacks evidence that it was 
instead probably on one of defendant’s devices.
 The third factor, mobility, generally supports the 
state’s argument that digital evidence probably remains on 
a device, in some form, even after the evidence has been 
uploaded or a person has attempted to delete the evidence. 
Winters explained in the affidavit in this case that foren -
sic examination of digital devices can locate evidence in 
those circumstances. Thus, digital evidence is not “moved” 
from one location to another in the same way as physical 
evidence. Again, however, the affidavit fails to connect that 
general premise to the circumstances of this case. Winters’s 
affidavit also provided contradictory statements that people 
with a sexual interest in children both keep CSAM on their 
devices for private viewing and avoid keeping CSAM on 
their devices, instead relying solely on cloud-based services 
to avoid having illegal material on their devices. The affida-
vit does not provide evidence of where the CSAM video was 
uploaded from. Thus, even accepting that a forensic exam -
ination of the device from which the CSAM in the Dropbox 
account was uploaded probably would find evidence of the 
video, the affidavit fails to establish probable cause that the 
video was ever on one of defendant’s devices.
 On the fourth and fifth factors, the propensity of 
a class of offenders to obtain and retain CSAM, which is 
explicitly illegal, Winters’s statements about the propensity 
of people with a sexual interest in children to obtain and 
retain CSAM also fails to sufficiently connect the affidavit’s 
general premise to the facts of this case. The deficiencies 
in this case are illustrated by comparing them to our prior 
cases on which the state relies. Those prior cases involved 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 721
affidavits that established probable cause of ongoing sexual 
offenses against children. In Gustafson, the affidavit estab-
lished that the defendant had stored CSAM on the computer 
at his gym 10 years ago. The affidavit also established prob-
able cause that the defendant had continued to use his gym 
to obtain access to and sexually abuse children. In light 
of that evidence of an ongoing pattern of sexual offenses 
against children, the 10-year-old information about CSAM 
on the defendant’s computer was not stale.
 Here, by contrast, there is scant case-specific evi -
dence in the affidavit. The affidavit included the report of 
only a single CSAM video in defendant’s Dropbox account 
seven months earlier. The video no longer existed in the 
account. The affidavit does not establish how the video was 
placed in defendant’s account or whether defendant viewed 
it. And the affidavit contains no evidence that the video was 
part of a pattern of possession of CSAM by defendant or that 
defendant had sexually abused a child.
 The state argues, relying on Daniels, that Winters’s 
attestation that CSAM is typically collected and retained 
for indefinite periods of time, along with the case-specific 
fact that defendant had uploaded the file to Dropbox, a site 
designed for the storage of files, together lead to the con -
clusion that defendant had probably stored CSAM on his 
devices. However, in Daniels, the evidence established that 
the defendant’s criminal activity had persisted over a 20-year 
period. Although the affidavit established that the most 
recent known offense committed by the defendant occurred 
nine months prior, the child he was seen abusing was still 
living in the home with the defendant. By contrast, here, the 
affidavit contains no evidence that defendant had sexually 
abused a child. The affidavit presents no case-specific evi -
dence of a pattern of criminal conduct by defendant. It con -
tains no case-specific evidence of present criminal conduct 
on defendant’s part. Moreover, as previously noted, the fact 
that defendant had not in fact retained the video in Dropbox 
undercuts the state’s assertion that defendant’s conduct is 
consistent with a pattern of collection or file retention.
 We further conclude that Winters’s training and 
experience is insufficient to establish a pattern of behavior in 
722 State v. Baker
this case that would revive the stale information. Although 
Winters averred that consumers of CSAM typically collect 
CSAM and retain it for indefinite periods of time, he also 
averred that consumers of CSAM “conceal their illegal images 
on internet based cloud storage accounts to avoid physical pos-
session of the images” and to allow access to those files “with-
out having to synchronize that same data between devices,” 
and that “Dropbox accounts have the capability of sending 
(sharing) files and folders with other Dropbox users.” But the 
objective facts in the affidavit fail to establish that defen -
dant’s upload of the video indicates that he was taking steps 
to remove the image from his device to avoid physical posses-
sion or that he was taking steps to store a file of his collection 
in a location accessible across multiple devices. Moreover, the 
affidavit does not provide facts that make it probable that 
defendant possessed it on his own device instead of moving 
the video to his Dropbox folder from some other location, such 
as another person’s cloud-based storage account.
 Thus, the affidavit failed to establish a necessary 
factual predicate: that defendant was a collector or per -
sistent consumer of CSAM. Without that factual predicate, 
or any additional facts to “refresh” probable cause, the court 
could not reasonably infer that CSAM would probably be 
located in defendant’s residence or on his devices. Because 
the warrant lacked probable cause, it was invalid, and the 
trial court erred by denying defendant’s motion to suppress.
 We do not necessarily disagree with the state that, 
under Article I, section 9, the durability of digital evidence, 
an affiant’s training and experience establishing the pro -
pensity of CSAM consumers to retain a collection of files for 
indefinite periods, and case-specific evidence supporting a 
reasonable inference that the defendant is a persistent con -
sumer of CSAM might be sufficient to overcome staleness. 
Cf., e.g., State v. Edwards, 2024 ME 55, ¶ 14, 320 A3d 387, 
392-93 (2024) (holding that probable cause did not become 
stale after a six-month period between an NCMEC tip and 
the issuance of a warrant where the affidavit established 
that the defendant had previous convictions for possession 
of CSAM, law enforcement had received multiple tips associ-
ated with the same IP address, and CSAM consumers have 
Cite as 350 Or App 710 (2026) 723
a propensity to retain the evidence for significant periods of 
time); United States v. Ebert, 61 F4th 394, 401 (4th Cir), cert 
den, ___ US ___, 144 S Ct 149 (2023) (concluding that prob -
able cause was not stale when an affidavit alleged that the 
defendant had taken sexually explicit photos of his daughter 
five to eight years earlier because “the property to be seized 
is not a consumable, like narcotics” and “law-enforcement 
experience supports the conclusion that individuals who pos-
sess such images rarely if ever dispose of such material, and 
store it for long periods in a secure place, typically in their 
homes” (internal quotation marks omitted)). Accord United 
States v. Raymonda, 780 F3d 105, 117 (2nd Cir), cert den, 577 
US 968 (2015) (holding that a warrant was not supported by 
probable cause because “absent any indicia that the suspect 
was a collector of [CSAM] likely to hoard pornographic files, 
* * * a single incident of access does not create a fair proba -
bility that [CSAM] will still be found on a suspect’s computer 
months after all temporary traces of that incident have likely 
cleared”). However, the state’s evidence is exceptionally thin 
in this case. As we explained above, the affidavit in this does 
not resemble affidavit in other cases that allege facts that 
establish ongoing or persistent access to CSAM, links the 
defendant’s access to CSAM directly to a propensity to store 
and collect such material, or establishes probable cause that 
the defendant has a persistent sexual interest in children. 
See, e.g., Daniels, 234 Or App at 538-39 (the affidavit alleged 
that the defendant had sexually abused multiple children 
over a 20-year period and as recently as nine months prior); 
see also United States v. Frechette , 583 F3d 374, 381 (6th 
Cir 2009), cert den , 562 US 1053 (2010) (explaining that 
“[i]t is not likely that the defendant is someone who was 
innocently surfing the internet and accidentally paid $79.95 
for a subscription” to a website distributing CSAM). Here, 
we conclude that the affidavit failed to sufficiently connect 
Winters’s training and experience to defendant’s conduct. 
Without that connection, the seven-month-old tip was stale, 
and the affidavit was insufficient to supply probable cause 
based on the upload of a single video, which no longer existed 
in defendant’s Dropbox account. Therefore, the trial court 
erred in denying defendant’s motion to suppress.
 Reversed and remanded.
