A179833
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/17/state_v._crawford_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879166/state-v-crawford/
Caption: State v. Crawford
Date: 2026-06-17

No. 557 June 17, 2026 689
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
FREDDIE LARAY CRAWFORD,
Defendant-Appellant.
Hood River County Circuit Court
21CR44785; A179833
Robert S. Raschio, Judge.
Argued and submitted September 27, 2024.
Daniel C. Silberman, Deputy Public Defender, argued the 
cause for appellant. Also on the briefs was Ernest G. Lannet, 
Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
Christopher A. Perdue, Assistant Attorney General, 
argued the cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Ellen 
F. Rosenblum, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Hellman, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.*
O’CONNOR, J.
Reversed and remanded.
______________
 * O’Connor, J. vice Mooney, S. J.
690 State v. Crawford
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 691
 O’CONNOR, J.
 In this criminal case, defendant challenges the trial 
court’s denial of his motion to suppress evidence. The ques -
tion before us is whether defendant was in compelling circum-
stances under Article I, section 12, of the Oregon Constitution, 
prior to being advised of his right to remain silent and his 
right to counsel during a police interrogation. Under the total-
ity of the circumstances of this case, the roadside traffic col -
lision investigation escalated into compelling circumstances 
prior to the officer advising defendant of his rights. The trial 
court thus erred when it denied the motion to suppress. We 
reverse and remand because the error was not harmless.
 The state charged defendant with driving under the 
influence of intoxicants (DUII), ORS 813.010; reckless driv -
ing, ORS 811.140; and failure to perform the duties of driver 
when property is damaged, ORS 811.700. Defendant moved 
to suppress evidence, and the trial court granted the motion 
in part and denied it in part. Defendant proceeded to a jury 
trial. The court entered a judgment of acquittal on the charge 
of failure to perform the duties of driver. The jury found defen-
dant not guilty of DUII and guilty of reckless driving.
 Defendant appeals the judgment of conviction for 
reckless driving. He assigns error to the trial court’s denial 
of his motion to suppress, renewing three arguments that 
he raised in the trial court. We write to address only the 
compelling circumstances issue because that obviates the 
need to resolve the other two arguments. 1 The trial court 
 1 Defendant’s second argument involves whether the trial court erred when 
it analyzed whether the evidence obtained in a warranted search should have 
been suppressed as a result of a separate Article I, section 12, violation under 
State v. Rohrs, 157 Or App 494, 970 P2d 262 (1998), aff ’d, 333 Or 397, 40 P3d 505 
(2002). The Article I, section 12, compelling circumstances violation requires the 
suppression of the evidence obtained from the warrant, as we explain below, and 
we thus do not separately address the remedy for the Rohrs violation.
 In his third argument, defendant challenges the officer’s search of his car 
incident to arrest as violating his rights under Article I, section 9, of the Oregon 
Constitution. Defendant acknowledges that his argument is foreclosed by State v. 
Stevens, 329 Or App 118, 540 P3d 50 (2023), rev den, 372 Or 437 (2024). He main-
tains that Stevens was wrongly decided and notes that the issue is pending before 
the Supreme Court in State v. Barajas (S071120). If we were to reach that issue, 
then Stevens would control. But we do not reach the issue because the evidence 
obtained from the officer’s search of defendant’s car must be suppressed because 
of the Article I, section 12, violation, as we explain below.
692 State v. Crawford
concluded that defendant was not in compelling circum -
stances and that Miranda warnings were thus not required 
prior to the point at which the officer arrested defendant 
and provided the Miranda warnings. Defendant argues that 
an Oregon State Police trooper interrogated him while he 
was in compelling circumstances without first advising him 
of the Miranda rights,2 in violation of Article I, section 12. 
The state responds that the trial court correctly determined 
that defendant was not in compelling circumstances. We 
conclude that a reasonable person in defendant’s circum -
stances would have felt compelled to answer the officer’s 
questions prior to the point at which the officer arrested 
defendant and provided defendant with Miranda warnings.
I. STANDARD OF REVIEW
 We are bound by the trial court’s findings of fact 
“if there is constitutionally sufficient evidence in the record 
to support those findings.” State v. Ehly, 317 Or 66, 75, 854 
P2d 421 (1993). If the trial court did not make express fact 
findings on a fact necessary to its decision “and there is evi-
dence from which a fact could be decided in more than one 
way, we presume that the trial court decided the fact in a 
manner that was consistent with the trial court’s ruling.” 
State v. Miller , 375 Or 173, 176, 589 P3d 151 (2026). We 
then review a trial court’s denial of a motion to suppress for 
legal error, and “assess anew” whether the facts meet the 
requirements of Article I, section 12. Id.
II. FACTS
 Whether a person was in compelling circumstances 
requires a fact-intensive analysis of the totality of the cir -
cumstances. State v. Grimm, 290 Or App 173, 178, 414 P3d 
435, rev den, 363 Or 283 (2018). We thus describe the facts 
in detail.
 2 “Miranda rights” refers to the advice of rights required under the Fifth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution as explained in Miranda v. 
Arizona, 384 US 436, 86 S Ct 1602, 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966). Article I, section 12, 
independently requires Miranda warnings or similar warnings when a person is 
in custody or compelling circumstances. State v. Magee, 304 Or 261, 265, 744 P2d 
250 (1987). The Oregon Supreme Court refers to the rights under both constitu -
tions as Miranda rights, for ease of reference, and we follow suit. State v. Roble-
Baker, 340 Or 631, 633 n 1, 136 P3d 22 (2006). 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 693
 The state called a single witness to testify at the 
hearing on defendant’s motion to suppress, Oregon State 
Police Trooper Ferrer. The court admitted four exhibits 
offered by the state: (1) Ferrer’s body camera video, (2) dash 
camera video from Ferrer’s patrol car, (3) photos from the 
scene, and (4) an affidavit for a search warrant for defen -
dant’s blood and urine. Defendant did not present evidence 
at the hearing. Nearly all of the encounter between Ferrer 
and defendant was video recorded, and the parties did not 
seriously dispute the facts.
 Late in the afternoon on a sunny day in early 
September, an eyewitness, Evans, reported a single-car 
crash to the police in Hood River County. Evans said that 
a man driving a dark sedan with no one else in the vehicle 
had hit the center barrier on Interstate 84, threw a beer can 
in a paper bag out of the window, and continued driving for 
about a mile before the car failed. Evans provided the car’s 
license plate number and said the car had significant dam -
age to the driver’s side and could no longer be driven.
 Ferrer responded and drove to the scene. On the 
way, Ferrer noticed a scuff on the center barrier and that 
the barrier had been “pushed slightly” from an impact. Not 
far from there, Ferrer saw a damaged car on the side of the 
highway. The car had significant damage on the driver’s 
side, including deflated tires and scuff marks consistent 
with striking the center barrier. The license plate matched 
the plate number provided by Evans.
 A uniformed sheriff’s deputy had arrived a few min-
utes prior to Ferrer. The deputy parked his patrol car on 
the side of the highway with its overhead lights activated, 
behind another car and defendant’s car. The other car 
belonged to defendant’s parents. The deputy was speaking 
with defendant and his father and examining defendant’s 
car when Ferrer arrived. Defendant’s mother was sitting in 
the passenger seat of her car. The deputy approached Ferrer 
and the deputy told Ferrer that defendant said that “they” 
blew a tire and pulled up about 30 minutes ago.
 Ferrer approached defendant, who had walked back 
to his parents’ car, and asked defendant if he had been 
694 State v. Crawford
driving the car. Defendant said that he owned the car and 
that nobody had been driving. Ferrer laughed and asked, 
“How did it get here?” Defendant said his girlfriend had 
driven it the day before and she had blown out a tire. Ferrer 
expressed disbelief and responded that he “was here yes -
terday” and had not seen the car. Defendant repeated that 
his girlfriend had driven the car yesterday and said that 
she had blown a tire. Ferrer asked defendant for his driver’s 
license. Defendant asked why, and this exchange followed:
 “[TROOPER FERRER:] Because at this point, I’m 
investigating a crash, and we have a witness who witnessed 
the crash and I believe that you were driving at this point.
 “[DEFENDANT:] Just because you believe it—
 “[FERRER:] Like I said, we have a witness that wit -
nessed the crash.
 “[DEFENDANT:] Can you bring that witness here 
then?
 “[FERRER:] I can certainly talk with them again. 
Okay? But right now, I’d like your driver’s license and you 
are not free to leave.
 “[DEFENDANT:] I’m not going anywhere. What I am 
saying is, basically, I am being detained right now?
 “[FERRER:] Yes.
 “[DEFENDANT:] Okay. [Defendant removes his license 
from his wallet and hands it to Ferrer.] Can you also bring 
that witness here?
 “[FERRER:] I can’t make them come anywhere but I 
can certainly talk to them.
 “[DEFENDANT:] But you just said there is witness 
that spoke—
 “[FERRER:] Yeah, on the telephone.3
 Ferrer then said, “Let’s walk up here to the car, 
okay?” Defendant and Ferrer walked to defendant’s car, 
which was parked approximately 10 to 20 feet in front of 
his parents’ car. Defendant’s father stood in front of his car, 
 3 The quotations are based on our transcription of the audio from Ferrer’s 
body camera video. 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 695
and his mother remained in the passenger seat. The dep -
uty stood at the back of defendant’s car, positioning himself 
between defendant’s parents, defendant, and Ferrer.
 Ferrer held his hand over the hood of the car and said 
to defendant, “Bro this thing’s been running. This thing’s 
been moving. It’s not just parked here since yesterday.” 
Defendant responded that he was not trying to give Ferrer 
a “hard time,” but “you’re not going to tell me I’ve been driv-
ing when I know I haven’t. The sun is right here beaming. It 
could be hot, it could be anything. I’m not going to sit here 
and let you say I have been driving—.” Ferrer interrupted 
him and asked, “How much have you had to drink today, 
sir?” Defendant responded that he had not been drinking. 
Ferrer told defendant that a beer can had been thrown out 
when the crash occurred. Defendant asked if Ferrer was 
going to blame that on him also. Ferrer responded that the 
witness saw him throw it out and that “we can make this 
easy or hard, it’s totally up to you whether you’re going to 
be honest or not.” Defendant responded that he was trying 
to be as honest as he could and again said that he was not 
trying to give the officer a hard time, but he was not going 
to let him accuse him of something he had not done.
 Ferrer then asked defendant if he would “do some 
tests just to make sure you are okay today.” Defendant 
expressed frustration and said he was trying to make 
it back to Portland because he had to go to work soon. 
Ferrer asked, “Why are you drinking before you go to work 
then?” Defendant did not respond. Ferrer said, “Look, I can 
smell alcohol on your breath, it’s very obvious.” Defendant 
responded that he was trying to get to work and that he 
was willing to cooperate with Ferrer. Ferrer said, “So you’re 
willing to do some tests then, is that correct?” Defendant 
said, “Okay, I have been drinking yesterday, is that going to 
make me guilty?” Defendant and Ferrer briefly talked over 
each other, and defendant said, “No, I’m not gonna. I refuse, 
sir.” Ferrer said, “Okay. Well, at this time I’m going to put 
you under arrest.” He handcuffed defendant and informed 
him of the Miranda rights, and defendant indicated that he 
understood. Ferrer placed defendant in the backseat of his 
patrol car.
696 State v. Crawford
 Ferrer then spoke with defendant’s father, who said 
that he came from Portland to help defendant get a new tire 
because defendant had called and said he had blown a tire. 
Ferrer spoke with defendant’s mother. She confirmed what 
defendant’s father had said.
 Ferrer searched defendant’s car. He found a lighter 
on the driver’s seat and eye drops and a small amount of 
loose marijuana in the center console, and he smelled alco -
hol and freshly burnt marijuana.
 Ferrer returned to the patrol car. Defendant asked 
him to turn on the air conditioning. Ferrer told defendant 
that the air conditioning was broken, apologized, and rolled 
down the window. Defendant said that he had not broken 
any laws and that he did not understand why he was being 
arrested. He asked where the witness was who said he had 
been driving. Ferrer explained that defendant’s parents said 
they drove here to pick up defendant. Defendant said “no.” 
Ferrer said, “They did tell me that. They said you’d called 
them because you claimed that you blew a tire.” Defendant 
said, “Exactly, they gave me a ride here.” Ferrer said that 
was not what defendant’s parents had told him. Ferrer said 
he did not want to “play games” with defendant and again 
repeated what Evans had reported. Ferrer told defendant 
that he had “obviously” been drinking and driving. Ferrer 
and defendant discussed defendant’s parents moving defen-
dant’s car instead of it being towed. Ferrer told defendant’s 
parents that he would allow them to move the car to save 
defendant money. He also explained that he would release 
defendant to his parents’ custody later that evening.
 Ferrer drove defendant to a police station in Hood 
River. The drive took about 20 minutes, and defendant dozed 
for a portion of the drive. At the station, Ferrer asked defen-
dant to submit to a breath test. Defendant said he was con-
cerned that he would fail because he had been drinking a 
lot with his girlfriend the night before and he was a smoker. 
Ferrer told defendant that being a smoker does not prevent 
a person from providing a breath sample. Defendant refused 
to submit to a breathalyzer test. Ferrer placed defendant in 
a holding cell.
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 697
 Ferrer prepared an affidavit in support of a request 
for a search warrant to obtain defendant’s blood and urine 
to test them for intoxicants. In the affidavit, Ferrer wrote 
that he had probable cause that defendant committed DUII 
because of poor driving, poor walking and balance, “slurred 
speech that smelled of alcohol,” watery eyes, defendant’s 
refusal to perform field sobriety tests (FSTs), defendant’s 
refusal to perform the breath test, defendant’s admission 
to drinking heavily the previous night, and because his car 
“smelled strongly of alcohol and burnt marijuana.” A judge 
issued the search warrant. Three hours after defendant 
refused the breathalyzer test, the blood draw revealed a 
0.012 blood alcohol content (BAC). The urine sample tested 
positive for marijuana use. At trial, an expert testified that 
the urine test result showed only that defendant had used 
marijuana sometime during the previous 30 days.
 The deputy found a beer can on the highway, near 
where defendant’s car struck the center barrier. The can 
was similar in color to Evans’s description of the beer can 
that she saw the driver throw out of the car’s window, but it 
did not have a paper bag around it or near it.
 As noted above, the state charged defendant with 
DUII, reckless driving, and failure to perform the duties of 
a driver. Pretrial, defendant moved to suppress “all physical 
evidence seized and gathered from [defendant’s] vehicle, all 
in and out of custody statements of the defendant, and all 
evidence deriving therefrom.” Defendant’s motion identified 
specific evidence that should be excluded, consistent with 
defendant’s arguments on appeal.
 The trial court granted the motion in part and 
denied it in part. The court determined that Ferrer had 
violated defendant’s Article I, section 12, privilege against 
compelled self-incrimination when he asked defendant to 
perform FSTs without providing the Rohrs admonishment. 
The court denied the remainder of defendant’s motion. It 
determined that defendant was not in custody or compel -
ling circumstances prior to Ferrer providing the Miranda 
warnings and that Ferrer’s search of defendant’s car was 
justified by the search-incident-to-arrest exception to the 
warrant requirement. The court suppressed defendant’s 
698 State v. Crawford
refusal to perform the FSTs, but it did not suppress any 
other evidence. As noted above, defendant challenges all 
three rulings on appeal, but we reach only the compelling 
circumstances ruling.
III. ANALYSIS
A. Article I, section 12, Compelling Circumstances
 Article I, section 12, of the Oregon Constitution 
provides that “[n]o person shall * * * be compelled in any 
criminal prosecution to testify against himself.” Miranda 
warnings protect a defendant’s Article I, section 12, right 
against compelled self-incrimination. State v. Rodriguez , 
337 Or App 728, 734, 564 P3d 471 (2025). That right is “sim-
ilar to, but broader than,” a defendant’s Fifth Amendment 
right against self-incrimination, as established in Miranda 
v. Arizona, 384 US 436, 86 S Ct 1602, 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966). 
State v. Reed , 371 Or 478, 483-84, 538 P3d 195 (2023). 
Article I, section 12, requires a law enforcement officer to 
provide a person with Miranda warnings or Miranda-like 
warnings when a defendant is in full custody or compel -
ling circumstances. State v. Roble-Baker, 340 Or 631, 638, 
136 P3d 22 (2006); State v. Schwerbel , 233 Or App 391, 
395, 226 P3d 100, rev den, 349 Or 172 (2010) (explaining 
that “full custody” means when a suspect “has been for -
mally arrested or placed under restraint by police acting in 
their official capacity” (internal quotation marks omitted)). 
That is, to protect a person’s privilege against compelled 
self-incrimination, Article I, section 12, requires Miranda 
warnings or Miranda-like warnings when law enforcement 
interrogates a person who is not in custody when the cir -
cumstances become compelling.
 When a defendant moves to suppress their own 
statement, the state must prove by a preponderance of the 
evidence that the statement was voluntary, including that 
any “unwarned statements were made before the circum -
stances became compelling.” Roble-Baker, 340 Or at 639. 
“The question whether the circumstances were compel -
ling * * * turns on how a reasonable person in the suspect’s 
position would have understood [their] situation.” State v. 
Shaff, 343 Or 639, 645, 175 P3d 454 (2007). We consider the 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 699
totality of the circumstances and ask whether law enforce -
ment created a “police-dominated atmosphere,” using a 
nonexclusive list of factors, including: “(1) the location of the 
encounter; (2) the length of the encounter; (3) the amount of 
pressure exerted on the defendant; and (4) the defendant’s 
ability to terminate the encounter.” Rodriguez, 337 Or App 
at 735 (citing Shaff, 343 Or at 645, and Roble-Baker, 340 Or 
at 640-41). “We consider each of those factors as we assess 
all of the circumstances of the encounter, keeping in mind 
that except in the most extreme cases, no single factor is 
dispositive.” Rodriguez, 337 Or App at 735 (internal brack -
ets and quotation marks omitted).
 The purpose of advising a person of their Miranda 
rights is to “counter the coercive effects inherent in custo -
dial interrogations.” Miller, 375 Or at 183 (internal quota -
tion marks omitted). The Miranda warnings, which include 
the right to remain silent and the right to counsel during 
interrogation, help “counteract” the coercive atmosphere, 
thus increasing the likelihood that a statement made in 
custody or compelling circumstances “is the product of free 
choice.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). An officer 
must advise a person of their rights before interrogating a 
person in custody or compelling circumstances “because the 
right to be free from compelled self-incrimination is fulfilled 
only when the person is guaranteed the right to remain 
silent unless he chooses to speak in the unfettered exercise 
of his own will.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).
 Defendant asserts that he was subject to interroga-
tion while in compelling circumstances and without receiv -
ing Miranda warnings. The state counters that defendant 
was not in compelling circumstances because the encounter 
was a routine traffic stop or typical DUII investigation. See 
State v. Nelson, 285 Or App 345, 351, 397 P3d 536 (2017) 
(explaining that a traffic stop or an investigatory detention 
does not require Miranda warnings “so long as the stop is no 
more lengthy or coercive than is typical”); State v. Prickett, 
324 Or 489, 494-95, 930 P2d 221 (1997) (administering FSTs 
does not, by itself, constitute compelling circumstances).
 “Routine” traffic stops can escalate into compel -
ling circumstances. See Schwerbel, 233 Or App at 395-98 
700 State v. Crawford
(concluding that the officer’s routine traffic stop of the defen-
dant for driving with an unsafe vehicle became compelling 
circumstances and required Miranda warnings once the 
officer suspected the defendant of driving with a suspended 
license after running the defendant’s identification and 
detaining him); State v. McMillan, 184 Or App 63, 68-69, 55 
P3d 537 (2002), rev den, 335 Or App 355 (2003) (concluding 
that the officer’s statement to the defendant during a stop 
that a second officer will “come back and make a decision 
as to whether or not [the defendant was] going to jail” and 
the fact that the officer confronted the defendant with his 
observation that the defendant retrieved cash from an ATM 
machine and immediately engaged in sexual activity with a 
prostitute in his car escalated the stop to compelling circum-
stances); State v. Rose, 109 Or App 378, 380-81, 819 P2d 757 
(1991) (concluding that an officer who asked the defendant if 
she knew that carrying a concealed weapon in a car without 
a permit is illegal placed the defendant in compelling cir -
cumstances after he had stopped the defendant for erratic 
driving and subsequently saw she had an empty holster, 
asked her if there was a weapon in the car, and asked her 
to exit the vehicle). When evaluating whether a traffic stop 
has become compelling, we consider, among the totality of 
the circumstances, whether the officer confronted the defen-
dant with incriminating evidence in a coercive manner that 
would cause a reasonable person in the defendant’s position 
to feel compelled to answer their questions. Schwerbel, 233 
Or App at 395-96.
1. Location
 A traffic stop on a public roadway is less likely to con-
tribute to a compelling atmosphere than a police-dominated 
atmosphere like a police station. Compare Prickett, 324 Or 
at 495 (describing a noncompelling traffic stop as “public,” 
“brief,” and not “coerc[ive] or threaten[ing]”), with Grimm, 
290 Or App at 180 (“[T]he unfamiliar, police station set -
ting of the interview tended—necessarily—toward a ‘police 
dominated atmosphere.’ ”).
 Here, Ferrer and defendant interacted on the shoul-
der of a busy public highway during the late afternoon. Two 
police officers, Ferrer and a sheriff’s deputy, were present. 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 701
The deputy does not appear to have engaged with defendant 
while Ferrer was speaking with him.
 Defendant’s parents were also present. His parents 
remained with their car for the majority of the encounter. 
Ferrer went back and forth between defendant and his par-
ents and was respectful when talking with them. But the 
officer exerted control over when defendant could interact 
with his parents. On the whole, we conclude that the loca -
tion of the encounter, including the people present, weighs 
against compelling circumstances. See State v. Gallegos-
Torres, 343 Or App 65, 68, 577 P3d 822 (2025) (an encoun -
ter in a public location weighs against finding compelling 
circumstances).
2. Length
 Here, a few minutes elapsed between Ferrer’s first 
question to defendant and when Ferrer arrested defendant 
and provided Miranda warnings. However, the length of an 
encounter is not dispositive. Rodriguez, 337 Or App at 736. 
Even a short encounter may result in compelling circum -
stances depending on other circumstances, including “the 
amount of pressure placed on [the] defendant during the 
encounter as well as [their] ability to terminate the encoun-
ter.” Id. It was a relatively brief encounter here, and the 
length weighs against concluding that the circumstances 
were compelling. See Gallegos-Torres, 343 Or App at 68 (con-
cluding that a 10-minute-long encounter in a public location 
weighed against finding compelling circumstances).
3. The amount of pressure exerted on defendant
 Even a brief encounter can become compelling 
under Article I, section 12. “The amount of significance 
we assign to the length of the encounter depends * * * on 
the qualitative dynamics of time and the amount of pres -
sure placed on defendant during the encounter as well as 
[his] ability to terminate[.]” Rodriguez, 337 Or App at 736 
(internal quotation marks omitted). We consider “the use 
of aggressive and coercive police interrogation practices, 
especially including those explicitly predicated on assump -
tions of a suspect’s guilt or calculated to contradict a sus -
pect’s assertions of innocence” to be more significant for our 
702 State v. Crawford
analysis of how a defendant understood their situation than 
the objective length of time. Id. (internal quotation marks 
and punctuation omitted)).
 In many police-citizen encounters, the most signif -
icant factor for evaluating the amount of pressure put on 
a defendant is “whether the officer[ ] used evidence of guilt 
in a coercive manner when they confronted defendant with 
that evidence.” Rodriguez, 337 Or App at 737 (internal quo -
tation marks, brackets, and punctuation omitted; emphasis 
in original). Specifically, we have concluded that an officer 
“expressly confronting a suspect with evidence of probable 
cause * * * may make the circumstances sufficiently compel -
ling to require Miranda warnings.” McMillan, 184 Or App at 
68; see also State v. Werowinski, 179 Or App 522, 532, 40 P3d 
545, rev den, 334 Or 632 (2002) (explaining that confronting 
the defendant with witness statements that incriminated 
the defendant would have made a reasonable person in the 
defendant’s situation understand that he was being ques -
tioned in compelling circumstances). For example, an officer’s 
statement that they believe a defendant had been driving 
impaired, without more, “would not be understood by a rea -
sonable person to be pressure on [them] to answer questions.” 
Nelson, 285 Or App at 354. By contrast, informing a defen -
dant that the officer will decide whether to take the defen -
dant to jail and then confronting the defendant with evidence 
that the defendant solicited a sex worker weighs in favor of 
compelling circumstances. McMillan, 184 Or App at 68-69.
 Here, the coercive nature of the encounter esca -
lated quickly as Ferrer increased the pressure on defendant. 
Within 40 seconds of engaging defendant, Ferrer told defen-
dant that a witness had observed a car crash and that Ferrer 
believed defendant was driving the car, despite defendant’s 
statements denying that he had driven the car. A little less 
than two minutes after engaging defendant, Ferrer asked 
defendant how much he had to drink that day and defendant 
denied drinking at all that day. Ferrer told defendant that 
a witness had seen him throw a beer can out of the window 
and that “we can make this easy or hard, it’s totally up to you 
whether you’re going to be honest or not.” A reasonable person 
in defendant’s circumstances would have understood Ferrer 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 703
to have communicated that Ferrer believed defendant was 
lying about drinking and driving and, if defendant did not 
tell Ferrer the truth (that is, admit to drinking and driving), 
then Ferrer would make this “hard” for defendant. Thus, the 
intensity of the encounter quickly escalated even though the 
duration was short. Accordingly, this factor weighs in favor of 
finding compelling circumstances.
4. Defendant’s ability to terminate the encounter
 A defendant’s inability to terminate an encounter 
during a traffic stop or relatively brief investigative stop to 
investigate a crime “does not usually result in compelling 
circumstances” by itself. Gallegos-Torres, 343 Or App at 69. 
When an officer expressly informs a defendant that they are 
“detained,” however, that weighs in favor of finding compel-
ling circumstances. Compare Schwerbel, 233 Or App at 397 
(officer telling the defendant he was detained weighed in 
favor of compelling circumstances), with State v. Revette, 318 
Or App 749, 763, 508 P3d 985, rev den, 370 Or 214 (2022) 
(explaining that an officer informing the defendant that he 
was free to leave no matter what the defendant told the 
officer weighs against finding compelling circumstances).
 Here, two law enforcement officers in patrol cars 
were present. Ferrer told defendant that he was investigating 
a crash and asked for defendant’s identification. Defendant 
asked whether he was being detained. Ferrer told him he 
was detained. Immediately thereafter, Ferrer repeatedly 
confronted defendant with Evans’s report and communi -
cated to defendant that he did not believe defendant’s story. 
Defendant was obviously not free to leave. Ferrer taking 
defendant’s driver’s license and telling him he was detained 
did not elevate the encounter to compelling circumstances 
on its own, but it significantly heightened the intensity of 
the encounter and the pressure that would have been felt by 
a reasonable person in defendant’s circumstances.
5. Totality of the circumstances
 “The interplay of all four factors is important and 
the synergistic effect of location, time, pressure, and abil -
ity to terminate the interrogation reflected in this record 
highlights the importance of assessing the totality of the 
704 State v. Crawford
circumstances over any isolated factor.” Rodriguez, 337 Or 
App at 739. Under the totality of the circumstances in this 
case, defendant was in compelling circumstances under 
Article I, section 12, when the officer told defendant that a 
witness had seen him throw a beer can out of the window 
and told defendant that “we can make this easy or hard, it’s 
totally up to you whether you’re going to be honest or not.”
 Prior to that point, the circumstances had esca -
lated quickly from a noncoercive crash investigation to 
compelling circumstances. From the start of the encounter, 
Ferrer clearly communicated that he believed defendant 
was lying to him about how the crash occurred. Ferrer then 
directed defendant’s movement away from his parents to 
defendant’s car, where he confronted defendant with physi-
cal evidence that contradicted defendant’s statements that 
he had not driven the car that day. The uniformed deputy 
placed himself between defendant, Ferrer, and defendant’s 
parents. Ferrer informed defendant that he was detained 
and not free to leave. Ferrer continued to tell defendant that 
he did not believe his statements, and to confront defendant 
with evidence that contradicted defendant’s claim that he 
had driven. When defendant protested that he was tell -
ing the truth, Ferrer abruptly asked “how much” he had 
to drink that day. That question assumed that defendant 
had been drinking, and circumstances of the encounter to 
that point made it clear that Ferrer believed defendant had 
been drinking and driving. Defendant denied drinking. 
Ferrer immediately responded by telling defendant that a 
witness had seen him throw a beer can out of the car’s win-
dow. Defendant responded by asking if Ferrer was going to 
blame that on him also. Ferrer then told defendant that the 
witness saw him do it and told defendant that “we can make 
this easy or hard, it’s totally up to you whether you’re going 
to be honest or not.”
 At that point, a reasonable person in defendant’s 
position would have understood that if they were not hon -
est, which Ferrer had communicated meant admitting to 
drinking and driving, then the remainder of the encoun -
ter would be “hard.” See Schwerbel, 233 Or App at 395 
(“Although an officer’s unarticulated suspicions do not 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 705
result in compelling circumstances, expressly confronting 
a suspect with evidence of probable cause to arrest may 
make the circumstances sufficiently compelling to require 
Miranda warnings[.]” (Citing McMillan, 184 Or App at 68.)). 
A reasonable person would have felt compelled to respond 
to Ferrer’s accusation to avoid making the rest of the 
encounter “hard.” See State v. Courville , 276 Or App 672, 
678, 368 P3d 838 (2016) (recognizing that the United States 
Supreme Court in Miranda explained that questioning that 
projects an “aura of confidence” in a person’s guilt “under -
mines [the person’s] will to resist” answering the questions 
(quoting Miranda, 384 US at 455)); see also Roble-Baker , 
340 Or at 643 n 8 (citing Miranda for the same proposition). 
The coercive effect on defendant tipped the balance of the 
encounter to compelling circumstances. See Reed, 371 Or 
at 484 (explaining that the purpose of requiring Miranda 
warnings under Article I, section 12, is to “counter the coer-
cive effects inherent in custodial interrogations” and cir -
cumstances that have become compelling). Miranda warn-
ings were required to counteract the coercive effect and to 
ensure that defendant’s subsequent statements were the 
product of his free will. See Miller, 375 Or at 183. This case 
illustrates the danger of not providing the warnings. It was 
only after the officer told defendant that “we can make this 
easy or hard, it’s totally up to you whether you’re going to be 
honest or not,” that defendant admitted to drinking alcohol, 
claiming that he had done so the night before, even though 
he had denied drinking alcohol multiple times earlier in the 
encounter.
B. Remedy for Article I, section 12, Violation
 “The state bears the burden of production and per-
suasion to show” that subsequently obtained evidence did 
not derive from an Article I, section 12, violation. State v. 
Swan, 363 Or 121, 133, 420 P3d 9 (2018). Physical and tes-
timonial evidence derived from a violation of Article I, sec -
tion 12, may not be used against a defendant in a criminal 
prosecution. State v. Vondehn, 348 Or 462, 476, 236 P3d 691 
(2010). A court must “suppress not only a defendant’s state-
ments obtained in violation of Miranda but also evidence 
derived from that violation.” State v. Jarnagin, 351 Or 703, 
706 State v. Crawford
715-16, 277 P3d 535 (2012). “[T]he question whether testi -
monial or physical evidence derives from a prior Miranda 
violation cannot be reduced to a mechanical formula but 
will vary depending on the totality of the circumstances.” 
Swan, 363 Or at 131. The totality of the circumstances 
inquiry involves looking at the Jarnagin factors, which are
“the nature of the violation, the amount of time between 
the violation and any later statements, whether the suspect 
remained in custody before making any later statements, 
subsequent events that may have dissipated the taint of 
the earlier violation, and the use that the state has made of 
the unwarned statements.”
Jarnagin, 351 Or at 716.
 Similarly, a defendant seeking to “exclude evidence 
obtained in a warranted search must establish a minimal 
factual connection between the illegality asserted as a 
basis for suppression and the challenged evidence.” State v. 
DeJong, 368 Or 640, 654, 497 P3d 710 (2021). A defendant’s 
burden to show a “minimal factual nexus” is low; it “does 
not require a defendant to identify and produce evidence 
related to discrete factual theories connecting unlawful con-
duct with the challenged evidence.” Id. at 655. A defendant 
can show a minimal factual nexus if the evidence that was 
obtained is connected to “some prior governmental miscon-
duct.” State v. Johnson, 335 Or 511, 521, 73 P3d 282 (2003).
 When a defendant shows a minimal factual nexus 
between evidence and an earlier constitutional violation, 
the burden shifts to the state to demonstrate that the evi -
dence “would have been inevitably discovered, * * * discov-
ered through independent means, or * * * so attenuated from 
the illegality as to dissipate the taint[.]” Id. at 520; see also 
State v. Yaeger, 321 Or App 543, 545, 517 P3d 1029 (2022), 
rev den, 371 Or 477 (2023). “[I]t is not sufficient for the state 
merely to show that the warrant application was sufficient 
without the tainted evidence. The state must show that the 
challenged evidence would have been discovered during the 
warranted search even without the prior illegality.” Yaeger, 
321 Or App at 548 (emphasis in original). For example, 
“[e]ven when a Miranda violation has occurred,” subsequent 
conduct, circumstances, or events can “break the causal 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 707
chain” if the subsequent conduct, circumstances, or events 
were “either not affected by or w[ere] only tenuously con -
nected to a prior illegality.” State v. Williams, 320 Or App 
705, 715, 514 P3d 501 (2022) (analyzing whether the defen-
dant’s voluntary consent was sufficient to “attenuate [the] 
prior violation” of Miranda (internal quotation marks omit-
ted)). Ultimately, this is a factually intensive inquiry, and 
“[t]here is a range of circumstances that can affect whether 
subsequently discovered evidence derives from the failure 
to give required Miranda warnings.” Id. at 722 (internal 
quotation marks omitted).
 DeJong implicitly overruled our cases that had 
approved of a trial court simply excising the evidence 
derived from the constitutional violation from a warrant 
and then evaluating whether the affidavit in support of 
the request for the warrant provided probable cause with -
out the excised evidence. Id. DeJong involved a violation of 
the defendant’s Article I, section 9, rights. 368 Or at 642. 
In Yaeger, we applied the DeJong analysis to a warranted 
search that followed an Article I, section 12, violation. 321 
Or App at 547-50.
 In this case, defendant asks us to determine which 
evidence derived from the violation by applying the test from 
Jarnagin and to conclude that the Miranda violation requires 
suppression of all subsequently discovered evidence, includ-
ing the evidence in defendant’s car and the blood test and 
urine test results. He argues that the subsequent events, 
including the belated Miranda warnings and the judge’s 
issuance of the warrant for his blood and urine, did not dissi-
pate the taint from the Article I, section 12, violation, and he 
notes that the state did not attempt to establish attenuation 
in the trial court. The state does not respond to the merits 
of those arguments. Instead, it argues in a footnote that the 
prosecutor “likely” did not advance any attenuation argu -
ments because defendant did not argue below that the trial 
court should suppress the evidence in his car or the results of 
the blood or urine tests as a result of the Miranda violation. 
We disagree that defendant did not raise the issue below.
 Defendant filed a single motion to suppress, 
argued that his statements “were coerced under compelling 
708 State v. Crawford
circumstances,” and asked the court to “suppress all physical 
evidence seized and gathered from [defendant’s] vehicle, all in 
and out of custody statements of [ ] defendant, and all evidence 
deriving therefrom.” To be sure, the motion also cited other 
constitutional provisions, and it could have been more precise. 
But the motion was adequate to place the state and the court 
on notice that defendant sought to suppress all physical and 
testimonial evidence obtained after the point at which the 
encounter became compelling under Article I, section 12.
 On the merits, defendant established a minimal 
factual nexus between the Article I, section 12, compelling 
circumstances violation and the subsequently discovered 
evidence, including the evidence discovered as a result of 
the warranted search. The state did not attempt to meet 
its burden to establish attenuation in the trial court, and 
it has not advanced an attenuation argument on appeal. 
Attenuation is a fact-dependent question that we will not 
address for the first time on appeal. See, e.g., State v. Gabr, 
324 Or App 588, 596-97, 527 P3d 49 (2023) (declining to 
address the state’s attenuation argument because there 
were questions as to how the record might have developed 
differently or what inferences the trial court might have 
drawn from the record). We thus conclude that the evidence 
should have been suppressed.
 Article VII (Amended), section 3, of the Oregon 
Constitution requires us to affirm “notwithstanding any 
error committed during the trial” if the error was harm -
less. State v. Davis, 336 Or 19, 32, 77 P3d 1111 (2003). An 
error is harmless when “there is little likelihood that a 
particular error affected the verdict.” Id. (internal quota -
tion marks, brackets, and punctuation omitted). The state 
does not argue that any trial court error in concluding that 
the circumstances of the encounter did not become compel -
ling prior to the point at which Ferrer provided Miranda 
warnings was harmless. We conclude that the error was 
not harmless. The prosecutor relied at trial on the physical 
evidence found in defendant’s car, the video of him dozing 
in the patrol car, Ferrer’s observations of defendant, some 
of defendant’s statements to Ferrer after the circumstances 
became compelling, and the results of the blood and urine 
Cite as 350 Or App 689 (2026) 709
tests, to discredit defendant and to urge the jury to find him 
guilty of reckless driving. On this record, there is more than 
a little likelihood that the error affected the jury’s guilty 
verdict for reckless driving.
IV. CONCLUSION
 The trial court erred when it determined that the 
circumstances of the encounter did not become compelling 
prior to the point at which Ferrer advised defendant of his 
Miranda rights, in violation of Article I, section 12. The 
subsequently obtained physical and testimonial evidence 
should have been suppressed. The error was not harmless.
 Reversed and remanded.
