A181113
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/17/state_v._kayne_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879164/state-v-kayne/
Caption: State v. Kayne
Date: 2026-06-17

No. 553 June 17, 2026 641
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
KAREN V. KAYNE,
Defendant-Appellant.
Josephine County Circuit Court
22CR13236; A181113
Brandon S. Thueson, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 3, 2025, Central Catholic 
High School, Portland.
Peter G. Klym, Deputy Public Defender, argued the cause 
for appellant. Also on the briefs was Ernest G. Lannet, 
Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
E. Nani Apo, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Ellen F. 
Rosenblum, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and Pagán, 
Judge.
PAGÁN, J.
Reversed and remanded.
642 State v. Kayne
Cite as 350 Or App 641 (2026) 643
 PAGÁN, J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment of conviction for 
two counts of maintaining a dangerous dog, ORS 609.098. 
Defendant argues, among other things, that the trial court 
erred in convicting defendant without applying the requi -
site mental state of criminal negligence. We conclude that 
the trial court plainly erred in convicting defendant with -
out finding that she acted with criminal negligence, and we 
exercise our discretion to correct the error.1 Accordingly, we 
reverse and remand.
 For context, we begin with an overview of the ele -
ments that the state must prove to convict a person of main-
taining a dangerous dog. We then summarize the facts and 
procedural history, including the parties’ arguments and 
the trial court’s speaking verdict, as relevant to the issues 
of preservation and plain error, before proceeding to our 
analysis.
ORS 609.098(2)
 Under ORS 609.098(2), “[a] person commits the crime 
of maintaining a dangerous dog if the person is the keeper 
of a dog and the person, with criminal negligence, fails to 
prevent the dog from engaging in an act described in sub -
section (1) of this section.” As relevant here, ORS 609.098 
(1)(b) provides that a “dangerous dog” means a dog that “[a]cts 
as a potentially dangerous dog,” defined under ORS 609.035 
(8)(c) as a dog that “[w]ithout provocation and while not on 
premises from which the keeper may lawfully exclude oth -
ers, inflicts physical injury on or kills livestock or a domes -
tic animal,” after having previously committed an act as a 
potentially dangerous dog that resulted in the keeper being 
found to have violated ORS 609.095(1)(g) (dog as a public 
 1 In light of that conclusion, we do not address defendant’s remaining assign-
ments of error, in which she argues that the trial court erred in (1) applying 
an incorrect legal standard in finding that defendant was guilty of maintaining 
dangerous dogs because the incident “began” on public property and then contin-
ued on defendant’s property; and (2) imposing restitution without a hearing or 
stipulation. We decline to address the first claim of error, which is unpreserved, 
because we cannot say with confidence that it will arise on remand; and should 
it arise on remand, the parties will have an opportunity to address it before the 
trial court in the first instance. As to defendant’s challenge to the imposition of 
restitution, we note that the state concedes that it was error; however, our dispo -
sition obviates the need to address it.
644 State v. Kayne
nuisance).2 In sum, to convict a defendant of maintaining a 
dangerous dog, as relevant here, the state must prove that 
the person is the keeper of a dog that has previously injured 
or killed another domestic animal, and that the person, with 
criminal negligence, failed to prevent the dog from inflicting 
injury on or killing a domestic animal without provocation, 
while not on property from which the keeper may lawfully 
exclude others.3
FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
 The state charged defendant with two counts of 
maintaining a dangerous dog after an incident involving 
defendant’s two dogs, Moki and Gyptian, and a dog owned 
by another person, Gaul, named Baby Girl. Defendant, who 
appeared pro se, waived a jury and proceeded to a bench trial. 
At trial, the state argued in its opening statement that the 
evidence would show that defendant had previously been con-
victed of maintaining two dogs—Moki and Gyptian—as a 
nuisance, and that the two dogs broke through defendant’s 
fence and pulled Baby Girl into defendant’s yard. In her open-
ing statement, defendant argued that the evidence would 
show that Baby Girl bit her small dog, Zorro, through the 
fence, that Gyptian and Moki had been provoked when Zorro 
yelped, and that Baby Girl was “stuck in [her] broken fence” 
on her private property when Moki and Gyptian grabbed her.
 Gaul testified that he was walking Baby Girl on a 
public path past defendant’s house, on the outside of a picket 
fence that surrounded defendant’s yard. Gaul saw a small 
barking dog, Zorro, in defendant’s front yard. Baby Girl 
did not bark at Zorro or try to push her nose through the 
fence. As they walked by, two large dogs, Moki and Gyptian, 
broke through a “makeshift” barrier on defendant’s porch, 
charged towards the picket fence, and broke a board off of 
the fence. One of the dogs reached through the broken fence, 
 2 After defendant was convicted, the legislature amended ORS 609.035. Or 
Laws 2025, ch 170, § 1. That amendment is not relevant to our analysis, and, 
accordingly, we cite to the current version of the statute.
 3 Criminal negligence means that “a person fails to be aware of a substan -
tial and unjustifiable risk that [a specified] result will occur or that [a specified] 
circumstance exists. The risk must be of such nature and degree that the failure 
to be aware of it constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a 
reasonable person would observe in the situation.” ORS 161.085(10).
Cite as 350 Or App 641 (2026) 645
grabbed Baby Girl, and dragged her through the fence into 
defendant’s yard, where both dogs “started mauling her” 
until Gaul went into the yard and defendant came out of her 
house to intervene. Another witness, Shoesmith, testified 
that she was driving past defendant’s house and saw defen-
dant’s two dogs break the fence and pull Baby Girl into the 
yard, and that Baby Girl did not “initiate the physical alter-
cation.” The state presented photos of injuries on Baby Girl’s 
chest, back, and underarm, as well as photos of the fence 
where a board had been replaced in the location where Gaul 
and Shoesmith testified that the dogs had broken through.4
 Defendant called her neighbor, McCrery, as a wit -
ness, who testified that as Gaul and Baby Girl were walking 
by the fence, Baby Girl was barking and nipping at Zorro 
through the fence. McCrery testified that Baby Girl pushed 
her head through the fence and bit Zorro, and that Moki 
and Gyptian grabbed Baby Girl’s head when it was stick -
ing through the fence and pulled her farther into the yard. 
Defendant also offered photos of a small, decorative fence in 
her yard that had been knocked over and argued that the 
direction that the small fence was knocked over rebutted 
the state’s theory that her dogs charged at and broke the 
larger fence.
 In closing argument, the state argued that defen -
dant should be found guilty because her dogs “caused phys-
ical injury to a domestic animal without provocation and on 
a location where [defendant] has no lawful right to exclude 
another.” The state pointed to Gaul and Shoesmith’s testi-
mony that defendant’s dogs charged at the fence, broke a 
fence board, grabbed Baby Girl, dragged her into defen -
dant’s yard, and attacked her, causing injuries. The state 
also argued that McCrery’s testimony was not credible, and 
that Baby Girl did not provoke the dogs by barking at or 
biting Zorro and that she was dragged from public property 
onto defendant’s property.
 In her closing argument, defendant argued that 
Baby Girl provoked her dogs by nipping at Zorro through 
 4 The state also presented evidence that defendant had previously been con -
victed of two counts of maintaining a potentially dangerous dog as a public nui -
sance after Moki and Gyptian attacked another dog at a campground. 
646 State v. Kayne
the fence and that Baby Girl “somehow * * * got through 
the boards and was a sitting duck on [defendant’s] private 
property.” Defendant argued that “for the first time in three 
years” her “big dogs” got the gate open on her porch to “go 
save * * * Zorro” and that she “reacted as quickly as possible.”
 Before announcing its verdict, the trial court 
explained that “[t]he state bears the burden of proving each 
and every issue, or element, beyond a reasonable doubt.” 
The court said that certain elements were not in dispute, 
including that defendant is a keeper of Moki and Gyptian; 
there is a previous conviction for those dogs as a public nui-
sance; and that the two dogs inflicted physical injury on 
Baby Girl. The court stated that what was in dispute was 
whether there was provocation by Baby Girl and whether 
the “incident occurred or began * * * on premises from which 
defendant could lawfully exclude others.” The court found 
defendant guilty of two counts of maintaining a dangerous 
dog after finding that Gaul and Shoesmith’s testimony was 
credible, that “the area in which this began were premises 
that * * * defendant could not lawfully exclude others,” and 
that Moki and Gyptian were not provoked.
ANALYSIS
 On appeal, defendant argues that the trial court 
erred in convicting her without finding that she acted 
with criminal negligence, as required by ORS 609.098(2). 
Defendant contends that that claim of error is preserved 
but asks us, in the alternative, to correct the error as plain 
error. See State v. Graham, 333 Or App 228, 230, 551 P3d 
998, rev den, 372 Or 787 (2024) (explaining that generally an 
issue not preserved in the trial court will not be considered 
on appeal; however, under ORAP 5.45(1), we have discretion 
to review for plain errors). The state responds that defen -
dant’s argument is unpreserved and that it does not meet 
the requirements for plain error review because it is not 
apparent on the record that the trial court omitted the ele -
ment of criminal negligence when it found defendant guilty. 
See State v. Vanornum, 354 Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013) 
(an error is plain when it is “an error of law, obvious and not 
reasonably in dispute, and apparent on the record without 
requiring the court to choose among competing inferences”).
Cite as 350 Or App 641 (2026) 647
 Beginning with preservation, defendant argues that 
statements she made during closing argument, including 
that her dogs got her gate on the porch open for the first time 
in three years; that she reacted as “quickly as possible”; that 
there was an “interior fence that was knocked over”; and 
that the exterior fence was broken “were relevant only to the 
issue of whether defendant had a culpable mental state.” In 
defendant’s view, her arguments can be interpreted as ask-
ing the court to find that she was not criminally negligent in 
maintaining her dogs. We disagree.
 As defendant acknowledges, she did not explicitly 
make any argument on the issue of criminal negligence 
or ask the trial court to make a finding on the applicable 
mental state. And to the extent that defendant argued that 
her dogs had not broken through the porch barrier in three 
years and that she reacted quickly, that evidence was never 
presented to the trial court in testimony or otherwise, and 
her brief reference to those issues was not “used in a way 
and context in which the other parties and the court would 
understand * * * from that single reference the essential con-
tours of the full argument.” State v. Haynes, 352 Or 321, 335, 
284 P3d 473 (2012).
 As to defendant’s discussion of the fences, through-
out the trial she referred to the fences not in the context of 
her mental state but rather related to the issue of whether 
her dogs broke the fence and grabbed Baby Girl outside the 
fence. In those circumstances, even if we were to interpret 
the rules regarding preservation of error “liberally,” defen-
dant’s statements during closing argument did not provide 
the trial court with an explanation of her objection that was 
“specific enough to ensure that the court [could] identify its 
alleged error with enough clarity to permit it to consider 
and correct the error immediately.” State v. Balfour, 311 Or 
434, 453, 814 P2d 1069 (1991) (the “rules regarding preser-
vation of error * * * might be interpreted liberally if a person 
had proceeded pro se at trial”); State v. Wyatt, 331 Or 335, 
343, 15 P3d 22 (2000) (explaining what a party must do to 
preserve a claim of error).
 Because defendant’s argument is unpreserved, 
we must determine if it meets the requirements for plain 
648 State v. Kayne
error. The parties do not dispute that whether the trial 
court applied the applicable elements of a criminal offense 
is a question of law, and that the legal point that a fact -
finder must find a defendant criminally negligent under 
ORS 609.098(2) is obvious and not reasonably in dispute. 
See State v. McKinney/Shiffer, 369 Or 325, 333, 505 P3d 
946 (2022) (whether the trial court failed to apply culpable 
mental state of criminal negligence to physical injury ele -
ment of assault was a question of law); ORS 609.098(2) (a 
person is guilty of maintaining a dangerous dog if they act 
“with criminal negligence”). Thus, the question before us is 
whether the error is apparent on the record without requir-
ing us to choose among competing inferences.
 The state argues that the trial court is not required 
to explain its verdict and that the court’s silence with respect 
to the criminal negligence element gives rise to competing 
inferences on the record—either the trial court failed to 
consider the element or the trial court found that defendant 
acted with the requisite mental state and failed to say so 
out loud. In our view, the inference that the state suggests—
that the trial court considered the mental state element but 
merely failed to discuss it in its speaking verdict—is not 
plausible on this record. See State v. Lovern, 234 Or App 502, 
512, 228 P3d 688 (2010) (for plain error analysis, competing 
inferences must be plausible). As defendant points out, the 
trial court walked through each element in its speaking ver-
dict except for the criminal negligence element; the state did 
not make any argument in opening or closing on the issue of 
criminal negligence; and the state did not explicitly present 
any evidence on that issue or discuss any of the evidence in 
the context of how it related to the issue. In those circum -
stances, the only plausible inference apparent on the record 
is that the trial court failed to consider whether defendant 
was criminally negligent, and the trial court’s error was 
plain.
 Having determined that the trial court plainly 
erred, the next question is whether the error was harmless, 
as we cannot reverse a judgment based on harmless error. 
State v. Ortiz, 372 Or 658, 671, 554 P3d 796 (2024) (“Under 
Article VII (Amended), section 3, of the Oregon Constitution, 
Cite as 350 Or App 641 (2026) 649
an appellate court may not reverse a criminal defendant’s 
conviction based on an error—whether preserved or unpre -
served—that is harmless.”). An error is harmless if there is 
“little likelihood” that it affected the verdict. State v. Davis, 
336 Or 19, 32, 77 P3d 1111 (2003).
 Here, some of the evidence in the record that could 
plausibly relate to the issue of criminal negligence weighed 
in favor of the state, including the size of the dogs, defen -
dant’s awareness that the dogs had previously attacked 
another dog, and that the dogs were outside while defendant 
was in the house. However, there was also evidence that 
would weigh in favor of a finding that defendant was not 
criminally negligent, including pictures of the exterior fence 
and testimony that the dogs were contained on the porch 
behind a “makeshift” barrier. In light of that evidence and 
the absence of any argument before the trial court on the 
issue of criminal negligence, there is at least some possibil-
ity that the trial court may not have found defendant crimi-
nally negligent had it considered that element, and thus we 
conclude that the error was not harmless. See State v. Stone, 
324 Or App 688, 695, 527 P3d 800 (2023) (In the mental-
state context, in assessing whether an error was harmless, 
the pertinent inquiry is “whether there is some likelihood 
that the [factfinder] might not have been persuaded that 
[the defendant] had the requisite mental state, had it con -
sidered that issue.” (Emphasis in original.)).
 Finally, because we conclude that the trial court’s 
error is both plain and not harmless, we must decide whether 
to exercise our discretion to correct it. Ortiz, 372 Or at 672. 
Based on the gravity of the error, the competing interests of 
the parties, and the interests of justice, we conclude that the 
trial court’s error in finding defendant guilty without hav -
ing found that she was criminally negligent—an element of 
the offense that the state was required to prove beyond a 
reasonable doubt—warrants the exercise of our discretion to 
correct the error. See Ailes v. Portland Meadows, Inc., 312 Or 
376, 382 n 6, 823 P2d 956 (1991) (outlining nonexclusive list 
of factors that are relevant in deciding whether to exercise 
our discretion to correct a plain error).
 Reversed and remanded.
