A181161
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/17/state_v._snyder_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879162/state-v-snyder/
Caption: State v. Snyder
Date: 2026-06-17

650 June 17, 2026 No. 554
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
DUANE ROBERT SNYDER,
Defendant-Appellant.
Multnomah County Circuit Court
20CR63487; A181161
Eric L. Dahlin, Judge.
Submitted January 21, 2025.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Carla Edmondson, Deputy Public Defender, 
Oregon Public Defense Commission, filed the briefs for 
appellant.
Ellen F. Rosenblum, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General, and Robert M. Wilsey, Assistant Attorney 
General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Lagesen, Chief Judge, 
and Hellman, Judge.*
HELLMAN, J.
Reversed and remanded.
______________
 * Lagesen, C. J. vice Mooney, S. J.
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 651
 HELLMAN, J.
 Defendant appeals a judgment of conviction for one 
count of fourth-degree assault constituting domestic vio -
lence. In his only assignment of error, defendant contends 
that “the trial court erred when it denied defendant’s motion 
for a mistrial.” For the reasons below, we agree with defen-
dant. We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
I. BACKGROUND
 The relevant facts are undisputed. Defendant was 
charged with one count of fourth-degree assault constitut -
ing domestic violence after an alleged altercation with a 
person with whom he resided. The state’s theory at trial 
was that defendant assaulted the complainant in the pro -
cess of telling her that she needed to leave the home that 
she shared with defendant and his father. Defendant’s the-
ory at trial, as set forth in his opening statement, was that 
he told the complainant that she needed to leave the home 
and the complainant, who was on “supervised probation 
for a domestic violence assault,” called 9-1-1 and lied about 
defendant assaulting her in an effort to “use the system in 
her favor.”
 During defendant’s trial, an officer testified as to 
his conversation with defendant after the officer arrived at 
defendant’s house to arrest defendant. As relevant to the 
issue on appeal, the officer testified that defendant “invoked 
his rights” after the officer “Mirandized” defendant:
“[PROSECUTOR:] Okay. And so when you arrived at the 
[defendant’s] residence, what did you do?
“[OFFICER:] I—I confirmed [defendant’s] cars that were 
there by running their license plates, and it did belong to 
him.
“[PROSECUTOR:] Okay.
“[OFFICER:] And then I knocked on the door and con -
tacted him.
“[PROSECUTOR:] Okay. And what did he say?
“[OFFICER:] I asked him to step outside, and we placed 
him under arrest.
652 State v. Snyder
“[PROSECUTOR:] Okay. And did you ask [defendant] if 
he touched or hit [the victim] at all?
“[OFFICER:] I—I would—after my post Miranda, or—
“[PROSECUTOR:] Yes.
“[OFFICER:] I had Mirandized him, and he invoked his 
rights.”
 Given that testimony—and specifically the officer’s 
reference to defendant’s invocation of his Miranda rights—
defendant moved for mistrial. Defendant argued that a mis-
trial was necessary because the state “clearly ask[ed] the 
officer about the Defendant invoking his right to remain 
silent.” The trial court recognized that the officer’s testi -
mony was improper but indicated that it thought “a cura -
tive instruction would be appropriate” and “would actually 
resolve [the] issue.” The trial court also noted its view that 
evidence that a defendant “invoked,” at least in some cir -
cumstances, is “not that * * * different than the instruction 
that [the court gives] to the jury about someone exercising 
their right to remain silent” at the end of trial when a defen-
dant does not testify, insofar as that instruction is “in itself 
effectively the same as saying [the defendant] invoked.”
 The trial court also recognized, however, that a cura-
tive instruction might “draw more attention” to the improper 
testimony, and asked defendant to decide if he wanted the 
trial court to “give a curative instruction.” The trial court 
noted that, if defendant did want a curative instruction, the 
court, the defense, and the state, could “talk about what the 
language would be.”1
 In response to the trial court offering a curative 
instruction, defendant noted that the officer’s testimony was 
describing an “interview situation where [the prosecutor 
 1 In discussing the contours of such an instruction, the trial court noted that 
it could instruct the jury with an instruction that
“would say to the jury something that everyone’s got a—everyone has a right 
to remain silent, and just as I would instruct the jury at the end of the trial 
if he doesn’t testify that the—the jury should not infer anything about his 
silence and—and—and decision not to testify seems like a curative instruc -
tion to just remind the jury of the right to remain silent and that it’s actually 
a good thing. 
“People should actually exercise that constitutional right.”
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 653
was] asking the officer * * * how he interviewed * * * the 
Defendant, and then [the officer] specifically said [defen -
dant] invoked his right to remain silent.” Defendant took 
the position that “no curative instruction would be enough 
to cure that prejudice” and an instruction would just “draw 
more attention” to the improper testimony and make the sit-
uation worse. The trial court then denied defendant’s motion 
for mistrial without giving a curative instruction.
 After another witness had begun her testimony, 
the court sua sponte returned to its ruling on defendant’s 
motion for mistrial. Outside the presence of the jury, and 
with the parties, it listened to the audio recording of the offi-
cer’s testimony. After listening to the audio recording and 
reviewing relevant case law, the trial court stated that it 
was struggling with “whether a curative instruction would 
be appropriate, or if this is just a situation where the Court 
of Appeals would say no curative instruction would be ade -
quate.” It noted that the officer’s testimony, which reflected 
that “[d]efendant didn’t answer any kind of question” about 
whether he hit the alleged victim “because he invoked” his 
right to remain silent, “certainly would suggest guilt” to 
a juror. The trial court concluded that the testimony was 
“clearly the kind of thing that requires some action,” either 
a curative instruction or a mistrial.
 However, the trial court ultimately adhered to its 
prior decision to deny defendant’s motion for mistrial because 
defendant had declined a curative instruction, even though 
the trial court believed it could possibly “craft [a curative 
instruction] that would hopefully un-ring the bell” and that 
such an instruction would eliminate the need for a mistrial. 
In making that ruling, the trial court correctly recognized 
the lingering absence of direction in the case law regard -
ing curative instructions; specifically, that “most of the time 
a curative instruction couldn’t fix the issue [but that that] 
wouldn’t necessarily mean that there [aren’t] some times 
where a curative instruction could fix the issue.” The trial 
court also correctly recognized the difficulty in creating an 
instruction that was not too “bland” and, at the same time, 
would not “draw additional attention to this and cause fur-
ther harm * * * for the defense case.”
654 State v. Snyder
 After the conclusion of the presentation of evidence 
and summation, the jury returned a guilty verdict on the 
single count of fourth-degree assault. This appeal followed.
 As noted, in his only assignment of error, defendant 
contends that “the trial court erred when it denied defen -
dant’s motion for a mistrial.”
II. ANALYSIS
A. Standard of Review
 “When a party moves for a mistrial, the trial court 
must decide whether to grant the motion, deny the motion 
but take curative steps, or deny the motion without taking 
any curative steps.” State v. Northey, 340 Or App 318, 330, 
571 P3d 219 (2025) (emphasis added). Because the trial court, 
not this court, “is in the best position to assess the impact 
of the complained-of incident and to select the means (if 
any) necessary to correct any problem resulting from it,” we 
review the trial court’s decision among those three choices 
for abuse of discretion. State v. Veatch, 223 Or App 444, 462, 
196 P3d 45 (2008) (internal quotation marks omitted). In 
that review, we take into consideration the “seriousness of 
the prejudice and the manner in which the court sought to 
cure the error, with the decisive issue [being whether defen-
dant’s ability to receive a fair trial was impaired.” State v. 
Kurz, 342 Or App 772, 785, 577 P3d 866, rev den, 374 Or 616 
(2025) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted).
 Notwithstanding the general discretion that trial 
courts have in ruling on a motion for mistrial, in some 
cases, “the prejudice to the accused created by an incident 
is so grave that a curative instruction is insufficient, and a 
mistrial is the only legally acceptable alternative.” State v. 
Evans, 211 Or App 162, 166, 154 P3d 166 (2007), aff ’d, 344 
Or 358, 182 P3d 175 (2008). At the other end of the spec -
trum, there are cases where it is “within the trial court’s 
discretion to decline to declare a mistrial in the wake of a 
potentially prejudicial incident,” without giving a curative 
instruction, “if the court finds that the incident was suffi -
ciently inadvertent and isolated so as to not compromise a 
fair trial.” Id. at 168. And, lying in the middle of those two 
categories of cases, are cases where “the decision to deliver 
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 655
curative instructions rather than to declare a mistrial 
remains within the ambit of the court’s discretion.” Id. at 
167.
B. Law on Improper References to Invocation of Constitutional 
Rights
 A prosecutor is not permitted to comment on or 
solicit evidence concerning a defendant’s invocation of a 
constitutional right under circumstances in which the jury 
is likely to draw a negative inference from the exercise of 
that right. See State v. Durant , 327 Or App 363, 368, 535 
P3d 808 (2023), rev den, 374 Or 143 (2025) (so noting regard-
ing comments made during closing argument); State v. 
Smallwood, 277 Or 503, 505-06, 561 P2d 600, cert den, 434 
US 849 (1977) (“There is no doubt that it is usually revers -
ible error to admit evidence of the exercise by a defendant 
of the rights which the constitution gives him if it is done in 
a context whereupon inferences prejudicial to the defendant 
are likely to be drawn by the jury.”). That is because refer -
ence “to a defendant’s exercise of a constitutional right” can 
“jeopardize[ ] the right to a fair trial if the jury was likely to 
infer that the defendant had exercised the right because he 
believed that he was guilty of the charged offense.” State v. 
Schumacher, 315 Or App 298, 301, 500 P3d 698 (2021).
 One such constitutional right—the right at issue in 
this case—is the right to remain silent, guaranteed under 
Article I, section 12, of the Oregon Constitution and the 
Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. State 
v. Castillo, 295 Or App 121, 127, 433 P3d 467 (2018), rev den, 
364 Or 749 (2019) (“Under Article I, section 12, of the Oregon 
Constitution, individuals have a right against compelled self-
incrimination in criminal prosecutions, including the right 
to remain silent.”); Miranda v. Arizona, 384 US 436, 467-68, 
86 S Ct 1602, 16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966) (recognizing that the 
Fifth Amendment includes a “right to remain silent”).
 It is usually the case that jurors will infer guilt 
from a defendant’s invocation of the right to remain silent. 
See State v. Ashbaugh, 330 Or App 680, 690, 544 P3d 414, 
rev den, 372 Or 588 (2024) (recognizing that “the connection 
between silence and guilt is often too direct and too natural 
656 State v. Snyder
to be resisted” by a jury (internal quotation marks omitted)); 
see also State v. White , 303 Or 333, 342 n 7, 736 P2d 552 
(1987) (“For the judge or prosecutor to call it [a defendant’s 
silence] to the jury’s attention has an undeniably adverse 
effect on the defendant.” (Quoting Lakeside v. Oregon, 435 
US 333, 345, 98 S Ct 1091, 55 L Ed 2d 319 (1978) (Stevens, 
J., dissenting); brackets in White.)). As a result, we “pre -
sume” that a prosecutor’s reference “to a defendant’s silence 
* * * [is] harmful” to the defendant. Ashbaugh, 330 Or App 
at 686; see also State v. Larson, 325 Or 15, 22, 933 P2d 958 
(1997) (the “Oregon Constitution does not permit a prosecu-
tor to draw the jury’s attention to a defendant’s exercise of 
the right to remain silent”).
 That said, not every reference during trial to a 
defendant’s exercise of a constitutional right is per se prej-
udicial. See, e.g., State v. Larson, 325 Or 15, 24-25, 933 P2d 
958 (1997) (concluding that “the context of the prosecutor’s 
improper comment was not one in which inferences prejudi-
cial to defendant were likely to have been drawn by the jury” 
where the prosecutor “made only a single reference to defen-
dant’s ability to testify” and, although “the jury was pres -
ent, the comment was directed to the judge, not to the jury,” 
and was made in “frustration” in “the context of objecting 
to defendant’s repeated attempts to introduce inadmissible 
hearsay”).
C. Ruling on Motions for Mistrial
 If a defendant moves for a mistrial based on a pros-
ecutor referencing or eliciting evidence concerning a defen -
dant’s invocation of a constitutional right, a trial court must 
first determine whether the jury is likely to draw an inference 
of guilt from that reference. See id. at 24-25; Schumacher, 
315 Or App at 307. If the trial court determines that the jury 
is unlikely to draw such an inference, because, for example, 
the incident was “sufficiently inadvertent and isolated so as 
to not compromise a fair trial,” it may be permissible for 
the trial court to “decline to declare a mistrial in the wake 
of a potentially prejudicial incident,” without taking cura -
tive steps. See Evans, 211 Or App at 168. If, however, as here, 
the trial court determines that the jury is likely to draw an 
inference of guilt from the invocation, the trial court’s range 
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 657
of permissible choices becomes constrained in two import -
ant ways.
 First, when a defendant moves for mistrial based 
on a prosecutor referencing or eliciting evidence of a defen -
dant’s invocation of a constitutional right, from which the 
jury would likely draw an inference of guilt, it is error for 
the trial court to do “nothing.” Schumacher, 315 Or App 
at 307 (“In light of our reversals in cases where the trial 
court did something to cure the prejudicial impact, it strikes 
us that, when a trial court does nothing, it would be error 
to affirm.” (Emphases in original.)). As discussed further 
below, that is true even when “the defendant declines a cura-
tive instruction,” because “it is the court, not defendant, that 
must decide whether and how to cure the prejudicial effect 
of improper testimony.” Id. (internal quotation marks omit-
ted); see also State v. Alvord, 118 Or App 111, 115, 846 P2d 
432 (1993) (“Although it is normally the defendant’s duty to 
request a curative instruction, the Supreme Court has said 
that, when a prosecutor has made an improper statement 
about a defendant’s exercise of the right to remain silent, 
the trial court has a duty to allow a timely motion for a mis-
trial or to cure the effect of the improper comment by giving 
a proper instruction.”).
 Second, the ability of a trial court to deny the motion 
but take curative steps is cabined by the reality that in order 
for a curative instruction to be effective, it must achieve the 
“perhaps impossible” task of “negating the inference that 
the defendant invoked his or her rights because of his or her 
consciousness of guilt.” State v. Hunt, 297 Or App 597, 606, 
442 P3d 232 (2019). That task is perhaps impossible because, 
under our case law, as we understand it, in crafting such an 
instruction, the inference of guilt must be “negated” without 
(1) ignoring the inference and simply telling the jury to dis-
regard the problematic statement, or (2) drawing additional 
attention to the inference, thereby potentially increasing 
the prejudice. Compare State v. Osorno, 264 Or App 742, 745, 
333 P3d 1163 (2014) (curative instruction telling the jury to 
“disregard the last statement,” as it was “not information 
that [the jury could] consider in deciding this case,” after an 
officer testified that the defendant told him that she did not 
658 State v. Snyder
“want to say anything incriminating,” was insufficient to 
cure prejudice, because “no part of the instruction negated 
the inference that defendant made the statement [that she 
did not want to say anything incriminating] because she was 
conscious of her guilt”), with State v. Hylton, 316 Or App 270, 
271, 501 P3d 1081 (2021) (curative instruction insufficient 
to cure prejudice where the trial court instructed the jury 
“not to draw an adverse inference from defendant’s invoca-
tion” because the instruction, although “well-intended,” may 
“well have exacerbated the adverse effect of the improper 
references” by “explicitly describ[ing] the adverse inference 
of guilt that the jury might reasonably draw from defen -
dant’s invocation of the right to remain silent”).
 Indeed, in Ashbaugh, a case in which the defendant 
did not object or move for a mistrial, we reversed a convic -
tion due to the prosecutor referring to the defendant’s “exer-
cise of his right to remain silent,” noting the “likely insuffi -
ciency of a curative instruction” had defendant objected and 
had a curative instruction been given. 330 Or App at 681, 
690. Ashbaugh is particularly significant because, as noted, 
the defendant in Ashbaugh did not object or move for a mis-
trial and, therefore, the question before us was whether “any 
curative instruction by the trial court would * * * have been 
effective.” State v. Perez, 373 Or 591, 606, 568 P3d 940 (2025) 
(describing standard of review in such circumstance under 
State v. Chitwood , 370 Or 305, 312, 518 P3d 903 (2022) 
(emphasis added)).
 Thus, the practical effect of our case law is that 
declaring a mistrial is likely the only permissible exercise of 
the trial court’s discretion when the following conditions are 
met: (1) the defendant moves for a mistrial; (2) the motion 
is based on an impermissible reference to defendant’s invo-
cation of constitutional rights; and (3) the trial court deter -
mines that the jury is likely to infer guilt from that imper -
missible reference. That is because, as explained above, if 
trial courts do nothing in that circumstance—even when 
they do nothing because the defendant objects to a curative 
instruction being given—the result is likely to be reversal 
on appeal. Schumacher, 315 Or App at 307. And if a trial 
court attempts to cure the prejudice by giving a curative 
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 659
instruction, it is likely that, on appeal, we will conclude that 
the instruction was insufficient to cure any prejudice; again, 
leading to a reversal on appeal. As noted, crafting a curative 
instruction in such a circumstance is a “perhaps impossible” 
task. Hunt, 297 Or App at 606.
 We hope that our clear statements about the prac -
tical effect of our case law will lead prosecutors to inten -
sify their efforts to make sure that they do not “elicit any 
evidence concerning [a] defendant’s exercise of [their] con -
stitutional rights,” Alvord, 118 Or App at 116 (recognizing 
the existence of that duty), including through preparation 
of law enforcement witnesses, so that all defendants receive 
a fair trial. It is also our hope that providing clarity in the 
law will support and encourage trial courts, where appropri-
ate, in their decisions to grant motions for mistrial. That is 
because, although we have frequently stated that “a mistrial 
is a drastic remedy to be avoided,” e.g., Kurz, 342 Or App at 
786 (internal quotation marks omitted), it is also the case 
that a trial court giving an ineffectual curative instruction 
or no curative instruction at all after a prejudicial refer -
ence to a defendant’s invocation of a constitutional right is 
made will frequently lead to reversal on appeal.2 That leads 
to unnecessary delays in the resolution of cases, which is 
harmful for victims, the accused, and society more broadly. 
See, e.g., Barker v. Wingo, 407 US 514, 527, 532, 92 S Ct 2182, 
33 L Ed 2d 101 (1972) (recognizing both that “society has a 
particular interest in bringing swift prosecutions” and that 
delay in bringing a case to trial can cause prejudice to a 
defendant).
D. Application
 Having described the legal framework in which this 
appeal comes before us, we turn to our analysis. As noted, 
defendant contends that the trial court abused its discretion 
when it denied his motion for a mistrial. In response, the 
state contends that, to the extent the trial court erred, it 
was only because defendant invited that error by declining 
 2 We observe that granting a mistrial also avoids the unusual and difficult 
situation when a trial court is forced to override a defendant’s trial strategy by 
giving a curative instruction to address a prejudicial error on the part of the 
state.
660 State v. Snyder
the trial court’s offer to give a curative instruction. We 
address the state’s invited error argument before turning to 
the merits.
1. Invited error
 As an initial matter, we reject the state’s invited 
error argument because it is foreclosed by our analysis in 
Schumacher.
 In Schumacher, after an officer testified to the 
defendant’s invocation of the right to counsel, the defendant 
moved to strike the testimony, and the court noted that it 
would offer a “curative instruction, which I would envision 
[the defendant] preparing.” Id. at 300. The defendant then 
moved for a mistrial, and the state replied “that a curative 
instruction would address the issue, and that if it had been 
error, the error was ‘harmless.’ ” Id. The court “agreed with 
the state and denied the motion for mistrial.” Id. Later, near 
the end of trial, “out of the jury’s presence, the court asked 
defendant if he had ‘put together some kind of a curative 
instruction’ ” and “defendant replied that he had decided 
not to offer one because he would ‘rather not emphasize it 
more to the jury.’ ” Id. at 300-01. After he was convicted, the 
defendant appealed the resulting judgment, assigning error 
to the trial court’s denial of his motion for a mistrial. Id. at 
299.
 We reversed, concluding that the trial court erred. 
We first explained that the jury “could have inferred from the 
officer’s mention of defendant’s invocation” and the circum-
stances thereof that the defendant’s “request for a lawyer 
was a tacit admission of guilt.” Id. at 304. We then explained 
that, “[i]n light of our reversals in cases where the trial court 
did something to cure the prejudicial impact [of improper 
testimony], it strikes us that, when a trial court does noth-
ing, it would be error to affirm,” even “when the defendant 
declines a curative instruction.” Id. at 307 (emphases in orig-
inal). That is because when a defendant moves for mistrial 
on the basis of improper and prejudicial testimony—at least 
when the testimony has been elicited by the prosecutor—it 
is “the court that must decide whether and how to cure the 
prejudicial effect of improper testimony,” and on appeal “we 
Cite as 350 Or App 650 (2026) 661
evaluate the trial court’s decision on the matter, rather than 
defendant’s.” Id. at 306-07 (emphases added).
 We further explained in Schumacher that, “although 
it is true that the trial court is in the best position to assess 
the impact of the complained-of incident and to select the 
means necessary to correct any problem resulting from 
it,” the trial court “abuses its discretion when it selects a 
means that does not produce a permissible, legally correct 
outcome,” which is one where “the state did not benefit from 
an inference that penalized defendant’s exercise of a consti-
tutional right.” Id. at 307.
 Here, as in Schumacher, when faced with defen -
dant’s motion for mistrial, it was the trial court (and not 
defendant) that was required to “decide whether and how to 
cure the prejudicial effect of improper testimony.” Id. Under 
Schumacher we are thus tasked with evaluating “trial 
court’s decision on the matter, rather than defendant’s.” Id. 
at 306. The question before us is whether the trial court’s 
decision resulted in a “legally correct outcome,” which is 
one where “the state did not benefit from an inference that 
penalized defendant’s exercise of a constitutional right.” Id. 
at 307. Defendant neither invited the improper testimony 
that penalized him for the exercise of his constitutional 
right to remain silent nor invited the denial of his motion for 
mistrial.3 Thus, we reject the state’s invited error argument 
as foreclosed by Schumacher.
 In seeking a different result, the state argues that 
Schumacher is inapposite because it “stands for the propo -
sition that a trial court, confronted with testimony that a 
defendant invoked a constitutional right that may give rise 
to an inference of the defendant’s guilt, may not put the 
burden of crafting a curative instruction on the defendant 
and then do nothing if the defendant continues to request 
 3 In that regard, we note that defendant, like the defendant in Schumacher, 
assigns error to the trial court’s denial of his motion for a mistrial, not to the 
court’s failure to give a curative instruction. We have routinely analyzed the mer-
its of a mistrial ruling, even when the defendant refused a curative instruction. 
See, e.g., Evans, 211 Or App at 169 (recognizing that defendant declined a cura -
tive instruction but proceeding to analyze the merits of the mistrial ruling). It 
may be that, if defendant had assigned error to the court’s failure to give a cura -
tive instruction, that error, if cognizable, would have been invited. But that issue 
is not before us.
662 State v. Snyder
a mistrial.” Although the state accurately points to factual 
distinctions between this case and Schumacher, those dif -
ferences do not undercut the holding of Schumacher that it 
is the trial court—and not the defendant—that is required 
to “decide whether and how to cure the prejudicial effect of 
improper testimony” after a defendant moves for mistrial. 
Id. at 307.4
2. The merits
 Having rejected the state’s invited error argument, 
we turn to the merits. The threshold question for our analysis 
of the merits is whether “the jury was likely to infer that the 
defendant had exercised the right because he believed that 
he was guilty of the charged offense.” Id. at 304. Here, the 
trial court expressly determined that defendant’s invocation 
under the circumstances “certainly would suggest guilt.” We 
see no error in that assessment. See id. (noting that even a 
“single statement apparently unintentionally elicited” may 
require a mistrial “unless the surrounding context of the 
reference is of the kind that would draw the jury’s attention 
away from the inference of guilt”).
 Therefore, we proceed to assess whether the trial 
court’s decision not to provide a curative instruction and to 
deny the motion for a mistrial amounted to an abuse of dis-
cretion. We conclude that it did, because, as described above, 
taking no action to cure the prejudicial impact of evidence of 
an invocation of constitutional rights amounts to an abuse 
of discretion. Id. at 307-08. Consequently, we reverse and 
remand.
 Reversed and remanded.
 4 Another factual distinction between this case and Schumacher is that in 
Schumacher the defendant was asked near the end of trial if he had prepared a 
curative instruction and we concluded that, at that point, “a curative instruction 
* * * could not ‘unring the bell’ ” because it would have been “not timely.” See id. at 
305, 307. But that factual difference between this case and Schumacher also does 
not undercut the rationale of Schumacher as applied to this case.
