A182130
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/17/state_v._tetlctle_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879160/state-v-tetlctle/
Caption: State v. Tetlctle
Date: 2026-06-17

670 June 17, 2026 No. 556
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
VIDAL GONZALEZ TETLCTLE,
Defendant-Appellant.
Linn County Circuit Court
21CR55897; A182130
Brendan J. Kane, Judge.
Argued and submitted August 20, 2025.
Joshua B. Crowther, Chief Deputy Defender, argued the 
cause for appellant. Also on the brief was Ernest G. Lannet, 
Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate Section, Oregon Public 
Defense Commission.
Greg Rios, Assistant Attorney General, argued the cause 
for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, Attorney 
General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
HELLMAN, J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 671
672 State v. Tetlctle
 HELLMAN, J.
 Defendant appeals a judgment of conviction, 
entered after a conditional plea, for unlawful possession 
of a marijuana item, ORS 475B.337(3)(c). In three assign -
ments of error, defendant challenges the trial court’s denial 
of his motion to suppress and renewed motion to suppress. 
First, defendant contends that the state did not establish 
that defendant consented to the warrantless search of the 
U-Haul truck that he and his codefendant were driving. 
Both defendant’s and codefendant’s primary language is 
Spanish, and an officer used a translation application on 
his phone to communicate with the men during the stop. In 
defendant’s view, because the officer failed to save a tran -
scription of the input and translated output from that appli-
cation, the state failed to create a sufficient record to estab-
lish that defendant voluntarily consented to the search. We 
conclude that the evidence in the record is legally sufficient 
to support the trial court’s conclusion that defendant and 
codefendant understood the officer’s request for consent to 
search and voluntarily consented.
 Second, defendant argues that the officers lacked 
reasonable suspicion to extend the traffic stop to investigate 
whether defendant possessed an unlawful quantity of mari-
juana. We conclude that the trial court relied on specific 
and articulable facts that are supported by the record to 
determine that reasonable suspicion of unlawful possession 
of marijuana justified the investigation. Third, defendant 
contends that the state failed to meet its burden to prove 
that he validly waived his Miranda rights, arguing that the 
evidence before the trial court did not establish whether 
the translation application on the officer’s phone accurately 
translated the Miranda warnings into Spanish and whether 
that translation adequately conveyed the concepts contained 
in the warnings. We reject that argument as unpreserved. 
We therefore affirm.1
 1 We affirmed codefendant’s conviction for unlawful possession of a mari -
juana item in State v. Alatorre , 341 Or App 470 (2025) (nonprecedential memo -
randum opinion). The cases against both men were consolidated before the trial 
court. On appeal, the defendant in Alatorre challenged the denial of his motion 
to suppress on bases similar to those raised in the instant case, specifically that 
the state failed to establish that codefendant had consented to the search and 
that officers lacked reasonable suspicion to investigate whether he possessed an 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 673
I. FACTS
 “We review a trial court’s denial of a motion to sup-
press for legal error, and we are bound by the trial court’s 
factual findings if there is any constitutionally sufficient 
evidence in the record to support them.” State v. Maciel-
Figueroa, 361 Or 163, 165-66, 389 P3d 1121 (2017). When 
the trial court did not make express findings and there is 
evidence from which the trial court could have found a fact 
in more than one way, we will presume that the trial court 
decided the facts consistently with the trial court’s ultimate 
conclusion. Id. We take the facts from the record of the sup-
pression hearing, viewed consistently with those standards.
 While off duty and driving south on Interstate 5, 
Deputy Newman began to smell an odor of marijuana that 
he believed was emanating from a 26-foot U-Haul truck. 
In his experience, the odor was stronger than the smell he 
had sensed when interacting with individuals possessing a 
“user’s amount” of marijuana in the past. Newman called 
State Trooper King, who was patrolling the area, to share 
his concerns. King then stopped the truck for traveling five 
miles per hour over the speed limit. As King approached the 
U-Haul, he “was struck by the large odor” of “green mari -
juana that was coming from [the back right corner] of the 
vehicle.” King testified that “the larger quantity you get * * * 
the more prevalent the odor becomes,” but explained that 
“just on odor alone, * * * it’s very difficult to get an idea on 
what kind of quantity you’re dealing with.”
 King asked defendant and codefendant for identifi -
cation and the rental agreement for the U-Haul. Although 
King noted “an English language barrier,” he “was confi -
dent” that defendant and codefendant “understood enough” 
of “the basic stuff [he] was asking” because he “was getting 
* * * a response from them in broken English.” Defendant 
and codefendant provided King with Mexican identifica -
tion cards as well as the rental agreement, which named a 
third party as the renter and referenced Eureka, California 
unlawful quantity of marijuana. Id. at 471-73. Defendant in this case also raises 
a third assignment of error, challenging the validity of his waiver of Miranda 
rights, and we further note that the briefing in the instant case presents a more 
developed argument regarding the issue of consent. We thus take the opportunity 
to explain our decision in a precedential opinion. 
674 State v. Tetlctle
as the destination. When King asked where they were 
going, the men explained that they were “taking sofas to 
Grandpa.” King was then called away on a separate police 
matter and turned the investigation over to Detective Nelson 
and Newman, who had by that point arrived on the scene. 
King relayed the information he had gathered thus far and 
explained that the individuals were “non-English speaking.” 
Newman reviewed the rental agreement when he arrived, 
which raised his concern because rental cars and U-Hauls 
are commonly used to transport drugs across state lines.
 As Nelson approached the vehicle, he detected “a 
very overwhelming odor of fresh marijuana,” which, based 
on his training and experience, “appeared to be stronger 
than individuals carrying marijuana for personal consump-
tion.” Newman similarly described “an overwhelming odor 
of marijuana coming from the U-Haul.”
 Newman made contact with defendant and codefen-
dant and came to the interaction “prepared to use a trans -
lation application on [his] phone” called “iTranslate.” He 
either spoke or typed into the phone, the application tran -
scribed and translated the information, and then Newman 
would show defendant and codefendant his screen. To allow 
the men to respond, Newman “would press on the Mexican 
flag” and then defendant and codefendant “could speak and 
then it would come back to [Newman].”
 Using the application, Newman typed Miranda 
warnings into the phone and, after showing the applica -
tion’s translation of the warnings to the men, asked the men 
whether he could look in the back of the vehicle. He did not 
“recall them saying no” and Newman testified that “they 
had said something to the effect of they were just carrying 
furniture, and that it was locked and they didn’t have keys.” 
Newman indicated that, absent their consent, he would 
apply for a search warrant. When the men again explained 
that they could not get into the back of the truck, Newman 
asked if he could physically break the lock, and defendant 
and codefendant agreed that he could. The exchange was 
captured in body camera footage:2
 2 The following is based on our transcription of the audio from Nelson’s body 
camera video. Newman’s phone was used throughout this interaction to facilitate 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 675
 “[NELSON]: No English at all? Poquito English? Mas 
menos? It can’t hear—the phone can’t hear.
 “[NEWMAN]: Can you open the door? Not this one. 
That might be better (inaudible).
 “[Newman holds the phone up; the men speak towards 
the phone in Spanish.]
 “[NEWMAN]: (inaudible). Slow down. Okay?
 “[Newman holds the phone up; the men speak towards 
the phone in Spanish.] 
 “[NEWMAN]: There are no keys?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: No.
 “[NEWMAN]: If we can’t get in (inaudible) then we’ll 
have to seize the truck and write a search warrant to 
(inaudible).
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: Ok.
 “[NEWMAN]: If the search warrant is signed, then 
we’ll be able to open up the truck and kinda look inside. 
(inaudible)
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[NEWMAN]: But if we can get inside now and you’ll 
consent to it, (inaudible).
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[NEWMAN]: I can have you guys on your way 
(inaudible).
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[NEWMAN]: Ok, so you can’t get in? (inaudible).
the exchange, which we have noted in brackets throughout the transcription, 
although we note that the phone screen is not visible in the video. Additionally, 
because of the quality of the body camera footage, due to the rainy weather, loud 
highway noise, and Nelson’s location behind Newman, it is sometimes difficult to 
see where the phone is or how it is being used. 
676 State v. Tetlctle
 “[The men respond in Spanish.]
 “[NEWMAN]: So are you saying we cannot get into 
the back of the truck? So are you saying we cannot get into 
the back of the truck?
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “(inaudible)
 “[NEWMAN]: Can you open it?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: (inaudible)
 “[NEWMAN]: It won’t open?
 “[NELSON]: If we can open it, will they consent to 
that?
 “[NEWMAN]: If I—if I open it, is that okay?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: Oh no, it might break the 
lock.
 “(inaudible)
 “[NEWMAN]: No?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: No—no. [The speak men 
in Spanish into the phone.]
 “(Trooper speaking on radio)
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[NEWMAN]: So, can I cut the lock?
 “[Newman holds the phone up so the men can see the 
screen.]
 “[NEWMAN]: I can cut the lock?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: Yeah.
 “[NEWMAN]: You’ll let me break it?
 “[UNIDENTIFIED MALE]: Si.
 “[NEWMAN]: Wait right here, okay?”
 Newman testified that the men “appear[ed]” to 
understand what they were reading on the translation appli-
cation, and that, several times during the stop, Newman 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 677
asked if the men understood by saying, “comprende,” to 
which they responded by “[n]odding their head in the affir -
mative, or saying, ‘si’ or ‘yes.’ ” Newman had used iTrans -
late previously but did not know “how well the application 
translated” the input. He did not save any screenshots or 
information from the application.
 After breaking the lock and entering the back of the 
truck, Newman observed multiple garbage bags and plastic 
tote boxes, which he believed contained marijuana, and at 
that point, he applied for a warrant to conduct a further 
search, which was granted.
 Defendant moved to suppress the evidence that the 
police found during the traffic stop under Article I, section 
9, of the Oregon Constitution.3 In his written motion and at 
the hearing, defendant argued that the state failed to carry 
its burden to prove that he had consented to the warrantless 
search of the truck because the officer had used “a purported 
translation application [of] which we have no record of what 
appeared on the screen for the occupants to read.” Second, 
he argued that Newman unlawfully extended the traffic 
stop because odor alone does not give rise to a reasonable 
suspicion that defendant was in possession of an unlawful 
amount of marijuana. The state responded that the officers 
had obtained valid consent to search on the basis that the 
body camera footage showed the officers speaking into the 
phone and showing the translated text to defendant and 
codefendant, and in that video, the driver can be heard giv -
ing Newman consent to cut the lock. Second, the state argued 
that, based on the totality of the circumstances, Newman 
had reasonable suspicion to investigate whether defendant 
was transporting an unlawful quantity of marijuana.
 After a hearing on the motion, the trial court ruled 
that the officers had obtained valid consent to search the 
truck:
“[T]he issue that I want to address first is about consent. 
* * * Trooper King contacts the Defendants, and even 
though Trooper King * * * testified that he doesn’t speak 
 3 Article I, section 9, provides, in relevant part, “No law shall violate the 
right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, 
against unreasonable search, or seizure[.]”
678 State v. Tetlctle
any Spanish, he is somehow able to procure identification, 
driver’s license, U-Haul rental agreement, and finds out 
from the Defendants that they’re transporting sofas to 
Grandfather. Pretty amazing despite the fact that he didn’t 
have an iTranslate or the services of a court certified inter-
preter with a BA in Spanish, or any other such accouter -
ments at his disposal.
 “ * * * * *
 “As far as the consent was concerned, Senior Trooper 
King, as I indicated earlier, was somehow able to communi-
cate on a nominal level without speaking any Spanish. And 
this application that then Detective Newman provided, yes, 
the burden is on the State, but it’s by a preponderance of 
the evidence that they understand that they—what the 
Miranda warnings are. The statements that were being 
made wasn’t the issues being suppressed, it’s the extension 
of the stop and the reasonable suspicion is what was artic -
ulated at the beginning, and that’s already been addressed 
and identified.”
The trial court also ruled that the expansion of the traf -
fic stop was justified by reasonable suspicion based on the 
“overwhelming odor of marijuana coming from the back 
of the U-Haul,” the fact that “[t]he person who rented the 
* * * U-Haul wasn’t even in the vehicle,” and that “[it] was a 
one[-]way rental.” The court also noted that “moving sofas 
for grandpa and nobody had a key to the back, that’s going 
to be hard to give grandpa his sofas back when nobody has a 
key to the U-Haul.” For those reasons, the trial court denied 
defendant’s motion to suppress.
 Defendant later renewed his motion after we issued 
a decision in State v. Vannoy, 326 Or App 11, 17, 530 P3d 503 
(2023), in which we accepted the state’s concession that an 
officer lacked reasonable suspicion to investigate the defen-
dant for a marijuana crime “based only on the odor of mari-
juana.” Id. The trial court again denied the motion and dis-
tinguished defendant’s case from Vannoy, noting that “some 
of the facts that differentiate” defendant’s case included that 
the officers had detected an “overwhelming odor of mari -
juana” that was “stronger in the cargo section of the truck 
and not in the passenger section of the vehicle.” Defendant 
subsequently entered a conditional plea of no contest and 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 679
reserved his right to appeal the trial court’s rulings on his 
motion to suppress and renewed motion to suppress.
II. ANALYSIS
A. Consent to Search
 On appeal, defendant first argues that where the 
state relies on a defendant’s verbal consent to validate 
a warrantless search, “the state must create an accurate 
record of what the officers said and did and what defendant 
actually understood before a reviewing court can constitu -
tionally assess whether a person waived their Article I, sec-
tion 9, rights.” In his view, because Newman failed to save 
any information from the translation application, the record 
is insufficient to prove that defendant actually consented. 
Alternatively, defendant contends that even if defendant 
understood some of the exchange, the totality of the cir -
cumstances establish that defendant merely acquiesced to 
police authority, which does not constitute valid consent. As 
we explain, we conclude that the evidence in the record was 
legally sufficient to establish that defendant voluntarily con-
sented to the search. We further determine that defendant 
did not preserve his argument that he merely acquiesced to 
police authority, and the record does not establish that the 
trial court plainly erred in denying the motion to suppress 
on that basis.
 Under Article I, section 9, “[w]arrantless entries and 
searches of premises are per se unreasonable unless they fall 
within one of the few specifically established and carefully 
delineated exceptions to the warrant requirement.” State v. 
Bridewell, 306 Or 231, 235, 759 P2d 1054 (1988). Consent 
to search is one such exception to the warrant requirement 
“because consent relinquishes a person’s privacy interest 
in property so that there is no unlawful intrusion.” State v. 
Bonilla, 358 Or 475, 480, 366 P3d 331 (2015). When the state 
relies on consent to justify a warrantless search, “the state 
has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence 
that someone having the authority to do so voluntarily gave 
the police consent to search the defendant’s person or prop-
erty.” State v. Jordan, 308 Or App 547, 552, 481 P3d 1017 
(2021) (internal quotation marks omitted).
680 State v. Tetlctle
 “The proper focus in determining the voluntariness 
of consent under Article I, section 9, is the defendant’s actual 
understanding and intent.” State v. McCray, 304 Or App 279, 
282, 466 P3d 1042 (2020). For us to determine whether the 
alleged consent was “actually” given, “the state must estab-
lish with some precision how the law enforcement officers 
ma[d]e a request of a defendant.” State v. Sunderman, 304 Or 
App 329, 337, 467 P3d 52 (2020) (internal quotation marks 
and brackets omitted); see also State v. Warner, 284 Or 147, 
161, 585 P2d 681 (1978) (“[A]ppellate courts must know what 
the state’s witnesses contend was actually said, in order for 
appellate courts to discharge their constitutional function in 
determining the validity of consent.”). Although “conclusory 
testimony regarding a claim of consent creates a problem for 
appellate courts,” an officer’s “failure to testify to the actual 
words used to convey a request for consent to search and the 
words used in response to that request does not necessarily 
mean that the state has failed to meet its burden.” State v. 
Miller, 375 Or 173, 197, 200, 589 P3d 151 (2026) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). In other words, conclusory evi -
dence that an officer asked for consent that the defendant 
provided is insufficient to prove that the consent was given 
voluntarily; however, the state is not required to put forth a 
complete transcription of the entire interaction between law 
enforcement and a defendant to carry its burden.
 Here, we conclude that the record is legally suffi -
cient to establish that defendant understood that Newman 
was requesting consent to enter the back of the U-Haul and 
that he consented to that search. In determining that defen-
dant and codefendant consented to the search, the trial court 
found that King “was somehow able to communicate on a 
nominal level without speaking any Spanish” and that the 
men were responsive to King’s questions. Moreover, even 
though the record does not contain evidence as to the exact 
information the officer put into the translation application, 
nor the output in Spanish, the body camera video provides 
some details about the officer’s conversations with defendant 
and codefendant. Specifically, when Newman asked, with 
the aid of the translation application, whether he could enter 
the back of the truck, defendant and codefendant responded, 
in Spanish, that they did not have keys to open the back, and 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 681
Newman orally confirmed his understanding of their state -
ment that was translated by the application. That exchange 
suggests that the men comprehended the nature of the offi -
cer’s request and vice versa, that the officer understood the 
men’s response to his questions. The footage also shows that, 
in response to the men explaining that they did not have 
keys to the back of the truck, Newman asked whether he 
could cut the lock, and defendant and codefendant responded 
in the affirmative, in both English and Spanish.
 Although we affirm the trial court’s denial of defen-
dant’s motion to suppress, we have concerns about the lack 
of a documented translation of the conversation between 
the officers, defendant, and codefendant. The record estab -
lishes that a language barrier hindered the exchange on the 
critical issue of whether defendant consented to the search. 
Specifically, the body camera video shows that both the offi-
cers as well as defendant and codefendant had to repeat 
their statements multiple times to ensure the other party 
understood their questions and answers. We are also con -
cerned that the record is so sparse on the translation appli-
cation that was used and caution that in another case the 
failure to develop the record on the application in general 
and the specific exchange may very well result in suppres -
sion of evidence.
 That said, having carefully reviewed the record in 
this case, including the bodycam footage, we conclude that 
the trial court’s findings regarding the men’s comprehension 
are supported by the record. Specifically, in the bodycam 
footage, Newman can be seen speaking directly into the 
application, he can be heard confirming his understanding 
of the men’s statements that they did not have keys to the 
vehicle, and throughout the exchange, the men were respon-
sive to the officers’ questions in that they were able to pro -
duce the requested documents and explain why they could 
not access the back of the vehicle. That record is legally suf-
ficient to support a conclusion that defendant and codefen -
dant consented to the search.
 As to defendant’s alternative argument that he 
merely acquiesced to police authority and thus did not volun-
tarily consent, we determine that defendant did not preserve 
682 State v. Tetlctle
that argument. The state does not dispute preservation; 
however, “we have an independent obligation to determine 
whether an argument advanced on appeal was preserved at 
trial.” State v. Brunkal, 324 Or App 306, 309, 525 P3d 500, 
rev den, 371 Or 284 (2023) (internal quotation marks omit -
ted). Below, in his written motion to suppress as well as at 
the hearing on that motion, defendant framed the question 
as whether defendant and codefendant “understood the con-
sent that was being requested when they gave it” in light 
of the language barrier and whether the court could assess 
that question without evidence from the translation appli -
cation. Defendant did not raise or develop any argument 
regarding acquiescence to the trial court in his original or 
renewed motion to suppress. Analyzing whether a defendant 
acquiesced to authority is a highly fact-specific inquiry. In 
conducting that review, a court is required to examine the 
exact words used by an officer to request consent to deter -
mine whether the words provided “the listener with a rea -
sonable opportunity to choose to consent, or [whether] those 
words [left] the listener with the impression that a search is 
inevitable[.]” State v. H. K. D. S. (A163158), 305 Or App 86, 
92, 469 P3d 770 (2020) (internal quotation marks omitted); 
see also, e.g., State v. Briggs, 257 Or App 738, 742-43, 307 
P3d 564, rev den, 354 Or 386 (2013) (“We will, however, pay 
close attention to the words used by an officer who requests 
consent to perform a warrantless search. When those words 
do not provide the listener with a reasonable opportunity 
to choose to consent, or when those words leave the listener 
with the impression that a search is inevitable, absent strong 
countervailing factors, we have consistently found acquies -
cence rather than consent.”); State v. Ry/Guinto, 211 Or App 
298, 306 n 5, 154 P3d 724, rev den, 343 Or 224 (2007) (“[I]n 
the absence of compelling circumstances to the contrary, an 
officer’s particular choice of language is highly significant 
in assessing whether a reasonable person would understand 
the officer’s remarks to be so coercive as to render refusal to 
consent futile.”).
 Determining whether an officer’s choice of words 
to request consent was coercive is a separate and distinct 
inquiry from determining whether the defendant under -
stood the actual words used by the officer. See, e.g., Miller, 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 683
375 Or at 200-01 (noting, in the context of Article I, sec -
tion 9, that “[the] defendant does not contend that [the offi-
cer] improperly coerced her into agreeing to have her blood 
drawn to check her BAC or that she merely acquiesced to 
[the officer’s] demand” and “[i]nstead, she contends that, 
because of her intoxication and physical condition, she could 
not understand what she was being asked to do”). Although 
both analyses examine the exchange between the officer 
and defendant, they do so for entirely different purposes. 
We have previously determined that “the presence of a com-
mon thread” between an argument made before the trial 
court and an argument on appeal “does not satisfy the pres-
ervation requirement if the two arguments are qualitatively 
different.” State v. Gray, 286 Or App 799, 806, 401 P3d 1241 
(2017), rev den, 362 Or 482 (2018) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). Such is the case here. Defendant’s argument below 
focused exclusively on the sufficiency of the record to eval -
uate whether defendant understood the officers’ request 
in light of the language barrier. Thus, as to acquiescence, 
defendant failed to “provide the trial court with an expla -
nation of his * * * [contention] that [was] specific enough to 
ensure that the court [could] identify its alleged error with 
enough clarity to permit it to consider and correct the error 
immediately.” State v. Wyatt, 331 Or 335, 343, 15 P3d 22 
(2000). Moreover, because the trial court’s factual findings 
on the issue of comprehension formed the basis of its denial 
of defendant’s motion to suppress, the trial court would 
likely be surprised to find itself reversed on the issue of 
acquiescence, which was neither presented nor considered. 
See State v. Skotland, 372 Or 319, 329, 549 P3d 534 (2024) 
(“Sometimes, the winds of preservation can be gauged by 
looking to the weathervane of trial court surprise: Would 
the trial court be taken aback to find itself reversed on this 
issue, for this reason? Here, the answer is yes.” (Emphasis 
omitted.)).
 Defendant has not requested that we review the 
error as plain, and we ordinarily do not conduct such review 
absent a request. See State v. Ardizzone , 270 Or App 666, 
673, 349 P3d 597, rev den, 358 Or 145 (2015) (“[W]e ordi -
narily will not proceed to the question of plain error unless 
an appellant has explicitly asked us to do so because it 
684 State v. Tetlctle
is incumbent upon the appellant to explain to us why an 
error satisfies the requisites of plain error and, further, 
why we should exercise our discretion to correct that error.” 
(Internal quotation marks omitted.)). Even so, we would not 
find any error to be plain on this record. At oral argument, 
in support of defendant’s argument that he had acquiesced 
to police authority, appellate counsel asserted that officers 
repeatedly asked defendant whether they could enter the 
truck, and that defendant repeatedly denied that request. 
However, we note that the officer appeared to repeatedly ask 
questions about entering the back of the truck to ensure the 
translation application was working properly and to allow 
the men to respond. Under those circumstances, it is not 
obvious nor beyond reasonable dispute that the officer’s per-
sistence was intended to, or would have, coerced defendant, 
but rather, was a product of the language barrier and an 
attempt to communicate his request in light of that. See 
State v. Vanornum , 354 Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013) 
(“For an error to be plain error, it must be an error of law, 
obvious and not reasonably in dispute, and apparent on the 
record without requiring the court to choose among compet-
ing inferences.”). We therefore reject defendant’s argument 
that the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress 
on the basis that his consent was involuntary.
B. Reasonable Suspicion
 Second, defendant argues that the trial court erred 
in denying his motion because police unlawfully extended 
the traffic stop without reasonable suspicion of another 
crime. Specifically, defendant contends that, under State v. 
Moore, 311 Or App 13, 18, 488 P3d 816 (2021), the officers 
impermissibly relied on odor to extend the traffic stop and 
launch a criminal investigation. He further argues that the 
totality of the circumstances here does not give rise to to rea-
sonable suspicion. We disagree with defendant’s argument.
 For purposes of Article I, section 9, “all investiga -
tive activities, including investigative inquiries, conducted 
during a traffic stop are part of an ongoing seizure and are 
subject to both subject-matter and durational limitations.” 
State v. Arreola-Bottello , 365 Or 695, 712, 451 P3d 939 
(2019). For that reason, “an officer is limited to investigatory 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 685
inquiries that are reasonably related to the purpose of the 
traffic stop or that have an independent constitutional jus -
tification.” Id. Accordingly, to be lawful, “an extension of a 
traffic stop to conduct a criminal investigation must be jus-
tified by reasonable suspicion of criminal activity.” Moore, 
311 Or App at 18 (internal quotation marks omitted). The 
reasonable suspicion standard is satisfied when the officer 
“can point to specific and articulable facts that give rise to 
a reasonable inference that the defendant committed or was 
about to commit a specific crime or type of crime.” State v. 
Wicks, 332 Or App 67, 69-70, 549 P3d 49 (2024) (internal 
quotation marks omitted). The officer must have a “sub -
jective belief that the person stopped has committed, or is 
about to commit, a crime, and that belief must be objectively 
reasonable under the totality of the circumstances.” Moore, 
311 Or App at 18. In this case, we do not understand the 
parties to dispute that the officers subjectively believed that 
defendant possessed an unlawful amount of marijuana, and 
accordingly, we focus our review on whether the officers’ 
belief was objectively reasonable under the totality of the 
circumstances.
 We conclude that the trial court did not err when 
it determined that reasonable suspicion of unlawful pos -
session of marijuana justified the investigation. Here, the 
trial court relied on several specific and articulable facts 
that are supported by the record: Newman smelled the 
odor of marijuana emanating from the U-Haul as he drove 
behind it on the freeway, all three law enforcement officers 
smelled the strong odor of marijuana as they approached 
the U-Haul on foot, and, based on their training and expe -
rience, they believed that the quantity of marijuana that 
would be needed to cause the smell was “significantly differ-
ent than * * * lawfully permissible quantities of marijuana 
for an individual.” In addition to the testimony about the 
marijuana odor, the trial court found that (1) defendant and 
codefendant represented that “they’re transporting sofas to 
grandfather,” (2) it was “going to be hard to give grandpa 
his sofas back when nobody has a key to the U-Haul,” 
(3) the person “who rented the * * * U-Haul wasn’t even in 
the vehicle,” and (4) the rental was one-way. The foregoing 
facts are supported by the record and—when considered in 
686 State v. Tetlctle
light of the totality of the circumstances known to the offi -
cers—create an objectively reasonable inference of unlawful 
possession of marijuana.
 We are unpersuaded by defendant’s argument 
that, under Moore, the officers lacked reasonable suspicion 
because “they could not assess [the] exact quantity of mari-
juana from smell alone.” In Moore, the trooper stopped the 
defendant’s car for speeding and smelled unburnt mari -
juana as he approached the passenger side of the car. Id. at 
15. We concluded that the trooper unlawfully extended the 
stop because the
“testimony relating to the ‘very strong’ odor of ‘more than 
just a very small amount’ of ‘unburnt’ marijuana—in 
the absence of any additional indicia that the quantity of 
marijuana that might have been present was unlawful—
is insufficient to support an objectively reasonable suspi -
cion that [the] defendant possessed an unlawful amount of 
marijuana.”
Id. at 22. In reaching that conclusion, we explained that, 
as the legal status of marijuana has changed, “the smell of 
marijuana generally no longer has the significance it once 
had as a basis for reasonable suspicion” and that “odor adds 
only that much to the calculus.” Id. at 19 (brackets, internal 
quotation marks, and emphasis omitted). 
 This case is distinguishable from Moore because, 
as explained above, the trial court did not rely solely on 
the officers’ testimony that they smelled the strong odor of 
marijuana as they approached the U-Haul. Defendant’s con-
tention that those findings do not contribute to reasonable 
suspicion because “[t]here was no evidence that [defendant 
and codefendant] could not be driving a U-Haul” and “[i]t is 
not suspicious to rent a U-Haul for transporting items” is 
unavailing. The trial court did not find that the men had 
impermissibly rented the U-Haul or that they were other -
wise unlawfully driving the truck. Nor did it conclude that 
renting a U-Haul for transportation was itself indicative of 
criminal conduct. Rather, the trial court relied on specific 
testimony that the men were not named in the rental agree-
ment, that the truck was travelling only one way, and that, 
in the officer’s training and experience, rental vehicles are 
Cite as 350 Or App 670 (2026) 687
commonly used to transport marijuana. It further found 
defendant’s and codefendant’s stated reason for their trip 
implausible because it would be difficult to transport furni-
ture to a family member when the men ultimately could not 
open the truck. We therefore conclude that Newman’s belief 
that criminal activity was occurring was objectively reason-
able in light of the totality of the circumstances. The trial 
court did not err in denying defendant’s motion to suppress 
or renewed motion to suppress.
C. Miranda Waiver
 Finally, in his third assignment, defendant argues 
that the state did not obtain a valid waiver of defendant’s 
rights against self-incrimination under Article I, section 
12, because when Miranda warnings are translated into 
another language, the state must prove that the translation 
adequately conveyed the concepts described by the warn -
ings. The state responds, and we agree, that defendant’s 
argument is unpreserved.
 At trial, Newman testified that he had typed 
Miranda warnings into the translation application and 
showed the translation to defendant and codefendant. In 
closing, defendant’s counsel briefly argued that the state 
had failed to meet its burden to show that defendant had 
validly waived his Miranda rights:
 “And, also, I think to a certain degree, it’s on—the bur -
den is on the State to prove that these individuals knew 
that they were—what they were consenting to and knew 
that they’d been given their Miranda warnings, because I 
think there’s a case out there—and I don’t have the cite to 
it—but it says if the Miranda warnings are conveyed incor-
rectly or not fully given, then they’re not Miranda warn-
ings at all.”
Beyond that comment, the argument was not otherwise 
raised at the hearing or in defendant’s written motion. In its 
ruling, the trial court explained that it did not understand 
defendant to challenge validity of his waiver and declined to 
issue a ruling as to that issue:
 “And this [translation] application that then Detective 
Newman provided, yes, the burden is on the State, but it’s 
688 State v. Tetlctle
by a preponderance of the evidence that they understand 
that they—what the Miranda warnings are. The state -
ments that were being made wasn’t the issues being sup -
pressed, it’s the extension of the stop and the reasonable 
suspicion is what was articulated at the beginning, and 
that’s already been addressed and identified.”
The trial court thus did not specifically rule that defendant’s 
Miranda waiver was valid, and defendant did not clarify or 
further argue that he was entitled to suppression of any 
particular statement. The state therefore did not have an 
opportunity to respond to that line of argument, nor did 
defendant’s argument sufficiently alert the trial court of his 
contention. We therefore conclude that defendant failed to 
preserve his argument for our review.
 Affirmed.
