A185685
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/10/allen_v._miller_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879213/allen-v-miller/
Caption: Allen v. Miller
Date: 2026-06-10

No. 514 June 10, 2026 373
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
MARCELLUS RAMON ALLEN,
Petitioner-Appellant,
v.
Jamie MILLER, 
Superintendent, 
Snake River Correctional Institution,
Defendant-Respondent.
Malheur County Circuit Court
22CV03503; A185685
J. Burdette Pratt, Senior Judge.
Argued and submitted May 7, 2026.
Lindsey Burrows argued the cause for appellant. Also on 
the briefs was Burrows Appellate Law LLC.
Rebecca M. Auten, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Tookey, Presiding Judge, Kamins, Judge, and 
Jacquot, Judge.
TOOKEY, P. J.
Affirmed.
374 Allen v. Miller
 TOOKEY, P. J.
 Petitioner appeals a judgment denying post-
conviction relief after his second trial for murder. The vic -
tim was shot nine times using three different guns, and the 
state’s theory was that petitioner and two other members of 
a gang shot the victim. Petitioner argues that he received 
inadequate and ineffective assistance of counsel at his sec -
ond trial. In his first assignment of error, petitioner argues 
that counsel’s performance was deficient because counsel 
made inaccurate statements about what the evidence would 
show without having properly reviewed discovery. More 
specifically, during petitioner’s opening statement, counsel 
stated that phone records would show that petitioner was 
not with one of the other shooters, Lomax, at the time of the 
shooting, but that claim was based on a misunderstanding 
of the phone records. Second, petitioner argues that trial 
counsel failed to preserve an objection to the admissibility of 
propensity evidence. The post-conviction court denied relief, 
and the superintendent maintains that the court did not err. 
We affirm.
 First, we agree with petitioner that one of his trial 
attorneys failed to exercise reasonable professional skill and 
judgment when he told the jury during petitioner’s opening 
statement that the phone records would show that petitioner 
was not with Lomax at the time of the shooting, which was 
based on a mistake about the phone records. Even so, when 
considered in the context of the other evidence presented 
during petitioner’s second trial, petitioner has not shown 
prejudice; in other words, he has not shown that counsel’s 
deficient performance could have tended to affect the out -
come of the case because, as set forth below, the evidence 
that petitioner was one of three people who shot and killed 
the victim was overwhelming. See Derschon v. Belleque , 
252 Or App 465, 466, 287 P3d 1189 (2012), rev den, 353 
Or 208 (2013) (affirming denial of post-conviction relief and 
concluding that “any errors that trial counsel made in the 
course of representing petitioner did not prejudice peti -
tioner because the state introduced overwhelming evidence 
of petitioner’s guilt apart from the contested evidence”). 
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 375
Because petitioner fails to show prejudice, we affirm on the 
first assignment of error.
 Second, we are not persuaded that it was unreason-
able for trial counsel to fail to object to the admissibility of 
gang evidence and evidence of other shootings. In the trial 
court, defense counsel made a tactical decision to propose 
stipulations about petitioner’s gang membership and then 
to object to much of the state’s gang evidence as unneces -
sarily cumulative or prejudicial. Considered in that context, 
trial counsel was not deficient by failing to object to gang 
evidence as impermissible propensity evidence. See Gorham 
v. Thompson, 332 Or 560, 567, 34 P3d 161 (2001) (“It is well-
established that a reviewing court will not second-guess a 
lawyer’s tactical decisions in the name of the constitution 
unless those decisions reflect an absence or suspension of 
professional skill and judgment.”). In addition, petitioner 
fails to show prejudice because he has not established that 
an objection to specific items of gang evidence on propensity 
grounds would have been successful. We therefore affirm 
the post-conviction court’s denial of relief.
I. FACTS
 On May 9, 2012, the victim, H, was shot nine times 
with three different guns. The state’s theory was that peti-
tioner was one of three people who shot and killed the vic -
tim, that the three persons were members of the same gang, 
and that they killed the victim because he was a competing 
marijuana dealer. On direct appeal after a second trial, we 
provided the following account of the facts:
 “H had been in the business of selling medical mari -
juana to individuals, and he was known for selling high 
quality marijuana at about half the price of other sellers. 
According to the state’s evidence, at around 11:30 p.m. on 
May 9, 2012, three men appeared at H’s home, and some -
one knocked on the door. H’s domestic partner, N, heard 
someone say they knew one of H’s close friends and wanted 
to buy marijuana. H stepped outside and told N to go 
upstairs. As she did, she heard someone yell H’s name and 
then ‘a lot’ of gunfire. N told the officers that she had looked 
through the peep hole to see a dark-skinned man wearing 
a red baseball hat on the front porch. Later that night, she 
told officers that the hat might instead have been white or 
376 Allen v. Miller
gray, but she maintained that the man was wearing a ‘red 
top’ or something red.
 “An autopsy and ballistics analysis would later reveal 
that H had been shot nine times with three different guns. 
A criminalist also concluded from wounds that three guns 
were fired from different positions, indicating three shoot -
ers. Three kinds of bullets and casings were found at the 
scene and during the autopsy: .22 caliber, 9 millimeter, and 
.380 caliber.
 “Soon after the shooting, police learned that three sus -
pects were hiding in a nearby apartment. Police surrounded 
the apartment for several hours. Eventually, the officers 
took the three men into custody and searched the apart -
ment. Among other items, officers found three guns—a .22 
caliber revolver, a 9 millimeter handgun, and a .380 caliber 
handgun—that were later confirmed to be the three guns 
used to shoot H. (The state’s theory would be that defen -
dant used the .380 handgun.) Officers also found items 
of clothing. DNA testing connected two of those things to 
defendant: a red baseball hat with a white letter ‘M’ and a 
sweatshirt with the letters ‘LRG’.”
State v. Allen , 311 Or App 454, 455-56, 489 P3d 1075, 
rev den, 368 Or 702 (2021) (Allen II).
 All three of the alleged shooters were tried together 
in 2014, and a jury found all three of them guilty of murder. 
Petitioner appealed, and we reversed and remanded for a 
new trial because the trial court erred in failing to suppress 
evidence discovered using a search warrant of petitioner’s 
cell phone that was overbroad. State v. Allen, 288 Or App 
244, 249, 406 P3d 89 (2017) ( Allen I). On remand, Lomax 
and Riley pleaded guilty, but petitioner did not, and he 
exercised his right to have the case re-tried within 60 days. 
At his second trial in 2018, another jury found petitioner 
guilty of murder, and, on direct appeal, we affirmed. Allen 
II, 311 Or App at 456.
 Petitioner sought post-conviction relief raising 
claims of inadequate and ineffective assistance of coun -
sel, including claims based on counsel’s mistake about the 
phone records and the failure to object to the admissibil -
ity of propensity evidence. The post-conviction court denied 
relief, and petitioner appeals.
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 377
II. ANALYSIS
 A criminal defendant has the right to adequate and 
effective assistance of counsel under Article I, section 11, of 
the Oregon Constitution and under the Sixth and Fourteenth 
Amendments to the United States Constitution. Antoine v. 
Taylor, 368 Or 760, 767, 499 P3d 48 (2021). A violation of 
those rights entitles a petitioner to post-conviction relief. 
ORS 138.530(1)(a). Under the Oregon Constitution, to suc -
ceed on a claim of inadequate assistance, a petitioner must 
establish by a preponderance of the evidence that “counsel 
failed to exercise reasonable professional skill and judgment, 
and that the petitioner suffered prejudice as a result of coun-
sel’s inadequacy.” Johnson v. Premo, 361 Or 688, 699, 399 P3d 
431 (2017). “A functionally equivalent two-element standard 
governs petitioner’s claim of ineffective assistance of counsel 
under the Sixth Amendment.” Smith v. Kelly, 318 Or App 567, 
568-69, 508 P3d 77 (2022), rev den, 370 Or 822 (2023).1
 To show prejudice from inadequate assistance, the 
petitioner must show that counsel’s deficient performance 
had “a tendency to affect the result of his trial.” Johnson, 
361 Or at 699 (internal quotation marks omitted). That 
standard “demands more than mere possibility, but less 
than probability.” Green v. Franke, 357 Or 301, 322, 350 P3d 
188 (2015). “In making that determination, the court must 
consider the totality of the circumstances.” Derschon, 252 
Or App at 474 (internal quotation marks omitted). In doing 
so, the question for the court “is not simply whether coun -
sel’s failure had any negative effect regarding a particular 
issue. Rather, the question is whether the negative effect, if 
any, as to that issue in turn tended to affect the result in the 
proceeding as a whole.” Id. (internal quotation marks and 
brackets omitted).
 When the post-conviction court denies relief on a 
claim of inadequate assistance of counsel, we review for 
errors of law. Green, 357 Or at 312. In doing so, we are 
bound by the post-conviction court’s findings of historical 
 1 Although the case law tends to refer to a defendant’s right to “adequate” 
assistance of counsel when discussing the state constitution, and to “effective” 
assistance of counsel when discussing the federal constitution, here we use the 
term adequate assistance as a shorthand for both adequate and effective assis -
tance of counsel.
378 Allen v. Miller
fact so long as there is evidence in the record to support 
them. Id.
A. The post-conviction court erred in determining that trial 
counsel provided adequate assistance, but it did not err 
in determining that trial counsel’s mistake did not prej-
udice petitioner.
 In the post-conviction court, petitioner pointed out 
that, at the second trial, defense counsel made a claim to the 
jury without having reviewed discovery to confirm that he 
could deliver on that claim. More specifically, counsel told 
the jury that the phone records would show that petitioner 
was not with one of the other shooters, Lomax, when the 
shooting occurred. But that was based on a misunderstand-
ing that there had been two phone calls between petitioner 
and Lomax at 11:38 p.m., when in fact the calls were made 
at 11:38 a.m.
 In considering whether that mistake amounted to 
inadequate assistance of counsel, the post-conviction court 
ruled that it did not. The court stated:
 “There is no dispute that in his opening statement, [trial 
counsel] did appear to confuse 11:38 a.m. with 11:38 p.m., 
but as explained below, this is not because of inadvertence 
to detail or neglect, but because all five attorneys and a 
police detective present for petitioner’s 2013-2014 trial, 
including the assigned prosecutors, made the same error 
and the entire 2013-2014 trial transpired without any 
attorney in the room realizing that the [phone records] 
actually indicated that petitioner was making texts and/
or phone calls to his co-defendant at 11:38 a.m. instead of 
11:38 p.m. The mistake appears to have originated from 
[a] District Attorney Investigator * * *, who first mistakenly 
testified at trial that there was cell phone activity between 
co-defendants at 11:38 p.m. Petitioner has not proven that 
all reasonable trial attorneys would have caught the error. 
Five attorneys in the first trial did not.
 “Petitioner also failed to prove prejudice. During the 
first trial, the evidence before the jury was that the phone 
call was made at the same time as the murder, yet peti -
tioner was still convicted. As soon as [the prosecutor] caught 
the mistake that the [phone records] indicated cell phone 
activity at 11:38 a.m. instead of 11:38 p.m., he brought this 
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 379
mistake to [defense counsel’s] attention, providing him with 
an opportunity to correct it. Petitioner’s defense did avail 
themselves of the opportunity to correct the mistake in a 
few instances during the 2018 re-trial. * * * [The attorneys 
for both the state and the defense] addressed the mistake 
during their respective cross-examination and redirect of 
[the] DA investigator * * *. By the prosecutor also ‘owning’ 
the mistake, this likely negated any loss of credibility to 
[defense counsel], since the jurors were provided with a 
compelling explanation for why [defense counsel] made the 
mistake directly from the prosecutor. The issue was also 
addressed during closing.”
 Regarding the first element of a claim of inadequate 
assistance, unlike the post-conviction court, we think that 
trial counsel’s performance fell short of the constitutional 
standard, and that it was not reasonable to make a claim 
to the jury during petitioner’s opening statement without 
having verified that the phone records supported the claim. 
Defense counsel argued during petitioner’s opening state -
ment that “forensic evidence” would show that petitioner 
was not with Lomax at the time of the shooting, and that 
“[t]he phone does not lie.” We think it was unreasonable for 
trial counsel to make those claims without having checked 
whether the phone records supported them. See Rudnitskyy 
v. State of Oregon, 303 Or App 549, 556, 464 P3d 471 (2020) 
(“to show that counsel’s performance was constitutionally 
inadequate, * * * petitioner must show that any reasonable 
attorney would have taken the steps that petitioner now 
asserts his attorney should have taken”); see also Myers 
v. Neal, 975 F3d 611, 621 (7th Cir 2020), cert den, ___ US 
___, 141 S Ct 2507, 209 L Ed 2d 540 (2021) (explaining that 
“[m]aking false promises about evidence in an opening 
statement” was “a clear instance of deficient performance”).
 We are cognizant that the constitutional standard 
“allows for tactical choices that backfire, because, by their 
nature, trials often involve risk.” Johnson, 361 Or at 702 
(internal quotation marks omitted). Here, defense counsel 
relied on sworn testimony from the first trial, and counsel’s 
preparation for the second trial may have been somewhat 
rushed given petitioner’s exercise of his right to a speedy 
trial. Nevertheless, when defense counsel relied on an 
380 Allen v. Miller
argument in his opening statement about what the phone 
records would show, we think that any reasonable attorney 
would have checked the records. Indeed, when petitioner’s 
attorney made the claim, the prosecutor was able to identify 
the error relatively quickly, which suggests that it would 
not have been burdensome for petitioner’s attorney to also 
check the phone records, rather than relying on what others 
had said about them. See Farmer v. Premo, 363 Or 679, 690, 
427 P3d 170 (2018) (for a tactical decision “to be considered 
an exercise of professional skill and judgment, [it] must be 
grounded on a reasonable investigation” (internal quotation 
marks and citation omitted)).
 Nevertheless, turning to the second element of a 
claim of inadequate assistance, we conclude that the post-
conviction court did not err in determining that petitioner 
failed to show prejudice. Although the mistake might have 
made the jury somewhat more distrustful of petitioner and 
his attorneys, we think that its impact must have been 
minor in relationship to the whole trial. See Derschon, 252 
Or App at 474 (in assessing prejudice from inadequate assis-
tance of counsel, the court must consider the totality of the 
circumstances). To explain why, we summarize additional 
facts presented to the jury during petitioner’s second trial.
 At the time of the shooting, two officers from a K-9 
unit happened to be training a dog nearby when they heard 
the gunshots. One of them saw a car enter an apartment 
complex without its headlights on. The officers saw three 
people walk away from the car, but the officers lost sight of 
them. The officers used the dog to track their scent, which 
led them to an apartment in which two women lived, Fair 
and Watson.
 Believing that the persons in the apartment may 
have been involved in a shooting, the officers set up a perim-
eter around the apartment. Fair’s mother came to the scene 
and worked with officers to get Fair, Watson, and Fair’s 
baby out of the apartment. The three men eventually left 
the apartment and were taken into custody. When police 
searched the apartment, they found three guns. An autopsy 
and ballistics analysis revealed that those guns were used 
to shoot the victim.
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 381
 During the second trial, the state offered evidence 
from Fair, who lived in the apartment where the three men 
had gone after the shooting. 2 Fair admitted that, on the 
night of the murder, she drove petitioner, Lomax, and Riley 
to the victim’s home to buy marijuana. When they arrived, 
petitioner, Lomax, and Riley got out of the car and walked 
away. It was around 11:30 p.m. A few minutes later, Fair 
heard gunshots, and she saw the three men running back to 
her car. They got in the car, and petitioner told Fair to “Go, 
go, go.” Petitioner told Fair to turn off the lights on the car, 
and she drove them back to her apartment. Fair went inside, 
and the three men stayed outside for a minute or two before 
also going inside.
 When the police searched Fair’s apartment, they 
found three guns. It was later determined that they were 
the guns used to shoot the victim. Based on the nature of 
the victim’s wounds, a criminalist testified that the three 
guns were fired from different positions, indicating three 
shooters. Allen II, 311 Or App at 456.
 One of the three guns recovered was a .380-cali -
ber handgun, and the state offered evidence connecting that 
gun to petitioner. Police found a bag of .380-caliber bullets 
in Fair’s apartment, and Fair testified that she had seen 
petitioner take it out of his pocket while he was in her apart-
ment after the shooting. The same gun had been used in 
four shootings in the City of Portland in prior months. There 
was evidence that two of those shootings were by members 
of the “Hoover” gang, which was a gang that petitioner was 
affiliated with. Indeed, there was evidence that petitioner 
and some members of the Hoover gang formed a subset, or 
“clique,” of the gang called HMF.
 The state offered evidence that petitioner was wear-
ing red on the night of the murder, which was consistent 
with a description of the person seen by the victim’s domes-
tic partner. In Fair’s apartment, police found a red baseball 
cap and a sweatshirt with a red stripe on it. The sweatshirt 
had been soaked in Pine-Sol. In his testimony, petitioner 
 2 At petitioner’s second trial, Fair testified that she no longer had any mem -
ory of the incident, so police played an audio recording of her testimony from the 
first trial. 
382 Allen v. Miller
admitted that he was wearing the baseball cap and sweat -
shirt on the night of the shooting, and there was also evi -
dence that Lomax and Riley were not wearing red clothes 
that night.
 While he was in custody following the murder, peti-
tioner offered an inmate $10,000 to kill Fair, telling the 
inmate that, without Fair’s testimony, the state “couldn’t 
prove him guilty * * * of anything.” Petitioner told the inmate 
that he and two others shot at the victim, but petitioner did 
not know which shots had hit the victim.
 Another inmate also testified that petitioner con -
fessed to him that petitioner had shot the victim.3 According 
to the second inmate, petitioner said that Fair drove him to 
the victim’s house and, when the victim came outside, peti-
tioner shot him. Petitioner said he got back in the car, went 
to Fair’s house, and he “tried to change his clothes * * * and 
wipe off the pistol.”
 In reviewing the evidence, we recognize that “we 
must be cautious about saying that the state’s evidence was 
so strong as to preclude any significant chance of acquit -
tal, regardless of counsel’s performance.” Mitchell v. State 
of Oregon , 300 Or App 504, 515-16, 454 P3d 805 (2019) 
(internal quotation marks omitted). Even so, considering 
the evidence presented during the second trial, we are not 
persuaded that trial counsel’s mistake about the time of the 
phone calls could have tended to affect the outcome. See 
Derschon, 252 Or App at 476-77 (concluding that trial coun-
sel’s error did not affect the result because there was ample 
evidence of the petitioner’s guilt).
 Here, there is no dispute that petitioner was with 
Lomax and Riley on the night of the murder. Instead, peti -
tioner testified that when they parked down the street from 
the victim’s house, only Lomax and Riley went to the house, 
while petitioner stayed by the car. But that account is con -
tradicted by Fair’s testimony, who testified that all three of 
them walked away from her car and minutes later she heard 
gunshots and then saw the three of them running back to 
 3 Like Fair, the second inmate also did not remember speaking with peti -
tioner, so the state played an audio recording of his testimony from the first trial. 
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 383
her car. It is contradicted by the testimony of the victim’s 
domestic partner, who saw someone on the porch wearing 
red and DNA evidence connected petitioner to the red base-
ball cap. Indeed, petitioner admitted that he was wearing 
the cap and sweatshirt that evening, and he testified that 
he gave the sweatshirt to Riley to soak in Pine-Sol while at 
Fair’s apartment.
 Petitioner claimed that he did not participate in the 
shooting, and the defense theory was that Riley must have 
used two guns, but that account was inconsistent with the 
testimony of a criminalist, who explained that, based on 
the victim’s wounds, three guns were fired from different 
positions, indicating three shooters. And Fair testified that 
she saw petitioner with a bag of .380-caliber bullets in her 
apartment, which is the caliber of one of the guns used to 
shoot the victim, and that gun was used in other shootings 
by members of the same or related gangs.
 There was evidence that petitioner sold marijuana 
as a source of income, and although he testified that he did 
not sell marijuana in Oregon, the fact that he sold mari -
juana was relevant to whether he had a motive to kill the 
victim, who was purportedly selling marijuana at a low price. 
And perhaps most damaging, petitioner offered an inmate 
$10,000 to kill Fair. On the stand, petitioner acknowledged 
that he had said some “angry things” to the inmate about 
Fair because, according to petitioner, Fair had lied about peti-
tioner’s involvement in the murder. At his second trial, peti-
tioner sought to discredit the inmate’s testimony,4 but peti -
tioner never denied offering the inmate money to kill Fair. 
Indeed, petitioner admitted that a jury in a prior proceeding 
had found him guilty of attempted aggravated murder, in 
part based on his “conversations” with the inmate about Fair. 
Although petitioner also sought to discredit the testimony of 
a second inmate, who claimed that petitioner had also con -
fessed to him, that was additional evidence supporting the 
state’s theory that petitioner was one of the shooters.
 In assessing the prejudice caused by the mistake 
about the phone records, we think it is also relevant that the 
 4 The inmate had testified that petitioner told him the victim had been 
“pistol-whipped,” but the medical evidence did not show that. 
384 Allen v. Miller
parties sought to address the mistake during the second trial. 
The state called the investigator as a witness during the sec-
ond trial, and she explained that she had made a mistake 
during her testimony in a prior proceeding. And petitioner 
explained that when he heard the investigator’s testimony in 
the prior proceeding, petitioner had mistakenly recollected 
that he had received calls at 11:38 p.m. because of all the 
“running and commotion” around the time of the shooting.
 Thus, we accept that it was a mistake for petition -
er’s attorney to claim during petitioner’s opening statement 
that the phone records would show that petitioner was not 
with Lomax at the time of the shooting. But we are not per-
suaded that the time of the two phone calls was, as peti -
tioner suggests, “the central defense theory.” For example, 
during petitioner’s opening statement, defense counsel also 
sought to explain petitioner’s gang membership, and defense 
counsel also tried to discredit the testimony of Fair and an 
inmate, to argue that Riley had used two guns because one 
of the other guns had jammed, and to argue that petitioner 
did not sell marijuana in Oregon.
 Indeed, considered in the context of the trial as a 
whole, whether there had been two phone calls between 
petitioner and Lomax at the time of the murder was an 
ancillary issue, as shown by the fact that the first jury found 
petitioner guilty of murder even accepting that those calls 
had been made. And it is not surprising that the prosecutor 
would seek to capitalize on defense counsel’s mistake after it 
was discovered during the second trial. Nevertheless, when 
we consider the mistake in relation to the ample other evi -
dence presented during the second trial, including evidence 
showing that petitioner was with Lomax and Riley on the 
night of the murder, that petitioner was wearing red, that 
three guns had been used to kill the victim, that petitioner 
had bullets matching the caliber of one of the guns, and that 
petitioner had offered an inmate money to kill Fair, we con-
clude that counsel’s deficient performance could not have 
tended to affect the jury’s determination that petitioner was 
guilty of murder. See Moser v. Lampert, 200 Or App 78, 83, 
112 P3d 482, rev den, 339 Or 406 (2005) (determining, in 
a post-conviction case, that the presence or nonpresence of 
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 385
certain testimony would not have changed the jury’s verdict 
given other overwhelming evidence presented at trial). The 
post-conviction court did not err in determining that peti -
tioner failed to show prejudice, and we affirm on that basis.
B. The post-conviction court did not err in determining that 
trial counsel did not provide inadequate assistance by 
failing to preserve an argument about the admissibility 
of propensity evidence.
 Turning to petitioner’s second assignment of error, 
petitioner argues that “his trial counsel rendered ineffec -
tive assistance by failing to challenge the propensity bases 
for admission of other-acts evidence.” To place that argu -
ment in context, we begin with an account of what occurred 
during petitioner’s second trial.
 At his second trial, the court addressed arguments 
about the admissibility of evidence of petitioner’s gang affilia-
tions and prior shootings involving the .380 caliber handgun. 
Allen II, 311 Or App at 457. Petitioner offered to stipulate 
“that he was a member of a gang, that he knew the other two 
suspects as fellow gang members, and that the .380 handgun 
had been in the possession of another gang member about ten 
days prior to H’s murder.” Id. Petitioner argued that, given 
those stipulations, much of the state’s evidence regarding his 
gang affiliations would be cumulative and unduly prejudicial. 
Id. For example, he challenged the admissibility of photos of 
his tattoos, a photo of petitioner wearing the red hat, and 
photos of petitioner and one of the shooters displaying gang 
signs. Id. Although the trial court limited some of the evi -
dence relating to petitioner’s gang membership, it ruled that 
most of it was relevant and admissible. Id. at 458.
 On direct appeal, we affirmed, determining that 
the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the 
evidence under OEC 403. Allen II, 311 Or App at 458-59. 
Despite petitioner’s offers to stipulate,
“[t]he state provided an explanation for each item of evi -
dence detailing why the probative value went beyond that 
of defendant’s proposed stipulated facts. According to the 
state, its proffered evidence demonstrated the extent of 
defendant’s commitment to the gang, his commitment to a 
386 Allen v. Miller
specific subset of the gang, the depth of his relationship with 
the other suspects, the improbable prospect that defendant 
was just an innocent bystander, his financial interest in the 
gang, and the likelihood that defendant himself procured 
the gun through the gang. As to each matter, the trial court 
found that the state had carried its burden of establish -
ing that the challenged evidence retained probative value 
beyond the simple facts in defendant’s stipulations.”
Id. at 462 (footnote omitted). We also affirmed the trial 
court’s determination that the probative value of each item 
of evidence was not outweighed by the danger of unfair prej-
udice. Id. at 463.
 In addition, on direct appeal, we rejected as unpre-
served petitioner’s argument that the challenged evidence 
was inadmissible propensity evidence. Id. at 459. We 
explained that, in the trial court, petitioner’s “arguments 
were limited to whether his proposed stipulations rendered 
the other evidence impermissibly prejudicial.” Id.
 In the post-conviction court, petitioner argued that 
trial counsel was deficient by failing to preserve the issue of 
whether the evidence was inadmissible because it relied on 
propensity reasoning. The post-conviction court denied the 
claim:
 “Petitioner did not prove that his trial attorney failed to 
exercise reasonable professional skill and judgment in fail-
ing to adequately preserve for appeal a meritorious propen-
sity evidence issue. The petitioner has not proven that the 
evidence in question was offered for propensity purposes. 
At trial, Petitioner conceded that some of the challenged 
photos were relevant. They were admissible for purposes 
beyond showing Petitioner’s gang membership. The Court 
of Appeals held that the additional photos were admissible 
for purposes not covered by the stipulation and thus were 
properly admitted. Petitioner did not prove that all reason-
able trial attorneys would have objected to the photos as 
improper propensity evidence.
 “Petitioner has also failed to prove prejudice. Petitioner 
has not proven that an objection to the evidence based on 
the allegation that it was improper propensity evidence 
would have had merit either at the trial court or on appeal.”
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 387
 On appeal from the post-conviction court, petitioner 
argues that “[a]t least some of the challenged evidence relied 
on impermissible propensity reasoning and would have 
been inadmissible, had petitioner properly objected.” For 
the reasons explained below, we are not persuaded by that 
argument.
 On appeal, petitioner’s arguments concern two cat-
egories of evidence: (1) the evidence of four prior shootings 
using the .380 caliber handgun, and (2) evidence of peti -
tioner’s gang affiliations more generally, including photos of 
petitioner.
 Starting with evidence of the prior shootings using 
the .380 caliber handgun, we do not agree with petitioner’s 
argument that defense counsel should have objected to the 
evidence on propensity grounds because the evidence was 
not “other acts evidence.” OEC 404(4) provides that, in crim-
inal cases, evidence of “other crimes, wrongs or acts by the 
defendant” is generally admissible if relevant. (Emphasis 
added.) Here, there was no suggestion that petitioner was 
the shooter in the prior incidents involving the .380 cali -
ber handgun, so that evidence was not “other acts evidence” 
within the meaning of OEC 404(4). Instead, evidence of the 
prior shootings, at least two of which involved associates of 
petitioner, was used to show how petitioner gained access to 
the handgun. Allen II, 311 Or App at 457.5
 Turning to petitioner’s contentions regarding evi -
dence of his gang affiliations more generally, including 
photos of petitioner, we conclude that petitioner fails to 
demonstrate that it was unreasonable for his attorneys not 
to object to that evidence as relying on propensity reason -
ing. At his second trial, petitioner’s attorneys made a stra-
tegic decision to offer to make stipulations about his gang 
affiliations, and then to object to much of the gang evidence 
 5 To the extent that petitioner argues that his attorneys should have objected 
to “[d]etails regarding the [prior] shootings,” petitioner did not make that argu -
ment in the post-conviction court, so we agree with the superintendent that the 
argument was not preserved, and we do not consider it. See Hale v. Belleque, 255 
Or App 653, 660, 298 P3d 596, adh’d to on recons, 258 Or App 587, 312 P3d 533 
(2013), rev den, 354 Or 597 (2013) (“Preservation principles apply in the context 
of post-conviction relief and, as a general rule, arguments not made to the post-
conviction court in support of a claim will not be considered on appeal.”).
388 Allen v. Miller
that the state sought to admit as cumulative and prejudi -
cial. Allen II, 311 Or App at 457. In our view, that strate -
gic decision was reasonable. We must bear in mind that, 
at his second trial, petitioner did not deny that he drove 
with two other persons who were gang members to the vic -
tim’s house; instead, he sought to create a reasonable doubt 
about whether he participated in shooting the victim. Given 
that the victim was shot by at least two others who were 
gang members, it was inevitable that the jury would hear 
some evidence of petitioner’s gang affiliations, so the deci -
sion to develop a defense strategy that sought to limit that 
evidence was reasonable. See Gorham , 332 Or at 567 (a 
reviewing court must not “second-guess” a lawyer’s reason-
able tactical decisions).
 Although we need not reach the second element of 
petitioner’s inadequate assistance claim, we note that “[t]o 
establish prejudice on a claim based on a trial counsel’s fail-
ure to object to the admission of evidence, a petitioner must 
establish that the objection would have been well taken 
when the criminal case was tried.” Logan v. State of Oregon, 
259 Or App 319, 327, 313 P3d 1128 (2013), rev den, 355 Or 
142 (2014). “The petitioner must then establish that, given 
the totality of the circumstances, the admission of the objec-
tionable evidence had a tendency to affect the jury’s verdict.” 
Id.
 Here, if trial counsel had made an objection to evi -
dence of other shootings involving the .380 caliber handgun, 
or gang evidence more generally, as inadmissible propen -
sity evidence, petitioner fails to demonstrate that the objec-
tion would have succeeded. For example, during petitioner’s 
opening statement and in his testimony on direct examina-
tion at trial, petitioner himself acknowledged that he was a 
gang member, which suggests the trial court was not likely 
to have sustained an objection to the admissibility of gang 
evidence on propensity grounds. In addition, after admit -
ting gang evidence at trial, the trial court instructed the 
jury not to use it as propensity evidence:
“You have heard evidence the [petitioner] has some associ-
ation and involvement with people identified as belonging 
to gangs. This evidence is not to be used as evidence that 
Cite as 350 Or App 373 (2026) 389
because of that association he was more likely to engage 
in criminal activity or more likely to engage in the kind 
of behavior some people believe gang members engage in.”
“As a matter of law, we presume that the jurors followed 
those instructions absent an overwhelming probability that 
they were unable to do so.” State v. Langley, 363 Or 482, 526, 
424 P3d 688 (2018), adh’d to as modified on recons, 365 Or 
418, 446 P3d 542 (2019), cert den, ___ US ___, 141 S Ct 138, 
207 L Ed 2d 1081 (2020). Thus, considering the record before 
us, petitioner has not shown he was prejudiced by trial coun-
sel’s failure to object to the admission of evidence of his gang 
affiliations as propensity evidence. And, for similar reasons, 
petitioner has also failed to show he was prejudiced by the 
failure to object to evidence of other shootings involving the 
.380 caliber handgun. 6 We therefore affirm on the second 
assignment of error.
 Affirmed.
 6 To the extent that petitioner means to separately challenge some of the 
prosecutor’s statements about petitioner made in closing, those arguments were 
not sufficiently made in the post-conviction court, so we do not address them. 
See Zyst v. Kelly, 338 Or App 597, 607, 566 P3d 1121, rev den, 374 Or 188 (2025) 
(rejecting arguments that petitioner failed to preserve in the post-conviction 
court).
