A184843
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/10/jones_v._board_of_parole_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879208/jones-v-board-of-parole/
Caption: Jones v. Board of Parole
Date: 2026-06-10

432 June 10, 2026 No. 519
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
DeLAINE JOHDON JONES,
Petitioner,
v.
BOARD OF PAROLE 
AND POST-PRISON SUPERVISION,
Respondent.
Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision
A184843 (Control), A184844
Argued and submitted August 8, 2025.
Brittney Plesser argued the cause for petitioner. Also on 
the briefs was Oregon Justice Resource Center.
Philip Thoennes, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. On the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General, 
and Kirsten M. Naito, Assistant Attorney General.
Before Tookey, Presiding Judge, Kamins, Judge, and 
Jacquot, Judge.
KAMINS, J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 433
 KAMINS, J.
 Petitioner seeks judicial review of two final orders of 
the Board of Parole and Post-Prison Supervision (the board), 
stemming from a dual juvenile hearing and parole consider-
ation hearing. In one order (BAF 12), the board found that 
petitioner had not met his burden of proof in demonstrat -
ing maturity and rehabilitation and deferred his ability to 
petition for a subsequent juvenile hearing for 36 months. In 
the second order (BAF 13), the board found that petitioner 
continued to remain a dangerous offender and deferred his 
release for 36 months.1 Petitioner argues that (1) the board 
erred in holding a dual juvenile and parole consideration 
hearing, (2) a rule the board adopted exceeded its author -
ity, and (3) certain parts of the board’s decisions were not 
supported by substantial evidence and reasoning. We affirm 
the board’s orders because it did not err in the ways peti -
tioner contends. The board acted within its authority in 
holding a dual juvenile and parole consideration hearing, 
the rules the board adopted to facilitate its hearings were 
within its authority, and the board’s orders were supported 
by substantial evidence and reasoning.
 In 1988, when petitioner was 17 years old, he pleaded 
guilty to one count of attempted murder with a firearm and 
two counts of first-degree robbery with a firearm. For each 
count, he was found to be a dangerous offender pursuant to 
ORS 161.725 and was sentenced to an indeterminate term 
with a maximum length of 30 years, with each count to run 
consecutively.
 Because petitioner challenges the board’s decision 
to hold his parole hearings concurrently, we describe the cir-
cumstances around the board’s decision with some detail.
 In 2021, while he was still incarcerated, petitioner 
received a commutation from Governor Kate Brown. That 
commutation granted petitioner, and others similarly sit -
uated who had been convicted of crimes as juveniles, the 
opportunity to seek release on parole through a juvenile 
hearing provided for in a recently enacted statute, ORS 
 1 Petitioner requested judicial review of the orders separately; the cases have 
been consolidated for our review.
434 Jones v. Board of Parole
144.397.2 At that time, petitioner was already scheduled for 
a parole consideration hearing in June 2022, as part of his 
dangerous offender sentence.
 In 2022, petitioner, through counsel, requested that 
his parole consideration hearing be postponed until summer 
2023.
 In January 2023, after litigation surrounding 
Governor Brown’s commutation order concluded, petitioner 
received a letter from the board asking him if he “wish[ed] 
to accept the commutation and be scheduled for a juvenile 
hearing instead of a parole consideration hearing and if [he] 
want[ed] a [b]oard-appointed attorney or not.”
 In March and April, petitioner and the board 
engaged in some correspondence. The board emailed peti -
tioner’s attorney stating that it would be holding petitioner’s 
hearings concurrently:
“[T]he [b]oard’s position is that if he wants a juvenile hear-
ing, he will have a parole consideration hearing as well, a 
‘dual’ hearing. The commutation does not take away that 
fact he was sentenced as a dangerous offender, FYI.”
 Petitioner’s counsel responded to the board that 
petitioner wished to move forward with his juvenile hearing 
but did not ask to move forward with the parole consider -
ation hearing. The board responded that it would schedule 
petitioner for a “dual” hearing. The board further asserted 
that its decision was final. The board also explained that 
its position was that it was “legally required to hold both a 
juvenile maturity hearing and a parole consideration jointly, 
given [that petitioner] has a current parole consideration 
date of April 26, 2024.”
 Petitioner then filed an administrative review 
request to challenge the board’s decision to hold a dual hear-
ing. Petitioner argued that the board action was inconsistent 
 2 Since 2019, all persons serving a prison sentence who were convicted of 
an offense committed prior to turning 18 are eligible for release on parole or 
post-prison supervision after serving 15 years of imprisonment, regardless of 
any mandatory minimum sentences. ORS 144.397(1) - (2). After a person who 
was convicted as a juvenile has served 15 years, the board shall hold a juvenile 
hearing that provides the person “a meaningful opportunity to be released on 
parole.” ORS 144.397(3).
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 435
with its administrative rules, its statutory authority, and 
the Oregon and United States constitutions. More specifi -
cally, petitioner contended that, by holding a dual hearing, 
“the [b]oard is denying [him] the benefit of his commuta -
tion by: (1) requiring he meet two distinct release standards, 
(2) denying him the benefit of the more robust juvenile reha-
bilitation hearing, and (3) denying him the opportunity to 
release to post-prison supervision.”
 On June 12, 2023, the board sent petitioner 
Administrative Review Response 3 (ARR 3), in which it 
denied petitioner’s review request as premature under OAR 
255-080-0011, because the board “ha[d] not issued any final 
[b]oard action.”3 The board, for the first time, clarified its 
position that petitioner would not be required to satisfy both 
applicable release standards at his dual hearing, but could 
obtain release if he satisfied either (or both).
 The board also explained that its justification for 
holding a dual hearing was to reduce the administrative 
inconvenience and expense of holding two related release 
hearings so close in time to one another:
“The Board elected, in its discretion, to schedule both man-
datory hearings concurrently because of the close proxim -
ity in time with your upcoming parole consideration date, 
and to reduce the administrative inconvenience (including 
potentially to witnesses and victims) and expense associ -
ated with conducting the two related release hearings sep -
arately but only several months apart. The Board’s deci -
sion to conduct those hearings concurrently did not create 
a new type of hearing, or otherwise alter the applicable 
evidentiary standards or release criteria for the separate 
hearings; those remain independent.”
Petitioner informed the board again that he would only par-
ticipate in his juvenile hearing.
 On October 4, 2023, the board held petitioner’s dual 
juvenile and parole consideration hearing. Prior to his 
 3 OAR 255-080-0011, in relevant part, provides:
 “All administrative review requests will be screened by a Board member 
or a Board designee who shall deny further review of the following:
 “* * * * *
 “(3) Board orders that are not final[.]”
436 Jones v. Board of Parole
hearing, petitioner made certain objections to evidence the 
board would receive. Of note to this request for judicial 
review, petitioner objected to his most recent psychological 
evaluation by Dr. Hamilton (Hamilton evaluation), which 
diagnosed him with Antisocial Personality Disorder, as 
hearsay and unreliable, and his prior psychological evalu -
ations as unreliable, not current, or irrelevant. The board 
admitted the psychological evaluations as exhibits over peti-
tioner’s objections.
 Petitioner also provided evidence to try to meet 
his burden to demonstrate maturity and rehabilitation. See 
Jacobs v. Board of Parole, 342 Or App 41, 55, 577 P3d 338, 
rev den, 374 Or 523 (2025) (citing ORS 144.397(7)) (“[A]t a 
juvenile hearing, the petitioner has the burden to demon -
strate his maturity and rehabilitation.”). To that end, peti -
tioner submitted a hearing memo that included a personal 
statement of responsibility; application of the statutory 
juvenile hearing factors listed in ORS 144.397(5) 4 and rel -
evant discretionary juvenile hearing factors listed in OAR 
255-033-0030(5);5 and a detailed release plan. Additionally, 
 4 ORS 144.397(5) provides:
 “During a hearing under this section, the board shall consider and give 
substantial weight to the fact that a person under 18 years of age is incapable 
of the same reasoning and impulse control as an adult and the diminished 
culpability of minors as compared to that of adults. The board shall also 
consider the following circumstances, if relevant to the specific person and 
offense:
 “(a) The age and immaturity of the person at the time of the offense.
 “(b) Whether and to what extent an adult was involved in the offense.
 “(c) The person’s family and community circumstances at the time of the 
offense, including any history of abuse, trauma and involvement in the juve -
nile dependency system.
 “(d) The person’s subsequent emotional growth and increased maturity 
during the person’s imprisonment.
 “(e) The person’s participation in rehabilitative and educational pro -
grams while in custody if such programs have been made available to the 
person and use of self-study for self-improvement.
 “(f) A mental health diagnosis.
 “(g) Any other mitigating factors or circumstances presented by the 
person.”
 5 OAR 255-033-0030(5) provides:
 “The board, when making a determination under ORS 144.397(7) as to 
whether the person, based on the consideration of the age and immaturity of 
the person at the time of the offense, and the person’s behavior thereafter, 
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 437
petitioner submitted an independent psychological evalua -
tion by Dr. Wells (Wells evaluation). That evaluation, unlike 
the Hamilton evaluation, diagnosed petitioner with Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder and Major Depressive Disorder, 
in full remission.
 At the hearing, petitioner called Dr. Wells to testify 
about her evaluation. Dr. Wells testified about her educa -
tion and experience, the type of evaluation she conducted, 
and how she applied her adolescent development expertise 
in evaluating petitioner. Petitioner testified and elaborated 
on his childhood experience, his crimes, and his life since he 
was sentenced. Petitioner, through counsel, reiterated his 
objection to participating in the parole consideration hear -
ing at the same time as the juvenile hearing.
 Following the hearing, the board issued two orders 
(BAF 12 and BAF 13). In BAF 12, the juvenile hearing 
has demonstrated maturity and rehabilitation, may consider, among other 
things:
 “(a) the person’s involvement in correctional treatment, medical care, 
educational, vocational, or other training in the institution which will sub -
stantially enhance the person’s capacity to lead a law-abiding life when 
released;
 “(b) the person’s institutional employment history;
 “(c) the person’s institutional disciplinary conduct;
 “(d) the adequacy of the person’s release plan including community sup -
port from family, friends, treatment providers, and others in the community; 
type of residence, neighborhood, or community in which the person plans to 
live;
 “(e) the person’s ability to demonstrate remorse and understanding of 
the impact the person’s crime had on the victims and the community;
 “(f) the person’s attitude and evidence of behavioral change;
 “(g) the extent the person takes personal responsibility for their actions;
 “(h) any psychiatrist or psychologist’s assessment of the person’s current 
risk of re-offending, risk of harm, and suitability for community supervision;
 “(i) the person understands long-term consequences;
 “(j) the person can delay impulses and identify alternative actions;
 “(k) the degree of premeditation or deviancy involved in the commis -
sion of the crime and the ability to understand, address, and mitigate those 
underlying risk factors;
 “(l) the person, if paroled, would not be a threat to the safety of the vic -
tim, the victim’s family, or the community and would comply with release 
conditions; and
 “(m) any other relevant factors.”
438 Jones v. Board of Parole
order, the board found that petitioner did not meet his bur -
den of proof to demonstrate maturity and rehabilitation 
and deferred petitioner’s ability to petition for a subsequent 
juvenile hearing for three years. The board explained that it 
reached that decision based on a number of factors, including 
petitioner’s minimal engagement with services, his failure to 
engage consistently with mental health treatment, and his 
misconduct while incarcerated. The board also discussed the 
Hamilton evaluation and the Wells evaluation, considered 
both of their diagnoses, and observed that both evaluations 
noted petitioner’s lengthy history of disciplinary misconduct. 
In deferring petitioner’s ability to petition for a subsequent 
juvenile hearing for three years, the board explained that 
it relied on similar factors, including the Hamilton evalua -
tion, sporadic engagement in treatment programs, ongoing 
behavioral misconduct, and mental health issues.
 In BAF 13, the parole consideration order, the board 
found that petitioner continued to remain dangerous and 
deferred his next parole consideration hearing for three 
years. This petition for judicial review followed.
 We review the board’s order for legal error, Morrison 
v. Board of Parole , 277 Or App 861, 863, 374 P3d 948, 
rev den, 360 Or 465 (2016), and substantial evidence, ORS 
144.335(1), (3); ORS 183.482(8), including substantial rea -
son, Jenkins v. Board of Parole , 356 Or 186, 195, 335 P3d 
828 (2014). “Substantial evidence exists to support a finding 
of fact when the record, viewed as a whole, would permit a 
reasonable person to make that finding.” ORS 183.482(8)(c). 
In reviewing for substantial evidence, we defer to the board’s 
reasonable inferences and do not reweigh the evidence. 
Mendacino v. Board of Parole , 287 Or App 822, 834, 404 
P3d 1048 (2017), rev den, 362 Or 508 (2018). Substantial rea-
son, on the other hand, requires that the board “articulate a 
‘rational connection between the facts and the legal conclu-
sions it draws from them.’ ” Jenkins, 356 Or at 195 (quoting 
Ross v. Springfield School Dist. No. 19, 294 Or 357, 370, 657 
P2d 188 (1982)).
 First Assignment of Error. Petitioner first argues 
that the board erred in holding a dual juvenile and parole 
consideration hearing.
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 439
 Before resolving petitioner’s argument, however, 
we address the board’s contention that we lack jurisdiction 
to review its decision because petitioner failed to file a peti-
tion for judicial review within the jurisdictional time limit. 
The board asserts that ARR 3—the order in which it told 
petitioner it would be holding a dual hearing—represented 
a final order and that “[n]othing prohibited petitioner from 
seeking review of that order before the board held the dual 
hearing.” (Emphasis in original.) We disagree.
 A person seeking review of a board order must file 
a petition for judicial review “within 60 days after the date 
the board mails the order disposing of the person’s request 
for administrative review.” ORS 144.335(4). Judicial review, 
however, is limited to final agency orders. ORS 144.335(1); 
ORS 183.480(3); see also ORS 183.315(1) (exempting the 
board from certain other portions of the APA). A “final order” 
means “final agency action expressed in writing,” but does 
not include
“any tentative or preliminary agency declaration or state -
ment that:
 “(A) Precedes final agency action; or
 “(B) Does not preclude further agency consideration of 
the subject matter of the statement or declaration.”
ORS 183.310(6)(b). In determining whether an agency’s order 
constitutes a final order, “the question is the order’s place in 
the process of which it is a part—whether it is a preliminary 
step in reaching some later decision or is, itself, the ultimate 
decision.” Grobovsky v. Board of Medical Examiners, 213 Or 
App 136, 145, 159 P3d 1245 (2007).
 Here, ARR 3, in which the board stated that it 
intended to hold a dual hearing, was not a final order subject 
to judicial review, for several reasons. First, the board itself 
ruled that it had “not issued any final [b]oard action” and 
denied the request for administrative review as premature. 
That ruling indicates that its decision was merely prelim -
inary. Second, nothing in the email conveying the board’s 
intent to hold a dual hearing, or the denial of the request for 
administrative review, precluded the board from further con-
sideration of that plan. Indeed, the board appeared to change 
440 Jones v. Board of Parole
its mind as to the function of the dual hearing during its 
many communications with petitioner—including by refer -
encing that “[t]he commutation [did] not take away [the] fact 
[that petitioner] was sentenced as a dangerous offender”—
and petitioner continued to raise the issue with the board, 
when he responded to the board with his “continued belief” 
that he should not be subjected to a dual hearing. Thus, peti-
tioner’s challenge is timely.
 Turning to the merits of petitioner’s argument, peti-
tioner raises four distinct arguments as to why that deci -
sion was erroneous. First, petitioner contends that holding 
a dual hearing violated the terms of the Governor’s commu-
tation by failing to give full effect to the terms of her com -
mutation order, and by subjecting him to a more severe sen-
tence. Second, petitioner argues that the decision violated 
his procedural due process rights under the Fourteenth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution because he 
lacked sufficient notice of the hearing. Third, petitioner 
argues that the board exceeded its authority by holding a 
hearing that did not have a procedure based in statute or 
rule. Fourth, petitioner argues that the board’s dual hearing 
decision violated his constitutional equal protection rights 
because, to his knowledge, the board did not subject other 
similarly situated persons to dual hearings. We address 
each argument in turn and, for the reasons explained below, 
we conclude that the board did not err in holding a dual 
hearing.
A. Governor’s Commutation
 Petitioner first argues that the decision to hold a 
dual hearing violated the Governor’s constitutional clem -
ency power. Petitioner contends that, by affording him the 
opportunity of release onto post-prison supervision through 
a juvenile hearing, the governor’s commutation replaced 
his right to release onto parole through the parole consid -
eration hearing process. Alternatively, petitioner contends 
that, even if the governor’s commutation did not replace that 
option, a dual hearing is inconsistent with the commutation 
because it creates a sentence that is more severe than the 
original sentence. Finally, petitioner contends that holding 
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 441
a dual hearing failed to give the governor’s commutation “its 
full effect” because the commutation did not mention dual 
hearings.
 Petitioner’s arguments are foreclosed by our deci -
sion in Jacobs, 342 Or App at 42. As we explained in Jacobs, 
the effect of the governor’s commutation was to provide 
petitioner “ ‘with a new, less severe punishment: continued 
imprisonment, but with the right to a hearing’ that [he] 
would not already be entitled to,” id. at 54 (quoting Marteeny 
v. Brown, 321 Or App 250, 253, 517 P3d 343, rev den, 370 Or 
303 (2022)), i.e., a juvenile hearing. The commutation did not 
replace other avenues of release, nor did it make petition -
er’s sentence harsher. Prior to the commutation, petitioner 
did not have the ability to petition for release with the new 
juvenile hearing procedure. After the commutation, petition-
er’s sentence remained the same, but with the added benefit 
of the ability to petition for release with a juvenile hearing 
(including with an attorney appointed at board expense). The 
decision to hold petitioner’s original hearing and his new 
hearing on the same day, as a dual hearing, did not create a 
harsher sentence because ultimately petitioner still received 
an additional opportunity for release that he would not have 
received otherwise.
B. Procedural Due Process
 Petitioner next argues that the decision to hold a dual 
hearing violated his right to due process guaranteed by the 
Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
Petitioner contends that the board violated his due process 
right to notice and the opportunity for a fair hearing by not 
clearly advising him about his prehearing decisions and the 
hearing process that it intended to use.
 “Procedural due process imposes constraints on 
governmental decisions that deprive individuals of constitu-
tionally protected liberty or property interests.” Alexander v. 
Board of Parole, 205 Or App 443, 451, 134 P3d 1055, rev den, 
341 Or 449 (2006). Thus, in analyzing a due process claim, 
we first look to “whether the state has deprived a person of 
a liberty or property interest within the meaning of the Due 
Process Clause,” and, if so, whether it provided that person 
442 Jones v. Board of Parole
with sufficient process. Stogsdill v. Board of Parole, 342 Or 
332, 336, 154 P3d 91 (2007). In the context of discretion -
ary parole release, the procedures required are “minimal.” 
Swarthout v. Cooke, 562 US 216, 220, 131 S Ct 859, 178 L Ed 
2d 732 (2011); see also Smith v. Board of Parole, 268 Or App 
457, 469, 343 P3d 245, rev den, 357 Or 550 (2015) (relying 
on Swarthout in concluding that the ability to subpoena wit-
nesses “is not a requirement for a constitutionally adequate 
parole consideration hearing”).
 Assuming without deciding that Oregon has cre -
ated a protected liberty interest in petitioner’s early release 
through the juvenile and parole consideration hearing pro -
cedures, we conclude that the board provided petitioner with 
constitutionally sufficient notice of the issues before the 
board and the expected hearing procedures. The board told 
petitioner, approximately three-and-a-half months before the 
hearing, that it would be holding his hearings concurrently, 
and that petitioner could achieve release if he satisfied either 
(or both) legal standards for the respective hearings. Those 
legal standards, and the factors that the board considers 
in determining whether the standards are met, are listed 
in statutes and administrative rules. Petitioner was able to 
voice objections, file a hearing memo, and present witness 
testimony at his hearing. Finally, the board provided its 
reasoning in written orders following the hearing, to allow 
petitioner to request administrative and judicial review. 
That is constitutionally sufficient due process. Greenholtz v. 
Inmates of Neb. Penal and Corr. Complex, 442 US 1, 16, 99 
S Ct 2100, 60 L Ed 2d 668 (1979) (a parole process that “affords 
an opportunity to be heard, and when parole is denied it 
informs the inmate in what respects he falls short of qualify-
ing for parole * * * affords the process that is due under these 
circumstances. The Constitution does not require more.”); 
Rivas v. Board of Parole, 272 Or App 248, 252-53, 356 P3d 
83 (2015) (observing that the liberty interest in early release 
under then-existing Oregon law is not more significant that 
the liberty interests discussed in Greenholtz).
C. Board’s Authority to Hold Concurrent Hearings
 Petitioner also argues that the board lacked author-
ity to hold his juvenile and parole consideration hearings 
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 443
concurrently. Petitioner points to the statutes and rules gov-
erning juvenile hearings and parole consideration hearings 
and notes that they do not explicitly authorize hearings to be 
held on the same day or at the same time.
 “Administrative agencies like the board are crea -
tures of statute and can only act with the power and author-
ity as has been conferred upon it by its organic statute.” 
Jacobs, 342 Or App at 47 (internal quotation marks omitted). 
“This power includes that expressly conferred by statute as 
well as such implied power as is necessary to carry out the 
power expressly granted.” Ochoco Const. v. DLCD , 295 Or 
422, 426, 667 P2d 499 (1983). The question before us, then, 
is whether the legislature, either expressly or by necessary 
implication, granted the board the power to hold multiple 
hearings concurrently.
 The legislature has not expressly granted the 
board authority to hold different hearings concurrently. The 
remaining question is whether that power is authorized by 
implication. To answer that question, we examine the stat -
utes and rules that govern the different types of hearings.
 Under the first statutory scheme, the board is 
required by statute to set a date for a parole consideration 
hearing for any person sentenced as a dangerous offender 
within six months after commitment to the custody of the 
Department of Corrections (DOC). ORS 144.228(1)(a). The 
parole consideration hearing date must be the date that 
the person would otherwise be eligible for parole under the 
board’s rules. Id. At the parole consideration hearing, if the 
board finds the person to be no longer dangerous or finds 
that the person remains dangerous but can be adequately 
controlled with supervision and mental health treatment, 
and that those resources are available, the board must give 
the person a release date in accordance with its rules. ORS 
144.228(1)(b)(A). If the board is unable to make such find -
ings, it must periodically conduct a review hearing no less 
than two years, and no more than 10 years, from the date 
of the previous review, until the board is able to make such 
findings. Id. The board determines the date of the review 
hearing in accordance with rules adopted by the board. ORS 
144.228(1)(b)(C). Rules adopted by the board to determine the 
444 Jones v. Board of Parole
date of the review hearing “must be based on the foundation 
principles of criminal law described in section 15, Article I of 
the Oregon Constitution.” Id.
 Under the second statutory scheme, the board is also 
required by statute to hold a juvenile hearing for any person 
who has served 15 years of imprisonment, and who was con -
victed of an offense committed when they were under 18 years 
old. ORS 144.397(1)(a); ORS 144.397(3). That hearing must 
provide a person “a meaningful opportunity to be released on 
parole.” ORS 144.397(3). During that hearing, the board “shall 
consider and give substantial weight to the fact that a person 
under 18 years of age is incapable of the same reasoning and 
impulse control as an adult and the diminished culpability of 
minors as compared to that of adults.” ORS 144.397(5).
 Both statutory schemes necessarily imply that the 
board has discretion in choosing the date and time of the 
respective hearings. See ORS 144.228(1)(a) (“The parole con-
sideration hearing date shall be the time the prisoner would 
otherwise be eligible for parole under the board’s rules.”); 
ORS 144.228(1)(b)(C) (“The board shall determine the date 
of the review hearing in accordance with rules adopted by 
the board.”); ORS 144.397(13) (“The board may adopt rules 
to carry out the provisions of this section.”). Given that the 
board has been granted broad authority to hold hearings, 
determine the hearing dates, and adopt rules governing the 
hearings, it follows that the board has the implicit authoriza-
tion to hold two hearings concurrently, as it did here.
D. Equal Protection
 Petitioner next contends that the board violated his 
state and federal constitutional rights to equal protection by 
holding a dual hearing. Petitioner asserts that, to the best 
of his knowledge, at least eight other people who received 
a juvenile hearing through Governor Brown’s commutation 
are eligible for another type of parole hearing, but none of 
them had a dual hearing. The board counters that it was 
justified in holding a dual hearing here in order to economize 
its resources and reduce the number of hearings the victims 
need to attend.
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 445
 The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment commands that no state shall “deny to any per-
son within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws,” 
“which is essentially a direction that all persons similarly 
situated should be treated alike.” City of Cleburne, Tex. v. 
Cleburne Living Ctr., 473 US 432, 439, 105 S Ct 3249, 87 
L Ed 2d 313 (1985). To state a successful equal protection 
claim as a “class of one,” petitioner would need to show that 
he “has been intentionally treated differently from others 
similarly situated and that there is no rational basis for the 
difference in treatment.” Village of Willowbrook v. Olech, 528 
US 562, 564-65, 120 S Ct 1073, 145 L Ed 2d 1060 (2000).
 Similar to the federal equal protection provision, 
Article I, section 20, of the Oregon Constitution prohibits 
laws “granting to any citizen or class of citizens privileges, or 
immunities, which, upon the same terms, shall not equally 
belong to all citizens.” A claim under Article I, section 20, 
may be brought by an individual “who demands equality 
of treatment with other individuals.” State v. Davis , 237 
Or App 351, 358, 239 P3d 1002 (2010), aff’d by an equally 
divided court, 353 Or 166, 295 P3d 617 (2013). “To bring an 
individual-based claim under Article I, section 20, a defen -
dant must initially show that the government in fact denied 
defendant individually an equal privilege with other citizens 
of the state similarly situated.” State v. Goacher, 303 Or App 
783, 790, 466 P3d 1047 (2020) (internal quotation marks 
omitted). “An agency or official’s decision will comply with 
Article I, section 20, as long as no discriminatory practice 
or illegitimate motive is shown and the use of discretion has 
a defensible explanation in the individual case.” Id. (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted). “An executive official’s deci -
sion will be defensible when there is a rational explanation 
for the differential treatment that is reasonably related to 
the official’s task or to the person’s individual situation.” Id. 
(internal quotation marks omitted).
 Petitioner’s sole argument that he has been treated 
differently is that, to the best of his appellate attorney’s 
knowledge, petitioner is the only person to have been eli -
gible for a juvenile hearing who was subjected to a dual 
hearing. Absent more concrete evidence—for example, the 
446 Jones v. Board of Parole
closeness in time of the other petitioners’ scheduled hear -
ings, the resources required, or needs of any potential vic -
tims in the other petitioners’ hearings—that bare statement 
is insufficient to demonstrate differential treatment that has 
no rational basis or explanation. Petitioner has not pointed 
to evidence in the record that would allow us, on judicial 
review, to find legal error in the board’s orders on the basis of 
an equal protection violation.
 Second Assignment of Error. Petitioner next asserts 
that the board erred when it found that he had not demon -
strated maturity and rehabilitation for the purposes of his 
juvenile hearing. Petitioner provides several arguments as to 
why the board erred. First, petitioner argues that the board 
exceeded its authority under ORS 144.397(13), a statute that 
permits it to adopt rules regarding juvenile hearings, when 
it adopted and relied on substantive factors enumerated in 
OAR 255-033-0030(5), thereby denying him a meaningful 
opportunity to be released. Second, petitioner argues that 
the board violated ORS 144.397(5) when it failed to give 
substantial weight to petitioner’s childhood circumstances 
and immaturity at the time of the crime. Third, petitioner 
asserts that the board’s determination that he had not met 
his burden to demonstrate maturity and rehabilitation is 
not supported by substantial evidence or substantial reason. 
For the reasons explained below, we conclude that the board 
did not err; its finding that petitioner had not demonstrated 
maturity and rehabilitation was supported by substantial 
evidence and reason.
A. OAR 255-033-0030(5)
 First, petitioner argues that the board exceeded its 
authority under ORS 144.397(13), a statute that permits it 
to adopt rules regarding juvenile hearings, when it adopted 
and relied on substantive factors enumerated in OAR 255-
033-0030(5) in denying release. Assuming that petitioner 
met preservation and exhaustion requirements, his argu -
ment fails on the merits, as it is foreclosed by our decision 
in Jacobs, in which we concluded that the rule at issue was 
“within the range of discretion granted to the agency.” 342 Or 
App at 48 (“Nothing in that statutory scheme suggests that 
the legislature intended to authorize the board to adopt only 
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 447
procedural rules for making its statutorily mandated matu-
rity and rehabilitation determination.”).6 Petitioner has not 
persuaded us that Jacobs was wrongly decided.
B. Childhood Circumstances
 At a juvenile hearing, the board is required to “con-
sider and give substantial weight to the fact that a person 
under 18 years of age is incapable of the same reasoning and 
impulse control as an adult and the diminished culpability 
of minors as compared to that of adults.” ORS 144.397(5). 
Petitioner argues that the board violated its statutory 
authority by placing too much weight on other statutory and 
non-statutory factors, despite petitioner providing signifi -
cant information to the board about his youth, maturity, and 
relevant circumstances at the time of his crime.
 We have reviewed the record and conclude that the 
board did not violate its statutory mandate to consider and 
give substantial weight to petitioner’s diminished culpabil-
ity as a youth. In its order, the board acknowledged “the 
trauma [petitioner] experienced as a child and teenager” and 
“considered extensive information regarding [petitioner’s] 
childhood in both [his] packet and testimony at the hear -
ing.” The board did not base its decision on any culpability 
of petitioner for crimes committed as a youth; rather, the 
board based its decision on evidence of petitioner’s behavior 
once he reached adulthood.
C. Substantial Evidence and Reason
 Petitioner next asserts that the board’s ultimate 
conclusion—that he failed to establish, by a preponderance 
of the evidence, maturity and rehabilitation—is not sup -
ported by substantial evidence or reasoning.
 When evaluating whether substantial evidence sup-
ports an agency’s finding, we ask whether “the record, viewed 
as a whole, would permit a reasonable person to make that 
 6 We also emphasized in Jacobs that “in applying its rules, the board may not 
consider the age of the person as an aggravating factor.” 342 Or App at 48 (citing 
ORS 144.397(6)). We do not understand petitioner to be advancing an argument 
that, in the board’s application of the OAR 255-033-0030(5) factors, it impermis -
sibly considered his age as an aggravating factor. Rather, petitioner argues that 
the factors on the whole were outside of the agency’s granted authority.
448 Jones v. Board of Parole
finding.” ORS 183.482(8)(c). “We consider both the evidence 
that supports and detracts from the board’s findings but defer 
to the board’s reasonable inferences without reweighing the 
evidence in the record ourselves.” Mendacino, 287 Or App at 
834.
 Given that standard, we conclude that the board could 
reasonably find that petitioner failed to demonstrate matu -
rity and rehabilitation based on the evidence that it relied on 
and its reasonable inferences. That evidence included peti -
tioner’s DOC records, which indicated intermittent partici -
pation in programming, chronic misconduct (including sev -
eral assaults on other adults in custody), significant time in 
disciplinary segregation or the intensive management unit, 
and minimal engagement with services over the years. It also 
included petitioner’s mental health evaluations, which showed 
that he struggled with depression and anxiety throughout his 
incarceration, but failed to attend appointments, took pre -
scribed medications sporadically, and was caught diverting 
medications. The evidence further included petitioner’s lack 
of engagement with sobriety services and petitioner’s denial 
of a substance use problem despite ongoing marijuana use, 
including a positive urinalysis for marijuana approximately 
three months before his hearing. Most of petitioner’s argu -
ments to the contrary require us to reweigh the evidence in 
the record, which we are unable to do.
 Petitioner also challenges the board’s admission 
of the Hamilton evaluation, contending that “the board’s 
admission of and heavy reliance on Dr. Hamilton’s report 
is not supported by substantial evidence or reason[ ].” 
Petitioner argues, in the main, that the Hamilton evalua -
tion is unreliable because it suffers from confirmation bias 
and cultural bias; does not provide adequate reasoning for 
its diagnosis; fails to give weight to petitioner’s childhood 
trauma and other relevant factors; relies on outdated and 
contested information; and is hearsay. Petitioner also con -
tends that the board did not establish Hamilton’s expertise, 
did not certify the report as required by its rules, and did not 
provide him with an opportunity to cross-examine Hamilton. 
To the extent that petitioner argues that the board relied 
too heavily on the Hamilton evaluation, we reject petitioner’s 
Cite as 350 Or App 432 (2026) 449
argument, as it goes to the weight of the evidence and not its 
admissibility. However, to the extent that petitioner argues 
that Dr. Hamilton’s report should have been excluded in its 
entirety as unreliable, we reject that argument as well, for 
the following reasons.
 At a juvenile hearing, “[e]vidence of a type that rea-
sonably prudent persons would commonly rely upon in the 
conduct of their serious affairs shall be admissible.” OAR 
255-030-0032; see also OAR 255-033-0040(1) (juvenile hear-
ings governed by OAR 255-030-0032). 7 The board “may 
exclude evidence” if it is:
 “(a) Unduly repetitious;
 “(b) Not of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably 
prudent persons in the conduct of their serious affairs;
 “(c) Provided by a person, other than a justice system 
official, without first hand knowledge of the circumstances 
of the crime that is the subject of the proceeding before the 
Board;
 “(d) Provided by a person, other than a justice system 
official, without first hand knowledge of the character of 
the inmate;
 “(e) Addressing only guilt or innocence; or
 “(f) Irrelevant or immaterial to the decision(s) to be 
made at that particular hearing.”
OAR 255-030-0032(4). The board’s order must be supported 
by “[r]eliable, probative, and substantial evidence.” OAR 
255-030-0032(3).
 In short, the board, by rule, has permissive author-
ity to exclude evidence. However, there is nothing in the 
board’s rule that would require it to exclude a psychological 
report that is deficient in the ways petitioner contends the 
Hamilton evaluation is deficient.
 Third and Fourth Assignments of Error. In his third 
and fourth assignments of error, petitioner contends that 
 7 It does not appear that the board has adopted similar rules for the admis -
sibility of evidence in parole consideration hearings. However, we note that, at a 
parole consideration hearing, the board may review “[t]he examining psycholo -
gist or psychiatrist’s written report.” OAR 255-036-0005(6)(a).
450 Jones v. Board of Parole
the board’s decisions to defer his next parole consideration 
hearing for three years and ability to petition for a juvenile 
hearing for three years were not supported by substantial 
evidence or reason. We have reviewed the record and con -
clude that the board did not err. The evidence that the board 
relied on included the Hamilton evaluation, which contained 
information on petitioner’s “significant maladaptive per -
sonality traits,” petitioner’s comments that he continued to 
view violence as an appropriate response to some situations, 
petitioner’s conduct during his hearing, petitioner’s limited 
engagement in treatment programs, petitioner’s continued 
substance use, petitioner’s long history of disciplinary infrac-
tions, petitioner’s high risk for future violence, and petition-
er’s refusal to participate in the parole consideration hear-
ing. The board explained its reasoning by connecting the 
evidence it relied on to the relevant factors in its decision. 
Thus, the board did not err.
 In conclusion, we affirm the board’s orders because 
it did not err in the ways petitioner contends. The board 
acted within its authority in holding a dual juvenile and 
parole consideration hearing, the rules the board adopted 
to facilitate its hearings were within its authority, and the 
board’s orders were supported by substantial evidence and 
reasoning.
 Affirmed.
