A180547
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/10/state_v._nebeker_1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879188/state-v-nebeker/
Caption: State v. Nebeker
Date: 2026-06-10

No. 513 June 10, 2026 357
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
JACOB MATTHEW NEBEKER,
Defendant-Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
21CR04061; A180547
Erik M. Buchér, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 10, 2025.
Andy Simrin argued the cause for appellant. Also on the 
brief was Andy Simrin PC.
Robert A. Koch, Assistant Attorney General, argued 
the cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Ellen F. 
Rosenblum, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, 
Solicitor General.
Before Aoyagi, Presiding Judge, Egan, Judge, and Joyce, 
Judge.
EGAN, J.
Reversed and remanded.
358 State v. Nebeker
 EGAN, J.
 In this criminal case, defendant appeals a judg -
ment of conviction for murder in the second degree, ORS 
163.115(1)(a), entered after a conditional guilty plea reserv-
ing the right to appeal adverse pretrial motions. . Defendant 
asserts three assignments of error: (1) the trial court erred 
by denying his motion to suppress statements that he made 
to an officer, arguing that any waiver of Miranda rights was 
involuntary due to intoxication; (2) the trial court erred by 
denying his motion to exclude statements that an unavail -
able witness made to a responding officer because the state-
ments were testimonial and, therefore, inadmissible at trial 
under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to 
the United States Constitution; and (3) the trial court erred 
by denying his motion to exclude the state’s proposed rebut-
tal evidence of defendant’s prior substance use, to be used 
to show substance-use tolerance in the event that defendant 
argued an intoxication defense to the mens rea element 
required for a murder conviction.
 On the second assignment of error, because we con-
clude that parts of the unavailable witness’s statements 
were testimonial and, therefore, inadmissible under the 
federal Confrontation Clause, we reverse and remand. On 
the first assignment of error, defendant does not contest the 
trial court’s ruling that circumstances were not compelling 
such that Miranda rights did not attach and no waiver was 
required. Consequently, the trial court did not err in deny -
ing his motion to suppress on Miranda grounds. However, 
following State v. Miller, 375 Or 173, 190, 589 P3d 151 (2026) 
(Miller II), the question of whether statements to law enforce-
ment were made voluntarily is a distinct issue that was 
not litigated and requires further factfinding, which may 
be addressed on remand. Given our reversal on the second 
assignment, we do not resolve defendant’s third assignment 
of error. We note that his arguments on appeal focus on rel-
evance under OEC 401 and OEC 403 balancing, whereas 
his arguments before the trial court focused on whether the 
topic of the state’s evidence required scientific expert testi -
mony under OEC 702. As evidenced by his shift of focus on 
appeal, it is possible that the record may develop differently 
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 359
on remand; therefore, we decline to reach defendant’s third 
assignment of error.
I. BACKGROUND
 When reviewing a trial court’s denial of a motion to 
suppress, we are bound by the trial court’s findings of fact, 
so long as there is constitutionally sufficient evidence in the 
record to support those findings, including implicit findings 
that are consistent with the court’s ultimate conclusion. 
State v. Ehly, 317 Or 66, 75, 854 P2d 421 (1993). We review 
the trial court’s conclusion for legal error. Id. We state the 
facts accordingly.
 Just before one o’clock in the morning on November 
22, 2021, defendant’s cousin, Slaven, witnessed defendant 
kill his mother’s husband, G. Immediately after having wit-
nessed the killing, Slaven called her husband, overcome by 
what she had seen. Her husband could hardly understand 
what Slaven was saying to him, describing her as “hyster -
ical.” Finally, he understood her to say that she had wit -
nessed defendant kill G. He told Slaven to call 9-1-1, which 
she attempted to do while keeping her husband on the line. 
When the call went through to 9-1-1, the call with her hus -
band dropped.
 Slaven then told the 9-1-1 operator that she had wit-
nessed defendant kill G after having heard crashing sounds 
coming from a bedroom in the house. She also told the opera-
tor that defendant had asked her to help him throw G’s body 
into the river. The operator dispatched law enforcement and 
medical personnel to the address Slaven provided. The 9-1-1 
operator kept Slaven on the line for several minutes until 
law enforcement arrived. The 9-1-1 operator asked questions 
standard to the dispatcher’s role in emergency response, 
such as where in the house G was, if defendant was still in 
the house, whether Slaven needed medical attention, and 
whether there was a weapon involved. Throughout the call, 
Slaven was hiding behind a tree on a golf course abutting 
the backyard of the home; she was crying and at times unin-
telligible. At one point during the call, Slaven said that she 
saw defendant emerge from the house, and she dropped her 
voice to a whisper, saying, “I have to be quiet * * * I have to 
360 State v. Nebeker
be quiet, please.” She did not speak again until she said that 
“[defendant] just went back inside.” When law enforcement 
arrived, they first went to the house to provide medical care 
for G and to contact defendant.
 Among the first to arrive was Corporal Mitchell 
with the Washington County Sheriff’s Department and two 
deputies. They were met at the door by defendant, who said, 
“he came at me” and “he’s in the bathroom,” stepping to the 
side and extending an arm to invite Mitchell and the oth -
ers inside. Mitchell and the deputies found G unconscious 
on the bathroom floor, wedged between the toilet and the 
bathtub. The deputies began performing medical first aid. 
Mitchell asked defendant to step outside and talk, to which 
defendant agreed.
 Mitchell and defendant walked to the driveway and 
stood in front of the garage, where Mitchell read defendant 
the Miranda warnings from a prepared card. When Mitchell 
asked if defendant understood his rights, defendant replied, 
“Uh-huh.” Mitchell asked him to provide a yes or no and 
defendant responded, “Yes.” Mitchell then asked defendant 
what happened. Defendant, as he had when he answered 
the door, said, “he came at me.” Defendant also described 
sexual advances that G had made toward defendant and 
added, “I pushed him back.”
 While they spoke, Mitchell noticed several signs 
that defendant was intoxicated, including that defendant 
had dilated pupils, walked and moved slowly, and slurred 
his words, and that defendant was cycling rapidly between 
emotions—speaking excitedly, crying, and falling into a 
flat affect, sometimes within the span of a minute. Mitchell 
believed that, despite his intoxication, defendant understood 
his rights and was cognizant that he was being questioned, 
testifying that defendant mostly responded coherently to 
the questions that were being asked.
 After about 20 minutes, when asked how G came to 
be bleeding on the bathroom floor, defendant responded that 
he felt like he was being “pushed into a corner” and invoked 
his right to an attorney. At that point, Mitchell ceased ques-
tioning. Later, without further questioning, defendant made 
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 361
spontaneous inculpatory statements, both while sitting in a 
squad car, while being handcuffed, and, later, at the hospi -
tal where he had been transported for a blood draw.
 Deputy Kringhelde, who was the first law enforce -
ment officer to contact Slaven, arrived at the scene a few 
minutes after Mitchell and the other deputies. When she 
arrived, Mitchell and defendant were already talking in the 
driveway, but Kringhelde testified that she did not see them 
there. As Kringhelde approached the house, Deputy Zogg 
asked her to join him in the back of the house to talk to 
Slaven. At first, the deputies were unable to locate Slaven, 
who remained on the line with the 9-1-1 operator. The oper-
ator encouraged Slaven to present herself to the deputies. 
Slaven emerged from the trees, visibly shaken, with her 
hand over her mouth, and crying. Kringhelde asked Slaven 
if she needed medical attention. Slaven said that she did 
not. Kringhelde then asked Slaven a general question, such 
as, “what happened or what’s going on?”
 Without further questions from Kringhelde, Slaven 
responded with a thorough account of what had occurred 
leading up to and during the incident. Slaven told Kringhelde 
that Slaven and defendant had been drinking and had gone 
out to get food. Slaven claimed that, while in the car, defen-
dant told Slaven that he was going to pretend to have sex 
with G and then kill him. Slaven also told Kringhelde that, 
when they returned to the house, she had seen defendant 
and G going in and out of the bathroom, as though they were 
going to have a sexual encounter. She said that defendant 
had come out to the kitchen to ask for gloves because he 
“didn’t want to touch” G. Slaven told Kringhelde that she 
then heard crashing sounds coming from “the room where 
the old man sleeps,” referring to G, and that G had twice 
yelled for help. She said that, when she went to see what was 
going on, she saw defendant holding a plastic bag over G’s 
head and pulling on a rope or cord.
 The entire backyard conversation lasted about 
five minutes, Slaven speaking through tears and labored 
breath. The interaction ended when Slaven lost composure 
entirely and had to take a knee to settle. Kringhelde then 
invited Slaven, who was underdressed and not wearing 
362 State v. Nebeker
shoes, to move to a warmer location. Later, law enforcement 
read Slaven the Miranda warnings and interviewed her for 
a more thorough statement of events.
 While this case was pending in the trial court, but 
before defendant filed the pretrial motions described below, 
Slaven died.
 Defendant moved to suppress evidence of the state-
ments he made to Mitchell, arguing that his waiver of 
Miranda rights could not have been knowing, intelligent, 
and voluntary due to his level of intoxication. He also moved 
to exclude the statements Slaven made to Kringhelde in 
the backyard, arguing that the statements—though fall -
ing under the excited utterance exception to the rule that 
hearsay statements are inadmissible—were testimonial 
in nature and, therefore, inadmissible under the federal 
Confrontation Clause because Slaven was not available 
for cross-examination at trial, given her recent passing. 1 
Finally, defendant moved to exclude the state’s proposed 
rebuttal evidence related to defendant’s past drug use, to be 
admitted if defendant argued that he was too intoxicated to 
develop the mens rea required for a second-degree murder 
conviction. The trial court denied all three motions.
 Defendant entered a conditional guilty plea, reserv-
ing his right to appeal those denials. He now appeals. We 
begin our analysis with the second assignment of error 
before turning to the first.
II. ANALYSIS
A. Sixth Amendment
 As stated above, Slaven was unavailable as a wit -
ness at trial because of her death. In his second assign -
ment of error, defendant argues that the trial court erred 
by denying his motion to suppress the statements Slaven 
made to Kringhelde in the backyard of the home; without 
denying that the statements were excited utterances, he 
argues that the statements were testimonial and, therefore, 
 1 Defendant also moved to suppress evidence of the calls Slaven made to her 
husband and to 9-1-1. The trial court denied those motions, and those rulings are 
not challenged on appeal.
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 363
inadmissible under the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth 
Amendment to the United States Constitution.
 We review for legal error whether statements made 
by an unavailable declarant are testimonial for purposes of 
confrontation rights under the Sixth Amendment. State v. 
Rytting, 324 Or App 828, 831, 527 P3d 777, rev den, 371 Or 
477 (2023).
 The Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment, 
applicable to the states via the Fourteenth Amendment, 
provides a criminal defendant with a right “to be confronted 
with witnesses against him.” Michigan v. Bryant, 562 US 
344, 352, 131 S Ct 1143, 179 L Ed 2d 93 (2011). Under the 
Confrontation Clause, when a hearsay declarant is unavail-
able to testify at trial, only nontestimonial statements are 
admissible; testimonial statements are inadmissible under 
such circumstances, unless the defendant has had prior 
opportunity to cross-examine the unavailable witness. 
Crawford v. Washington, 541 US 36, 53-54, 124 S Ct 1354, 
158 L Ed 2d 177 (2004). The fact that a statement qualifies 
as an excited utterance—and consequently is admissible as 
a matter of state law governing hearsay—does not exempt 
it from Confrontation Clause protection. State v. Camarena, 
344 Or 28, 34, 41, 176 P3d 380 (2008).
 Statements are nontestimonial “when made in the 
course of police interrogation under circumstances objec -
tively indicating that the primary purpose of the interroga-
tion is to enable police assistance to meet an ongoing emer-
gency.” Davis v. Washington, 547 US 813, 822, 126 S Ct 2266, 
165 L Ed 2d 224 (2006). Statements are testimonial “when 
the circumstances objectively indicate that there is no such 
ongoing emergency, and that the primary purpose of the 
interrogation is to establish or prove past events potentially 
relevant to later criminal prosecution.” Id.
 Therefore, in deciding whether a declarant’s state-
ments are admissible, courts must determine the “primary 
purpose” of the interrogation in light of all the objective 
circumstances—whether it was to “meet an ongoing emer -
gency” or “to establish or prove past events potentially rel-
evant to later criminal prosecution.” Id.; State v. Case, 328 
364 State v. Nebeker
Or App 485, 494, 538 P3d 902 (2023), rev den, 372 Or 107 
(2024). In Bryant, the Supreme Court clarified that courts 
must do so by “objectively evaluating the statements and 
actions of the parties to the encounter, in light of the cir -
cumstances in which the interrogation occurs.” 562 US at 
370. Importantly, it is not just the officer’s questions but 
also the declarant’s statements that must be assessed in 
Confrontation Clause inquiries. Id. at 367-68 (“In many 
instances, the primary purpose of the interrogation will be 
most accurately ascertained by looking to the contents of 
both the questions and the answers.”); Camarena, 344 Or at 
38-39. Under some circumstances, an interaction between a 
declarant and law enforcement will contain a mix of admis-
sible nontestimonial statements and inadmissible testimo -
nial statements. Id. 40-41 (concluding that some questions 
asked and statements made in a 9-1-1 call were nontestimo-
nial and therefore admissible, while others were testimonial 
and inadmissible).
 Factors guiding the inquiry include (1) the exis -
tence of an ongoing emergency; (2) the temporal proximity 
of the statements to the emergency event; (3) whether the 
questions asked and elicited statements were necessary to 
resolve the ongoing emergency, rather than to learn what 
had happened in the past; and, (4) the degree of formality 
of the situation and interrogation. Davis, 547 US at 827; 
State ex rel Juv. Dept. v. S. P., 346 Or 592, 609, 215 P3d 847 
(2009). For example, structured interrogations taking place 
at the police station and eliciting recorded statements about 
events that occurred in the past are clearly testimonial. 
Crawford, 54 US at 51-53, 65-69. Conversely, statements 
made during 9-1-1 calls, while an emergency is ongoing, 
are often found to be nontestimonial, so long as the elicited 
information is in aid of the emergency response, which can 
include a description of the circumstances of the emergency 
event and the identity of the perpetrator. Davis, 547 US at 
826-29; Camarena, 344 Or at 39-42.
 The more difficult cases are those, such as this one, 
in which a declarant has made statements to a police offi -
cer in the field during the course of an emergency response. 
They are difficult because such interrogations are often 
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 365
quite informal and may occur in a disorganized fashion, and 
yet, “what begins as an interrogation to determine the need 
for emergency assistance can evolve into testimonial state -
ments.” Bryant, 562 US at 365-66. This evolution may occur 
if the declarant provides police with information that makes 
clear that the emergency has ended and there is no longer 
an ongoing threat to the public. Id. at 365. Police may also 
determine that there is no longer a public threat if the per -
petrator is “disarmed, surrenders, is apprehended, or * * * 
flees with little prospect of posing a threat to the public.” Id.
 In Bryant, police officers spoke to a gunshot victim 
in a parking lot for five to 10 minutes, until emergency medi-
cal services arrived. Id. at 349. Police asked, “what had hap-
pened, who had shot him, and where the shooting occurred.” 
Id. The declarant provided the name of the shooter and fur-
ther described what had occurred, that he had been shot 
through the back door of the shooter’s house, after having 
spoken to the shooter through door, and then fled from the 
shooter’s home to the parking lot. Id. The Court determined 
that the statements were nontestimonial because police 
asked the type of questions necessary to allow them to 
assess the situation, the threat to their own safety, and pos-
sible danger to the victim and the public, and the declarant- 
victim provided the information necessary to meet those 
needs. Id. at 375-76. Further, the Court determined that a 
person in the declarant’s situation—“lying in a gas station 
parking lot bleeding from a mortal gunshot wound to his 
abdomen”—would not have had a primary purpose of aiding 
prosecution but, rather, of enabling police to meet the ongo-
ing emergency. Id. at 374-75.
 In Hammon v. Indiana, a companion case decided 
with Davis, police responded to a reported domestic distur -
bance. Davis, 547 US at 819. When police arrived, they found 
the declarant sitting alone on the front porch. Id. Though 
she appeared frightened, she told police that “nothing was 
the matter.” Id. Police found the perpetrator inside of the 
house; the man said that the two had been in an argument, 
that things had never become physical, and that “every -
thing was fine now.” Id. Police, making efforts to isolate the 
declarant from the perpetrator so that they could “investi -
gate what had happened,” asked her what had occurred, and 
366 State v. Nebeker
had her fill out and sign a “battery affidavit.” Id. at 820. The 
Court ruled that those circumstances more closely resem -
bled the post-emergency, stationhouse interrogation easily 
found to be testimonial in Crawford. 547 US at 829-30 (“It 
was formal enough that [the declarant’s] interrogation was 
conducted in a separate room, away from [the perpetrator] 
(who tried to intervene), with the officer receiving her replies 
for use in his ‘investigation.’ ”).
 In Camarena, the Oregon Supreme Court assessed 
the primary purpose of an interrogation by a 9-1-1 operator. 
344 Or 28. In that case, the declarant had just been injured 
in a domestic dispute, and the perpetrator had fled. Id. at 
30. After concluding that the circumstances of interroga -
tion involved an ongoing emergency, the court held that the 
parts of the 9-1-1 call that established the nature and loca -
tion of the emergency; the identity and location of the per -
petrator, including his name and physical characteristics; 
and whether the declarant required medical attention were 
all nontestimonial and therefore admissible. Id. at 37-41. 
However, the primary purpose of the interrogation evolved 
from emergency response to include those designed to estab-
lish facts for later prosecution. Id. at 40. The testimonial 
statements included that the perpetrator was on probation, 
the operator’s question about the cause of probation, and the 
declarant’s response. Id. at 31, 40. The declarant also stated 
that she was financially dependent upon the perpetrator 
and did not want him to go to jail, to which the operator 
responded with her belief that the perpetrator should go to 
jail for hitting the declarant. Id. All of those statements, the 
court concluded, as well as a later statement the declarant 
made to an investigating officer that the perpetrator had 
struck her eye, were inadmissible at trial. Id. at 40-41.
 The interrogation at issue in this case is more sim-
ilar to the latter half of the 9-1-1 call in Camarena and the 
circumstances of the interrogation in Hammon than the 
interrogations in Davis and Bryant. In Davis, the perpetrator 
had fled during the call and could have returned to further 
threaten the declarant at any moment. In Bryant, the per-
petrator’s location was unknown, and officers did not know 
if he was a threat to their own safety or that of the public. 
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 367
Further, in Bryant, the declarant-victim was in an extreme 
state of physical emergency such that he would have had 
no purpose beyond the emergency response. Camarena sug-
gests that it is not merely the existence of an ongoing emer-
gency—the facts in that case were narrowly distinguishable 
from the facts in Davis—but also, importantly, the nature 
of the statements made by the declarant that determine 
whether statements are testimonial.
 In reviewing the trial court’s decision, we first exam-
ine the circumstances in which the interrogation occurred, 
as that context guides our understanding of the statements 
that were made. Bryant, 562 US at 360, 371 (“[T]he relevant 
inquiry is not the subjective or actual purpose of the indi -
viduals involved * * * but rather the purpose that reasonable 
participants would have had, as ascertained from the indi -
viduals’ statements and actions and the circumstances in 
which the encounter occurred.”).
 In the case before us, the trial court determined that 
circumstances suggested that, from Slaven and Kringhelde’s 
perspective, the emergency was ongoing. When Kringhelde 
arrived, Slaven was hiding behind a tree on the golf course 
at the edge of the backyard, still on the phone with the 9-1-1 
operator, and shaken from having just witnessed a murder. 
For her part, Kringhelde was not privy to the status of the 
emergency response or investigation, the whereabouts of the 
defendant, or the parties involved. The trial court also based 
its ruling, in part, on the fact that the interaction was infor-
mal and brief, taking place in the backyard for about five 
minutes. While acknowledging that some of Slaven’s state-
ments were “borderline historical,” the trial court concluded 
that they were “part of the ongoing scenario.”
 We agree that those facts suggest that reasonable 
people in both Slaven and Kringhelde’s position would have 
understood there to be an ongoing emergency, and the inter-
rogation occurred with the degree of informality and tempo-
ral proximity to the emergency event that would suggest a 
primary purpose of facilitating an emergency response.2
 2 We note that the parties dispute whether, when conducting the ongoing- 
emergency analysis, we should consider the knowledge that the particular officer 
possesses about the state of the investigation or, rather, the knowledge that the 
368 State v. Nebeker
 That context frames the more difficult question of 
whether the elicited statements Slaven made to Kringhelde 
were “necessary to resolve the present emergency.” 
Camarena, 344 Or at 39; see also State v. Rafeh, 361 Or 423, 
433, 393 P3d 1155 (2017) (“[W]hether an ongoing emergency 
exists is simply one factor * * * that informs the ultimate 
inquiry regarding the primary purpose of the interroga -
tion.”). To the single question of “what happened or what’s 
going on,” Slaven gave a detailed account of events, includ-
ing statements of intent that defendant had made to Slaven 
earlier in the evening and other inculpatory statements 
made just before committing the act. For example, she said 
that while the two were out picking up fast food defendant 
told her that he planned to act like he was going to have sex 
with G and then kill him. She further stated that defendant, 
just before killing G, had walked into the kitchen and asked 
her for rubber gloves so that he didn’t have to touch him.
 As in Camarena, we conclude that some of the 
statements Slaven made to Kringhelde were nontestimonial 
while others were testimonial. Identification of defendant 
and descriptions of the murder itself—Slaven having heard 
crashing sounds coming from G’s room; having heard cries 
for help coming from the room; having witnessed defendant 
kill G using a bag or a rope; and defendant asking her to 
help dump the body, which caused Slaven to flee to the golf 
course—were nontestimonial, as they are the type of state -
ments frequently elicited to aid in emergency response. In 
any event, many of those details were provided by Slaven 
to her husband and to the 9-1-1 operator, both of which the 
trial court allowed as nontestimonial excited utterances 
that are not being challenged. However, Slaven’s statements 
regarding her conversation with defendant in the car in 
which he stated that he was going to pretend to have sex 
with G and then kill him; her statement that she and defen-
dant had been drinking earlier in the evening; her obser- 
vations of defendant and G going in and out of the bath- 
room as though they were going to have a sexual encounter; 
defendant’s request for gloves in the kitchen so that he didn’t 
entire law enforcement response team possesses. We need not decide that ques -
tion to reach our conclusion that the statements made by declarant were testimo-
nial and, therefore, do not decide it.
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 369
have to touch G, and any other statements that were focused 
on establishing facts in the past that were unnecessary to 
resolve the perceived ongoing emergency were testimonial 
for purposes of the Confrontation Clause. Therefore, the 
trial court erred in denying defendant’s motion to suppress 
those statements. We need not decide whether the error was 
harmless given the procedural posture; when a defendant 
reserves the right to appeal adverse pretrial motions as part 
of a conditional guilty plea under ORS 135.335(3), any error 
found provides the defendant with an opportunity to decide 
whether to withdraw their guilty plea and proceed to trial.
B. Article I, section 12, and the Fifth Amendment
 In his first assignment of error, defendant argues 
that intoxication prevented him from knowingly, intelli -
gently, and voluntarily waiving his right against compelled 
self-incrimination under Article I, section 12, of the Oregon 
Constitution, as well as the Fifth Amendment to the United 
States Constitution. Pursuant to the Fifth Amendment, 
a defendant’s right against compelled self-incrimination 
attaches when they are in inherently coercive circumstances 
akin to police custody. Stansbury v. California, 511 US 318, 
322, 114 S Ct 1526, 128 L Ed 2d 293 (1994). The Article I, 
section 12, right similarly provides protection to defendants 
who are in custody or “compelling circumstances.” Reed, 371 
Or 478, 484, 538 P3d 195 (2023). We begin with the protec -
tions provided by Article I, section 12.
 Article I, section 12, provides that “[n]o person 
shall * * * be compelled in any criminal prosecution to tes -
tify against himself.” To protect the right against compelled 
self-incrimination, law enforcement must give Miranda 
warnings to a person who is either in “full custody” or in 
circumstances that “create a setting which judges would 
and officers should recognize to be ‘compelling’ ”—that is, a 
setting containing “the sort of police-dominated atmosphere 
that Miranda warnings were intended to counteract.” State 
v. Roble-Baker, 340 Or 631, 638, 641, 136 P3d 22 (2006); see 
also Miranda v. Arizona , 384 US 436, 467, 86 S Ct 1602, 
16 L Ed 2d 694 (1966) (explaining that Miranda warnings 
were intended to counteract the “inherently compelling 
pressures” of “in-custody interrogations”); State v. Vondehn, 
370 State v. Nebeker
348 Or 462, 474, 236 P3d 691 (2010) (describing the same 
intention under the Oregon Constitution). Therefore, when 
reviewing whether a defendant’s Article I, section 12, rights 
were violated, courts first determine whether the defen -
dant was in custody or in compelling circumstances such 
that officers were required to give Miranda warnings. Reed, 
371 Or at 488; Roble-Baker, 340 Or at 639. If officers were 
required to give Miranda warnings and did so, any waiver 
of those rights by a defendant must be knowing, intelligent, 
and voluntary under the totality of the circumstances. State 
v. Nichols, 361 Or 101, 107, 390 P3d 1001 (2017).
 With deference to the trial court’s findings of his -
torical facts, we review for legal error both whether cir -
cumstances were compelling and, if so, whether any waiver 
of the rights was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. Reed, 
371 Or at 488; State v. Ward, 367 Or 188, 200, 475 P3d 420 
(2020).
 In this case, the trial court concluded that defen -
dant was not in custody or compelling circumstances when 
he spoke to Mitchell in the driveway. Accordingly, the trial 
court concluded that Mitchell was not required to give 
Miranda warnings— i.e., that no waiver was necessary. See 
State ex rel City of Pendleton v. Woodell , 338 Or App 85, 
90, 565 P3d 80, rev den, 373 Or 815 (2025) (“[A]n officer is 
not required to obtain a waiver of the rights enumerated 
in Miranda warnings from a defendant who is not in cus -
tody or compelling circumstances.”); Reed , 371 Or at 488 
(“The state bears the burden of proving that a defendant’s 
unwarned statements were made under circumstances that 
were not compelling,” such that the Miranda warnings were 
not required.). Independently, the trial court concluded that, 
even if Mitchell was required to give Miranda warnings, 
defendant voluntarily waived his rights.
 On appeal, defendant argues only that any waiver 
of his Miranda rights was involuntary, without making 
any argument that the trial court was wrong to conclude 
that the circumstances were not compelling such that the 
right against compelled self-incrimination never attached. 
Because he does not challenge the trial court’s determina -
tion that Miranda warnings were not required, we affirm 
Cite as 350 Or App 357 (2026) 371
the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion to suppress his 
own statements. State v. Nunes, 295 Or App 91, 101, 433 
P3d 374 (2018), rev den, 364 Or 849 (2019) (affirming when 
the defendant failed to challenge an independent, sufficient 
basis for the trial court’s ruling).
 In a post-argument memorandum of additional 
authorities, defendant also argues that, based on the 
Supreme Court’s recent decision in Miller II, even when cir-
cumstances are not compelling such that Miranda warn-
ings and a knowing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of 
Miranda rights are not required, any statements he made 
to Mitchell must have been voluntary. 375 Or at 190. In that 
case, the defendant had argued that circumstances were 
compelling and that her waiver of Miranda rights had not 
been knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. 336 Or App 606, 
607, 561 P3d 675 (2024) (Miller I). We determined that the 
record supported the trial court’s conclusion that the circum-
stances were not compelling, which “rendered the corollary 
requirement to obtain a valid waiver of those rights unnec -
essary,” and affirmed the ruling on that basis. Id. at 609. 
On review, without disagreeing with our assessment, the 
Supreme Court explained that, even when circumstances 
are not compelling such that Miranda warnings are not 
required and the state is not required to establish a know -
ing, intelligent, and voluntary waiver of Miranda rights, 
“the state must still establish that [the] defendant’s state-
ments made [to law enforcement officers] were voluntary.” 
Miller II, 375 Or at 183-84, 190 (“Whether a person makes 
statements to the police voluntarily is a separate question 
from whether the police were required to inform a suspect 
of their Miranda rights or obtain a knowing and voluntary 
waiver of those rights.”).
 Because the question of whether a person makes 
statements to the police voluntarily is separate from the 
Miranda question and because that issue was not raised 
in defendant’s opening brief or litigated below, we decline 
to rely on the factual record before us to decide in the first 
instance whether defendant’s statements to Mitchell were 
themselves voluntary. On remand, should defendant choose 
372 State v. Nebeker
to rescind his conditional plea, the parties can litigate the 
issue of whether defendant’s statements were voluntary.
III. CONCLUSION
 Concluding that many of Slaven’s statements to 
Kringhelde were testimonial, we reverse the trial court’s 
denial of defendant’s motion to exclude those statements. 
Under ORS 135.335(3), we reverse and remand the judg -
ment of conviction to give defendant an opportunity to decide 
whether to withdraw his guilty plea. State v. Leach, 294 Or 
App 639, 646, 432 P3d 310 (2018). We affirm the denial of 
defendant’s motion to suppress on Miranda grounds, but 
we note that Miller II requires an assessment of whether 
defendant’s statements to Mitchell were voluntary. Should 
defendant choose to withdraw his guilty plea, the parties 
will have an opportunity to litigate and create a factual 
record on the issue of whether defendant’s statements to 
Mitchell were voluntary and, if necessary, to address the 
issues raised in defendant’s third assignment of error.
 Reversed and remanded.
