A183229
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/10/state_v._o._a._m._a._1.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10879187/state-v-o-a-m-a/
Caption: State v. O. A. M. A.
Date: 2026-06-10

No. 524 June 10, 2026 493
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of O. A. M. A., 
a Youth.
STATE OF OREGON,
Respondent,
v.
O. A. M. A.,
Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
23JU04108; A183229
Thomas A. Goldman, Judge.
Argued and submitted October 15, 2025.
Ginger Fitch argued the cause for appellant. Also on the 
briefs was Youth, Rights & Justice.
Peenesh Shah, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent. Also on the brief were Dan Rayfield, 
Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
HELLMAN, J.
Affirmed.
494 State v. O. A. M. A.
Cite as 350 Or App 493 (2026) 495
 HELLMAN, J.
 In this juvenile delinquency proceeding, youth 
appeals a supplemental judgment awarding restitution in 
the amount of $12,808.98 to State Farm Insurance. Youth 
challenges that award in two assignments of error. First, 
he contends that the juvenile court plainly erred by order -
ing youth to pay restitution to State Farm because the state 
failed to identify State Farm as a victim before the juvenile 
court accepted youth’s admission. In youth’s view, the state’s 
request was untimely under ORS 419C.450(1)(a), which 
requires the state to present evidence of the “nature and 
amount” of damages “prior to or at the time of adjudication.” 
We conclude that it is not obvious or beyond reasonable dis-
pute that ORS 419C.450(1)(a) requires the state to specifi -
cally identify the victim prior to or at the time of adjudica -
tion, and we thus reject youth’s first assignment.
 Second, youth argues that the evidence was insuf -
ficient to establish a causal connection between his conduct 
and the full amount of restitution because other individuals 
also participated in the theft. In particular, he contends that 
the juvenile court impermissibly relied on a video depicting 
the theft to conclude that youth worked “in concert” with 
the other individuals because that video was never formally 
admitted into evidence. However, youth’s counsel played the 
video for the juvenile court and affirmatively invited it to rely 
on the video, arguing that it showed that youth was respon-
sible for only a portion of the victim’s losses. Accordingly, we 
conclude that youth invited any error below and his second 
assignment of error therefore does not provide a basis for 
reversal. We affirm.
 The relevant facts are not in dispute. The state 
alleged by delinquency petition that youth had stolen jewelry 
from a kiosk in Washington Square Mall and was within 
the juvenile court’s jurisdiction for that conduct, which, if 
committed by an adult, would constitute first-degree theft, 
ORS 164.055. Both the original and the amended petitions 
named the owner of the kiosk as the victim. At his adjudi -
cation hearing, youth admitted that he “did unlawfully and 
knowingly commit Theft of Property, in the value of more 
496 State v. O. A. M. A.
than $1,000, which belonged to [kiosk owner].” The juve -
nile court accepted youth’s admission and immediately pro-
ceeded to disposition.
 At that point, a juvenile counselor reported that 
the value of the stolen property was “over $13,000” and rec-
ommended that youth be committed to the custody of the 
Oregon Youth Authority (OYA). A victim’s advocate also 
advised the court that the kiosk owner had filed a claim 
with her insurance, which was still pending, and requested 
that the restitution hearing be set out at least 60 days. The 
district attorney then represented to the juvenile court that, 
“that was part of the Plea Agreement for restitution. * * * 
That [youth] stipulate to legal liability and for presentation 
of restitution either at disposition or at a future hearing.” 
The juvenile court committed youth to the custody of OYA 
and set a date for the restitution hearing. The juvenile coun-
selor then informed the court:
“[T]he victim has requested an amount. [Youth’s counsel] 
has that amount. Insurance and victim are in the process 
of getting that amount figured out, how much insurance is 
going to pay. So it’s actually to the [y]outh’s best interest the 
farther we go out because insurance may have paid some 
of it by then and it would be a lesser restitution amount.”
 At the restitution hearing, the state represented 
that “all parties have previously stipulated to restitution 
being presented at a different date and time than adjudi -
cation” and youth’s counsel confirmed that was correct. The 
state then explained that it would be requesting $1,000 in 
restitution to be paid to the kiosk owner and $12,808.98 in 
restitution to be paid to State Farm. The owner of the kiosk 
testified that the value of the stolen jewelry was $13,808.98, 
and that the jewelry was insured by State Farm. She 
explained that she had paid a deductible of $1,000, and she 
would be compensated by State Farm for the remaining loss. 
On cross examination, youth’s counsel played surveillance 
footage of the theft.1 The kiosk owner testified that the video 
depicted multiple individuals, including youth, removing a 
 1 The video was never formally admitted into evidence, and thus, it is not 
part of the record before us on appeal. Our description of the video is therefore 
based solely on the kiosk owner’s testimony describing the video. 
Cite as 350 Or App 493 (2026) 497
tarp and taking jewelry from the kiosk. 2 According to her 
testimony, youth can be seen in the video taking a “display[ ] 
of the bracelets” that held 147 bracelets worth $10 each.
 In closing, the state argued that, even though youth 
did not commit the theft by himself, youth could neverthe -
less be held liable for the full amount of restitution because 
the video established that “this is an aid and abet situation, 
that these are people working in concert, working together 
for this loss.” Youth’s counsel argued that he should only be 
liable for $1,470, which reflected the value of the bracelet 
display, and relied on the video to support that argument:
 “However, in the video you could see that if we sort of 
say that the tarp was like a front door, someone else pulled 
that down, someone else, and others, started taking items 
and then made it so it was open. And when [youth] hap -
pened to come by then he took those items specifically as 
you saw, just that one rack of items.
 “And, so, we would argue that if Your Honor thinks he 
is—is liable for an amount, it would be the $1,470, not the 
full amount at this time.”
 The juvenile court ruled that youth could be held 
liable for the owner’s full losses:
 “So, here’s what I saw in that video, is someone pulled 
down the tarp. And a number of faces and hands dive in 
and start taking things. We see [youth] with that same 
group of people moments later. [Youth] is working in con -
cert with them.
 “Now, just because he’s not seen on camera the first time 
doesn’t mean he’s not right there. And the fact that he went 
back to the kiosk with them would imply that he is familiar 
with these people and working in concert with them. He 
knows these people.
 “If [youth] is upset about this not being joint and sev -
eral, it would appear [youth] has it in his power to pro -
vide information to the State of Oregon to help alleviate 
the amount of restitution, to share this among those who 
are equally culpable for this Aggravated Theft, which was 
under-charged. This is a theft over $10,000.
 2 For reasons that are unclear on the record before us, besides youth, no other 
individuals were charged in connection with the theft.
498 State v. O. A. M. A.
 “There are a lot of situations where, you know, we’d 
like to hold everyone responsible for their actions equally. 
Unfortunately at this point in time, the only person who 
I have in front of me, the only person who has entered an 
admission to this Theft in the First Degree, is [youth], who 
was clearly working with these other individuals in this 
coordinated theft.
 “* * * * *
 “The amounts being requested are reasonable, based on 
market value. At this point in time [youth] will be held lia-
ble for the full sum of restitution, $13,808.98.”
The juvenile court awarded restitution in two separate sup-
plemental judgments, which required youth to pay the kiosk 
owner $1,000 and State Farm $12,808.98, respectively. 3 
This appeal followed.
 We first address youth’s argument that the state’s 
claim for restitution for State Farm was untimely under 
ORS 419C.450(1)(a), which requires the state to present res-
titution evidence prior to or at the time of adjudication. We 
review a restitution order for legal error and are bound by 
the juvenile court’s factual findings if they are supported 
by any evidence in the record. State v. R. D. M., 330 Or App 
692, 694, 544 P3d 425 (2024). We similarly review questions 
of statutory interpretation for legal error. Id. Here, youth 
concedes that his argument regarding the timeliness of the 
state’s restitution evidence is unpreserved, and he seeks 
plain error review. For an error to be plain, it must be an 
error of law, obvious and not reasonably in dispute, and 
apparent on the face of the record without requiring us to 
choose among competing inferences. State v. Vanornum, 354 
Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013).
 Youth argues that the state’s request for restitution 
was untimely under ORS 419C.450(1)(a) because the state 
did not identify State Farm as a victim until the restitution 
hearing, which occurred two months after the adjudication 
 3 Youth appealed both supplemental judgments, which were then consoli -
dated on appeal. Youth later moved to sever the appeals and dismiss the appeal 
of the supplemental judgment imposing $1,000 in restitution to the kiosk owner. 
We granted that motion, and therefore, our review in this case is limited to the 
supplemental judgment requiring youth to pay $12,808.98 in restitution to State 
Farm. 
Cite as 350 Or App 493 (2026) 499
and dispositional hearing. Youth further contends that he 
did not clearly and unequivocally waive objection to the 
state’s timely presentation of that evidence, and thus, 
in his view, the juvenile court lacked authority to impose 
restitution for State Farm. The state responds that ORS 
419C.450(1)(a), on its face, does not expressly require the 
state to identify the victim specifically, and instead, simply 
requires the state to present evidence of the “nature and 
amount” of the restitution owed by youth. The state adds 
that, even if we conclude otherwise, youth waived objection 
to the delayed identification of the victim because he stipu -
lated to the presentation of restitution evidence at disposi -
tion or a future hearing. For the reasons explained below, 
we conclude that it is not obvious or beyond reasonable dis-
pute that the state’s presentation of evidence was untimely, 
and consequently, that the juvenile court did not plainly err.
 In order to seek a restitution award, ORS 419C.450 
(1)(a) requires the state to present evidence of “the nature and 
amount of the injury, loss or damage” to the court “prior to or 
at the time of adjudication.” We have previously addressed 
the timing requirements in ORS 419C.450 in State v. M. A. S., 
302 Or App 687, 462 P3d 284 (2020), in which we concluded 
that the state must present restitution evidence prior to “a 
determination of jurisdiction over a youth based on a finding 
of delinquency.” Id. at 705. In that case, the juvenile court 
ruled to assert jurisdiction over the youth at the adjudica -
tion hearing. Id. at 692. The dispositional hearing occurred 
two months later, at which time the state requested restitu-
tion and presented evidence of the victim’s damages. Id. at 
691-92. Because the state’s presentation of restitution evi -
dence was untimely, we concluded that the juvenile court 
lacked authority to award the restitution. Id. at 705-06.
 Applying M. A. S. , in State v. L. G. S.-S. , 307 Or 
App 208, 211-12, 475 P3d 922 (2020), we similarly concluded 
that the state’s failure to present restitution evidence prior 
to or at the time of adjudication made its request untimely. 
There, the juvenile court accepted the youth’s plea agree -
ment, which identified six victims of the youth’s conduct. Id. 
at 209. At the adjudication hearing, the state represented 
to the court that it would not seek restitution, and it did not 
500 State v. O. A. M. A.
otherwise present any evidence of the named victims’ dam-
ages. Id. at 210. At the dispositional hearing, which took 
place two weeks later, the state indicated for the first time 
that it would seek restitution. Id. At the restitution hearing, 
the state requested restitution for a victim named in the plea 
agreement as well as for Safeco Insurance, which was not 
a victim identified in the judgment. Id. The juvenile court 
awarded restitution to Safeco, over the youth’s objection 
that the request was untimely under ORS 419C.450(1)(a). 
Id. We reversed, concluding that “when the court accepted 
[the] youth’s plea and found him within its jurisdiction[,] the 
state [had] not present[ed] evidence to the court of injury, 
loss, or damage to Safeco Insurance.” Id. at 212.
 Youth argues that those cases require us to reverse. 
We disagree. In L. G. S.-S., we did not clearly conclude that 
the state’s failure to identify Safeco Insurance prior to adju-
dication, standing alone, made the state’s presentation of 
restitution evidence untimely. Rather, the state’s failure to 
present any evidence in support of restitution prior to adju-
dication violated the timing requirements of ORS 419C.450 
(1)(a). Moreover, because the state had also failed to timely 
request restitution for the victim named in the plea agree -
ment, we declined to address “whether the fact that Safeco 
Insurance had subrogation rights to a named victim has 
any bearing on the timeliness of a restitution request.” 
L. G. S.-S., 307 Or App at 212.
 By contrast, here, in the course of the adjudication 
and disposition hearing, the state identified the kiosk owner 
as a victim, represented that the victim’s losses totaled 
“over $13,000,” stated that the victim had a claim pending 
with her insurance, and informed the court that youth had 
previously stipulated to legal liability and “for presenta -
tion of restitution either at disposition or at a future hear -
ing.” Youth argues that his stipulation did not apply to the 
delayed identification of State Farm as a victim. However, 
the stipulation broadly and unambiguously allows the 
state to present evidence of “restitution” after adjudication. 
Indeed, youth appears to concede that the stipulation applied 
to at least some of the evidence required by ORS 419C.450 
(1)(a). For example, youth does not argue that the state 
Cite as 350 Or App 493 (2026) 501
failed to timely present evidence concerning the “nature 
and amount” of restitution, although that evidence was pre-
sented during the dispositional phase of the hearing, after 
the trial court accepted youth’s admission. See M. A. S. , 
302 Or App at 701 (describing “adjudication” and “disposi -
tion” as “distinct phases of delinquency proceedings”). And 
youth’s stipulation, on its face, does not narrow the scope of 
the evidence that the state could present after adjudication, 
meaning that any alleged limitations to that stipulation are 
not apparent on the record. Accordingly, the record is sus -
ceptible to an inference that youth agreed to the manner in 
which the disposition and restitution hearings proceeded. 
 In sum, prior to the restitution hearing, youth was 
aware of the amount of restitution, and he knew the iden -
tity of the victim and that she was working with an insur -
ance company. To be sure, State Farm was not named as the 
insurance company until the restitution hearing, and youth 
did not know, prior to that hearing, what portion of the total 
losses would be covered by State Farm. On that point, we 
acknowledge that the juvenile counselor made statements 
at the dispositional hearing which fairly implied that youth 
would be responsible only for those losses that insurance did 
not cover. However, the record also demonstrates that youth 
was aware of the total value of the stolen property and that 
he had stipulated to “legal liability” for that loss. Moreover, 
at the restitution hearing, youth contested the amount of 
restitution, but not on the basis that the counselor’s state -
ment allowed the state to seek only $1,000 to cover the kiosk 
owner’s deductible. Instead, he argued that he was liable 
only for the value of the bracelet display, valued at $1,470. 
If he had prevailed on that theory, that amount would nec -
essarily involve some award of restitution to both the kiosk 
owner and State Farm. Thus, even though youth did not 
know the exact allocation of loss between the victim and her 
insurer, we conclude that the counselor’s misrepresentation 
did not plainly deprive the trial court of authority to impose 
restitution for the full value of the property loss.
 We nevertheless question whether the state can 
comply with its obligation to present evidence prior to adju -
dication about the “nature and amount of the injury, loss 
502 State v. O. A. M. A.
or damage” under ORS 419C.450(1)(a) without identifying 
the victim who has suffered that injury. See ORS 419C.450 
(1)(b) (“[I]f the court is unable to find from the evidence 
presented [pursuant to ORS 419C.450(1)(a)] that a vic-
tim suffered injury, loss or damage, the court shall make 
a finding on the record to that effect.” (Emphasis added.)); 
L. G. S-S., 307 Or App at 212 (emphasizing that, at the time 
the youth was adjudicated, the state “had not even identi -
fied Safeco Insurance by name as a victim”). However, the 
statute on its face does not expressly impose that require -
ment, and youth has not asked us to engage in a statutory 
construction analysis, nor has either party developed such 
an argument to support their reading of ORS 419C.450 
(1)(a), and we thus decline to do so in a plain-error posture. 
See, e.g., State v. Johnson , 329 Or App 57, 63, 540 P3d 73 
(2023) (“Both parties’ arguments have persuasive weight. To 
conclusively resolve this legal issue of first impression, we 
would have to engage in an in-depth analysis of statutory, 
text, context, and legislative history to a degree that exceeds 
the bounds of plain-error review.”). In conclusion, because it 
is neither obvious nor beyond reasonable dispute that the 
state’s presentation of restitution evidence was untimely, we 
reject youth’s argument that the juvenile court plainly erred 
by awarding restitution to State Farm Insurance.
 In youth’s second assignment, he argues that the 
juvenile court erred by imposing $12,808.98 in restitution 
because the evidence was insufficient to establish that youth 
was the “but for” cause of the entire loss. Youth acknowl -
edges that the juvenile court found that youth was working 
“in concert” with the other individuals who participated in 
the theft. But he argues that that factual finding is specu -
lative because the surveillance footage depicting the theft 
was never formally admitted into evidence. As we explain, 
we reject that argument as invited error.
 Under the invited error doctrine, “a party who was 
actively instrumental in bringing about an alleged error 
cannot be heard to complain, and the case ought not to 
be reversed because of it.” State v. Kammeyer, 226 Or App 
210, 214, 203 P3d 274, rev den, 346 Or 590 (2009) (inter -
nal quotation marks omitted). The purpose of that rule is 
Cite as 350 Or App 493 (2026) 503
to “ensure that parties who make intentional or strategic 
trial choices do not later blame the court if those choices 
prove to be unwise.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). 
Here, youth was actively instrumental in bringing about the 
alleged error. Youth’s counsel played the video for the juve-
nile court and affirmatively relied on it to support youth’s 
argument that he should be responsible for only a portion 
of the victim’s losses. Instead, the juvenile court relied on 
the video to find that youth had worked in concert with the 
other individuals involved, and thus, could be liable for the 
full loss. Youth does not dispute that the video’s contents 
could support the court’s finding that he had participated 
in a “coordinated theft.” Nor does he argue that the juve -
nile court could not legally impose restitution for the full 
loss having made that finding. Rather, his sole argument is 
that, because the video was never admitted into evidence, 
the juvenile court’s factual findings are unsupported by the 
record. Because youth invited that error, we reject youth’s 
argument.
 Affirmed.
