A182055
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/03/citizens_for_resp._devel._in_the_dalles_v._walmart.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10869561/citizens-for-resp-devel-in-the-dalles-v-walmart/
Caption: Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
Date: 2026-06-03

No. 477 June 3, 2026 183
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
CITIZENS FOR RESPONSIBLE DEVELOPMENT IN 
THE DALLES,
Petitioner,
v.
WAL-MART STORES INC. 
and Department of State Lands,
Respondents.
Department of State Lands
43798RF; 
A182055
Argued and submitted March 3, 2025.
Cary L. Allen argued the cause for petitioner. Also on 
the briefs were Law Office of Cary Allen LLC and Karl G. 
Anuta, Corey Oken, and Law Offices of Karl G. Anuta, P.C.
Gregory S. Hathaway argued the cause for respondent 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. Also on the brief was Hathaway 
Larson LLP.
Inge D. Wells, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent Department of State Lands. Also on 
the brief were Ellen F. Rosenblum, Attorney General, and 
Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Lagesen, Chief Judge, 
and Hellman, Judge.
LAGESEN, C. J.
Affirmed.
184 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 185
 LAGESEN, C. J.
 This proceeding for judicial review of a final order 
of the Department of State Lands (DSL) approving the issu-
ance of a removal/fill permit to respondent Wal-Mart Stores, 
Inc., is before us for the second time, following agency pro -
ceedings on remand from the Supreme Court. Petitioner 
Citizens for Responsible Development in the Dalles (CFRD) 
raises three assignments of error contending that DSL 
erred in two primary ways on remand: (1) by conducting the 
remand proceedings in a manner that exceeded the scope 
of the Supreme Court’s remand, was contrary to adminis -
trative rule, and inconsistent with the doctrines of law of 
the case and issue preclusion; and (2) by issuing an order 
unsupported by substantial evidence or reason. We affirm.
I. BACKGROUND
 We set forth the background of this case, which is 
mainly procedural, before addressing petitioner’s assign -
ments of error.
 This case is about whether Wal-Mart has satisfied 
the requirements under ORS 196.825 for the issuance of 
a removal/fill permit subject to that provision. In particu -
lar, the issue is whether DSL permissibly determined that 
Wal-Mart’s proposed project, for which it sought the permit, 
satisfied ORS 196.825(1)(b)’s requirement that the project 
“would not unreasonably interfere with the use of the state’s 
waters for navigation, fishing, and public recreation.”
 In May 2013, DSL issued a removal/fill permit to 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., having determined that the require-
ments of ORS 196.825, among other requirements, were 
satisfied. CFRD challenged the permit and, following a con-
tested case hearing conducted by an Administrative Law 
Judge at the Office of Administrative Hearings, DSL issued 
a final order on October 9, 2014. The final order granted the 
permit and determined that the permit, as conditioned, met 
all the requirements by statute and rule, and was otherwise 
within DSL’s discretion to issue. With respect to the require-
ments of ORS 196.825, DSL considered the public need, pub-
lic benefits, and economic costs to the public of Wal-Mart’s 
proposed project as required by ORS 196.825(3)(a) and (b) 
186 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
and found that the evidence was inconclusive with respect 
to those factors. Notwithstanding those inconclusive find -
ings with respect to the public benefits of the project, the 
public need for the project, and the economic costs to the 
public of the project, DSL determined that the issuance of 
the permit was allowed under ORS 196.825(1) due to the 
project’s location and the known activities at that location. 
Specifically, DSL reasoned that there would be no unreason-
able interference with the use of the state’s waters for nav-
igation, fishing, and public recreation because the “project 
is not located on a state-owned waterway, and there are no 
known public fishing or public recreation activities on the 
site.”
 CFRD petitioned for judicial review in our court. 
On review, relying on case law construing a prior version 
of ORS 196.825, we agreed with CFRD that DSL’s order 
approving the permit rested on an erroneous interpretation 
of ORS 196.825. Citizens for Resp. Devel. In The Dalles v. Wal-
Mart, 295 Or App 310, 321, 433 P3d 364 (2018) (CFRD I). We 
concluded that, correctly construed, ORS 196.825 “requires 
DSL to find that the public need for a proposed project pre -
dominates before DSL has the authority to issue a wetland 
fill and removal permit for the project.” Id. Therefore, “[b]
ecause DSL found it was inconclusive whether the proj -
ect would address a public need, DSL lacked authority to 
issue the permit.” Id. We therefore reversed DSL’s order and 
remanded to the agency. Id.
 DSL petitioned the Supreme Court for review of our 
decision, and the Supreme Court allowed review. On review, 
the court affirmed our decision to remand the case to DSL 
but disagreed with our interpretation of ORS 196.825. The 
court rejected our “premise that ORS 196.825 conditions the 
issuance of every permit on a finding that the proposed proj-
ect will serve a ‘public need.’ ” Citizens for Resp. Devel. In 
The Dalles v. Wal-Mart, 366 Or 272, 274, 461 P3d 956 (2020) 
(CFRD II). Instead, the court concluded that ORS 196.825(1) 
requires that
“if DSL finds that the proposed fill will ‘interfere with the 
paramount policy of this state to preserve the use of its 
waters for navigation, fishing, and public recreation,’ then 
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 187
DSL must determine whether the interference is ‘unrea -
sonable’ by weighing the interference with public uses 
for which ‘waters of the state’ are preserved against the 
expanded list of public-benefit considerations [in ORS 
196.825(3)]”
Id. at 285-86.
 The court clarified that, as a result, there are “two 
components” that DSL must address to determine if its 
authority is limited by ORS 196.825(1)(b): “either the project 
will not interfere with the public uses for which ‘waters of 
the state’ are preserved, or the interference is ‘not unrea -
sonable’ when weighed against the range of public benefits.” 
Id. at 286. The court determined that DSL’s order did not 
reflect that it found either component satisfied. Id.
 The court explained that DSL’s assertion that the 
project would not unreasonably interfere with the use of 
the state’s waters in light of the project site’s location and 
usage was insufficient because the agency acknowledged 
that fill or removal “of a private waterway on private land 
‘conceivably’ could ‘impact what happens on a downstream 
[public] river.’ ” Id. at 289. Further, DSL did not make any 
findings as to whether that conceivable interference was 
not unreasonable because DSL found that the record was 
inconclusive on the public benefit considerations. Id. at 290. 
The court explained that “absent a finding that the project 
will not ‘interfere’ with the ‘paramount policy of this state 
to preserve the use of its waters for navigation, fishing, and 
public recreation,’ the record does not support DSL’s deter-
mination that the project will ‘not unreasonably interfere.’ ” 
Id. at 291. Noting that the “current record lacks a finding 
about whether or not the project will ‘interfere,’ ” the court 
determined that it was required to reverse and remand 
DSL’s decision because that decision failed to adequately 
link the factual findings to the legal conclusion. Id. (citing 
Drew v. PSRB, 322 Or 491, 500-01, 909 P2d 1211 (1996), and 
Bergerson v. Salem-Keizer School District, 341 Or 401, 415, 
144 P3d 918 (2006)). Accordingly, the court reversed and 
remanded “for further proceedings.” Id.
 On remand, DSL re-referred the matter to the 
Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH). In a Statement of 
188 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
Referral, DSL requested, pursuant to OAR 137-003-0655(2), 
that an administrative law judge (ALJ) conduct further 
hearing, with the agency defining the scope of the hearing. 
In DSL’s Statement of Referral, the agency stated that:
“[t]he Supreme Court concluded that the Department 
did not properly find whether the project at issue in this 
case would interfere with the listed uses, and therefore 
remanded the case to the Department.
 “Pursuant to OAR 137-003-0655(2), the Department 
requests an administrative law judge to conduct further 
hearing in this matter, and defines the scope of the hearing 
as follows: the administrative judge shall take additional 
evidence pertaining to (1) the project’s interference or lack 
thereof with the use of the state’s waters for navigation, 
fishing, and public recreation, (2) the public need for the 
proposed fill or removal and the social, economic, or other 
public benefits likely to result from the proposed fill or 
removal, and (3) the economic cost to the public if the pro -
posed fill or removal is not accomplished.
 “The Department defines the issue to be addressed as: 
whether the project described in the application ‘would not 
unreasonably interfere with the paramount policy of this 
state to preserve the use of its waters for navigation, fish -
ing, and public recreation,’ based on the process prescribed 
by the Oregon Supreme Court for making this finding.”
In DSL’s view, OAR 137-003-0655 permitted OAH to hear 
the matter on remand upon DSL’s referral, and DSL has 
sole authority to define the scope of the hearing on remand. 
DSL determined that the further hearing was warranted 
because it had based its original decision on an erroneous 
interpretation of ORS 196.825, and the Supreme Court 
remanded the matter for further proceedings based on a dif-
ferent interpretation of ORS 196.825(1)(b). DSL explained 
that the “difference in interpretation affects the finding 
required by ORS 196.825(1)(b) as a whole, and not just the 
question of whether there is any interference with the pres-
ervation of the state’s waters for navigation, fishing, or pub-
lic recreation.”
 CFRD challenged both OAH’s jurisdiction to con -
duct the additional hearing and the scope of the hearing on 
remand. CFRD argued that for OAH to have jurisdiction to 
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 189
hold a hearing in this matter, DSL must first issue a revised 
permit decision—either reissuing or denying the permit—
based on the existing record and findings, and one addi -
tional finding of whether the project will or will not inter -
fere with the use of the state’s waters for navigation, fishing, 
and public recreation. CFRD contended that OAH did not 
have jurisdiction until the permitting decision was made 
and appealed by one of the parties. CFRD also argued that 
OAR 137-003-0655 did not authorize DSL’s OAH referral 
and request for an ALJ to conduct further hearing. CFRD 
further took the position that the scope of DSL’s referral was 
inappropriate because “DSL has attempted to refer to issues 
that were already decided in this matter, and that are now 
binding” based on the doctrine of “law of the case.”
 OAH scheduled a contested case hearing. Before 
the hearing, the ALJ issued a ruling on OAH’s authority to 
conduct further proceedings, and the scope of those proceed-
ings. The ALJ agreed with DSL that OAH had the author -
ity to conduct proceedings on remand on DSL’s referral and 
that DSL had the authority to define the scope of the pro -
ceedings in response to the Supreme Court’s remand. The 
ALJ then held a contested hearing in October 2021. Nearly 
a year later, the ALJ issued a proposed order “on re-referral 
for limited issue” concluding that Wal-Mart satisfied its bur-
den of establishing that the project “would not unreasonably 
interfere with the paramount policy of the state to preserve 
the use of its waters for navigation, fishing, and public recre-
ation, pursuant to ORS 196.825(1)(b), based on the weighing 
process set forth in [CFRD II.]”
 In the proposed order, the ALJ applied the Supreme 
Court’s two-part test and found that the “proposed project 
will have minimal interference with public fishing and rec -
reation.” Having found that the project would have mini -
mal interference, the ALJ focused its analysis on whether 
the “interference [was] unreasonable by weighing it against 
the public need for the proposed fill; any social, economic, or 
other public benefits likely to result from the proposed fill; 
and any economic cost to the public if the proposed fill is not 
accomplished.”
190 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
 Addressing the public benefits, the ALJ found that 
“the record establishes that the proposed project offers pub-
lic benefits in that it will provide temporary construction 
jobs as well as permanent full-time and part-time employ -
ment at a variety of in-store positions, from managers to 
greeters.” The ALJ also found that the “record establishes 
that the proposed store is likely to result in offsite public 
improvements totaling more than $7.2 million, more than 
$800,000 in development charges and fees, and at least 
$150,000 in tax revenues—all of which are public benefits.”
 Addressing economic cost, the ALJ determined that 
other uses for the site absent construction of the proposed 
store would not yield the same amount of public economic 
benefits as the proposed store. Further, without completion 
of the proposed project, “there would be an economic cost 
to [T]he Dalles community in the form of lost infrastruc -
ture improvements, tax revenues, fees, and development 
charges.” The record also showed that there was likely to be 
a minimal economic cost to the public if the proposed project 
was not completed.
 Finally, with respect to public need, the ALJ found 
that the record was still inconclusive as to whether the proj-
ect would address a public need.
 Ultimately, after noting that Wal-Mart had not 
demonstrated a public need for the project, the ALJ deter -
mined that the public benefits and economic costs associ -
ated with the project outweighed the project’s interference 
with the uses of the waters of the state, explaining:
“the evidence shows the proposed project provides at least 
moderate social, economic, and other public benefits to The 
Dalles community and at least minimal economic cost if 
the proposed store is not built. The evidence of interference 
with use of waters of the state does not outweigh the evi -
dence on the public benefit side of the equation. The greater 
weight of evidence is on the side of public benefits and eco-
nomic costs without the project.”
 DSL issued a final order adopting the ALJ’s pro -
posed order and issued the permit to Wal-Mart. Petitioner 
seeks judicial review of that order under ORS 183.482(1).
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 191
II. ANALYSIS
 In three assignments of error, CFRD contends 
that DSL erred in two primary ways on remand from the 
Supreme Court: (1) by conducting the remand proceedings 
in a manner that exceeded the scope of the Supreme Court’s 
remand, was contrary to administrative rule, and inconsis -
tent with the doctrines of law of the case and issue preclu -
sion; and (2) by issuing an order unsupported by substantial 
evidence or reason. We conclude that DSL did not err in any 
of the respects alleged.
A. Remand Proceedings
 We first address CFRD’s contentions that DSL’s 
conduct of the remand proceedings exceeded the scope of its 
authority in several different ways. How an agency conducts 
proceedings on remand is, in general, a matter of discretion, 
subject to restrictions on that discretion by the scope of the 
remand or other applicable sources of law. See, e.g., Gearhart 
v. PUC, 356 Or 216, 233-34, 339 P3d 904 (2014) (discussing 
generally the extent of agency authority on remand from a 
court). Accordingly, we review to determine whether the agen-
cy’s exercise of discretion was within the range of discretion 
delegated to it, consistent with applicable rules and otherwise 
in accordance with applicable law. ORS 183.482(8)(b).
1. Law-of-the-case and issue preclusion doctrines
 CFRD argues that the law-of-the-case and issue 
preclusion doctrines precluded DSL from referring the mat-
ter to OHA for further development of the factual record and 
additional findings on remand from the Supreme Court. We 
disagree.
 With respect to issue preclusion, that doctrine does 
not apply in this procedural context. As set forth in CFRD’s 
own brief, that doctrine may apply if an issue has been 
resolved in a prior proceeding: “[i]f one tribunal has decided 
an issue, the decision on that issue may preclude relitigation 
of the issue in another proceeding if five requirements are 
met[.]” Nelson v. Emerald People’s Utility Dist., 318 Or 99, 
104, 682 P2d 1293 (1993) (emphasis added). This matter is 
a single proceeding that has had multiple stages because of 
192 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
the appellate court review process. Each stage of the process 
does not constitute a separate proceeding for purposes of the 
doctrine of issue preclusion.
 In contrast with the doctrine of issue preclusion, 
the law-of-the-case doctrine does apply in this procedural 
context and could, in theory, limit the approaches that were 
available to DSL on remand from the Supreme Court. Under 
that doctrine, “an appellate decision is binding and conclu -
sive for purposes of future proceedings in the same case” 
with respect to those parts of the appellate decision “that 
were necessary to the disposition of the appeal.” Estrada v. 
Federal Express Corp., 298 Or App 111, 118, 445 P3d 1276, 
rev den, 365 Or 769 (2019) (quotation marks and citations 
omitted). We have applied that court-created doctrine in 
both proceedings arising from courts and proceedings aris -
ing from administrative agencies. See, e.g., id. (agency pro-
ceeding); Hayes Oyster Co. v. Dulcich, 199 Or App 43, 53-54, 
110 P3d 615, rev den, 339 Or 544 (2005) (court proceeding).
 Here, CFRD contends that “DSL’s Findings on pub-
lic need and benefit were an essential part of the issues 
and facts decided on by this Court” and the Supreme Court 
during the first round of appeals. Accordingly, CFRD argues, 
DSL was precluded from reopening the record and revisit -
ing those findings on remand.
 CFRD is correct that DSL’s findings factored into 
the Supreme Court’s analysis and informed the court’s deci-
sion to remand. We are not persuaded, however, that the 
role those findings played in the disposition is one that 
means that DSL was required to treat them as preclusive 
on remand. The Supreme Court’s decision to reverse and 
remand ultimately turned on its conclusion that DSL erro -
neously interpreted ORS 196.825(1)(b). The court explained 
that DSL’s erroneous interpretation required the court to 
reverse and remand to the agency for further proceedings 
because, when the correct interpretation of ORS 196.825(1)
(b) was taken into account, the facts contained in the agen -
cy’s order did not supply the essential link between the facts 
found and the ultimate conclusion that the project would not 
unreasonably interfere with the waters of the state. CFRD 
II, 366 Or at 290-91. In reaching that conclusion, the court 
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 193
did not review the agency’s factual findings for substantial 
evidence. In the absence of that review, we cannot read the 
court’s decision to remand the case back to DSL to sug -
gest that the record could not support the findings needed 
to authorize the issuance of the permit or that DSL would 
be barred from reopening the record and revisiting those 
findings in light of the court’s articulation of the correct 
legal standard. Under those circumstances, CFRD has not 
demonstrated that the law-of-the-case doctrine rendered 
preclusive DSL’s previous “inconclusive” findings regarding 
the public benefits and economic costs associated with the 
project.
2. Scope of the remand
 CFRD next argues that the scope of the Supreme 
Court’s remand was narrow. CFRD contends that the 
Supreme Court remanded the case to DSL for a single 
purpose: to make a finding—on the existing record—as to 
whether the proposed project would “interfere” with the 
state’s policy to preserve the state’s waters for fishing, navi-
gation, and public recreation. Therefore, CFRD asserts, DSL 
exceeded the scope of the Supreme Court’s remand when 
it referred the matter to OAH for the purpose of further 
developing the record as to the public benefits of the pro -
posed project and in making further factual findings about 
those benefits after previously finding that the evidence was 
inconclusive as to the public benefits of the proposed project. 
Rather, CFRD argues, DSL was required to deny the permit 
if it found on the existing record that the proposed project 
interfered with the public uses for which the waters of the 
state must be preserved; only if DSL found on the existing 
record that there was no such interference, could DSL issue 
the permit, because the inconclusive evidence of public ben-
efits would, as a matter of law, render any interference at all 
“unreasonabl[e]” for purposes of ORS 196.825(1).
 In response, DSL argues that the scope of the 
Supreme Court’s remand was not, by its terms, so narrow. 
In DSL’s view, the Supreme Court concluded that its prior 
order had been based on an incorrect interpretation of ORS 
196.825(1) and that the remand was broad enough to permit 
DSL to conduct whatever proceedings it deemed appropriate 
194 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
for the purpose of deciding the matter under the correct 
interpretation of law.
 We conclude that DSL’s actions were within the 
scope of the Supreme Court’s remand. “Under general princi-
ples of administrative law, * * * remand usually is the appro-
priate remedy when the court concludes that an agency has 
erred.” Gearhart, 356 Or at 233-34. “[A] general remand, 
without specific instructions to the agency, allows the court 
to perform its review function without invading the prov -
ince of the agency.” Id. at 234. “Even when an agency has 
interpreted a statute incorrectly—that is, when the agency 
has made a legal error—courts ordinarily remand for the 
agency to apply the law as interpreted by the court.” Id. This 
accords with the general principle “that an agency retains 
broad powers to resolve the matters before it, and that lim-
itations on those powers must be explicitly laid out in stat -
utes.” Stella v. Dept. of Human Services, 344 Or App 38, 42, 
580 P3d 899 (2025), rev den, ___ Or ___ (2026).
 That is not to say that a reviewing court cannot 
impose constraints on an agency on remand. On the con -
trary, “[w]hen an appellate court directs action on remand, 
the tribunal typically may determine how to accomplish the 
directed outcome if it does so within the boundaries set by 
the remand.” Village at Main Street Phase II, LLC II v. Dept. 
of Rev., 360 Or 738, 748, 387 P3d 374 (2016). An agency’s 
action on remand may be constrained in two ways: (1) by an 
appellate court’s express order or implied directive and (2) 
by the law of the case doctrine. Id. “The scope of the remand 
is established by the appellate court’s opinion in a particu-
lar case.” Id. at 749.
 In this instance, we have already rejected CFRD’s 
contention that the law-of-the-case doctrine constrained DSL 
from revisiting the findings at issue on remand. The Supreme 
Court’s express order, which reversed and remanded for 
“further proceedings,” likewise imposed no such constraint. 
Finally, nothing in the balance of the decision allows for 
the conclusion that the Supreme Court intended by implica-
tion to preclude DSL from revising its previous findings. If 
anything, the court’s observation that, the “current record” 
lacked a link between the findings made and the decision 
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 195
reached tends to suggest the opposite: that DSL would have 
the discretion on remand to expand the record if warranted 
to account for the Supreme Court’s definitive interpretation 
of ORS 196.825(1)(b).
3. Administrative rules
 Petitioner’s final argument regarding the scope of 
the proceedings on remand is that the ALJ “erred by hold -
ing a Contested Case Hearing when there was no jurisdic -
tion to do so.” Petitioner’s theory is that the administrative 
rules governing contested case hearings do not expressly 
provide for a further hearing on remand to an agency from 
an appellate court. Contrary to petitioner’s argument, how-
ever, the plain terms of OAR 137-003-0655 broadly autho -
rized an ALJ to conduct further hearings upon an agency’s 
request. OAR 137-003-0655(1) states that “[a]fter issuance 
of the proposed order, if any, the administrative law judge 
shall not hold any further hearing or revise or amend the 
proposed order except at the request of the agency, except 
as provided in this subsection.” Subsection (2) sets out the 
process upon an agency’s request for a further hearing: “[i]f 
the agency requests the administrative law judge to conduct 
a further hearing under section (1) of this rule, the agency 
shall specify the scope of the hearing and the issues to be 
addressed.” Those provisions, by their terms, authorized 
DSL to request, and the ALJ to conduct, the additional pro-
ceedings on remand developing the factual record in light of 
the Supreme Court’s construction of ORS 196.825.
 Arguing for a different conclusion, petitioner points 
to two other rule provisions that allow for the conduct of 
additional hearings before an ALJ after the issuance of a 
proposed final order: OAR 137-003-0655(5) and OAR 137-
003-0675(6)(b). Petitioner notes that OAR 137-003-0655(5) 
allows for an agency to request a further hearing upon the 
receipt of exceptions and that OAR 137-003-675(6)(b) allows 
an agency to request a further hearing after an agency 
issues, but then elects to reconsider, a final order. Petitioner 
contends that those provisions would be superfluous if OAR 
137-003-0655(1) and (2) are construed broadly to authorize 
an ALJ to conduct further proceedings upon an agency’s 
request.
196 Citizens for Resp. Devel. in The Dalles v. Walmart
 Petitioner’s argument—which treats the adminis -
trative rules as a grant of authority—rests on a misconcep -
tion of the nature of agency authority. Again, as we recently 
observed in Stella , an agency has “ ‘plenary authority’ ” to 
resolve the matters committed to it for decision. 344 Or App 
at 43 (quoting Boydston v. Liberty Northwest Ins. Co. , 166 
Or App 336, 339, 999 P2d 503, rev den, 331 Or 191 (2000)). 
The question is whether the legislature or agency itself has 
limited that authority by statute or rule. The rules identified 
by petitioner do not expressly or impliedly limit an agen -
cy’s authority to reopen a contested case hearing on remand 
from an appellate court and, for that reason, do not sup -
port the conclusion that the remand proceedings were con -
strained by administrative rule.
B. Substantial Evidence and Substantial Reason
 In the remaining assignment of error, CFRD asserts 
that DSL’s findings regarding the public benefits and eco -
nomic costs of the project are not supported by substantial 
evidence and that DSL’s ultimate determination that the 
project will not “unreasonably interfere” with the waters of 
the state is not supported by substantial reason.
 Starting with substantial reason, the substan -
tial reason standard requires a determination of whether 
findings of fact logically lead to conclusions of law. Goin v. 
Employment Dept., 203 Or App 758, 763, 126 P3d 734 (2006); 
see also Drew v. PSRB, 322 Or 491, 499-500, 909 P2d 1211 
(1996) (addressing line of decisions since 1975 holding that 
agencies “are required to demonstrate in their opinions 
the reasoning that leads the agency from the facts that it 
has found to the conclusions that it draws from those facts” 
(emphases in original)).
 Here, DSL’s order satisfies that standard. The order 
explains that DSL found that the project had “moderate” 
public benefits and that there would be “minimal” economic 
costs to the public if the project were not completed. The 
order explains that it found that “the proposed project will 
have at most minimal interference with fishing and public 
recreation at Chenoweth Creek and the Columbia River.” It 
then weighed those benefits and costs against the level of 
Cite as 350 Or App 183(2026) 197
interference, determining that “[t]he evidence of interfer -
ence with use of waters of the state does not outweigh the 
evidence on the public benefit side of the equation.” Based 
on those findings about the weight of the evidence, the order 
connects those findings to DSL’s ultimate legal conclusion: 
“Walmart has therefore satisfied its burden of establishing 
that the proposed project will not unreasonably interfere 
with the paramount policy of the state to preserve the use 
of its waters for navigation, fishing and public recreation, 
based on the weighing process set forth in [CFRD II].”
 Turning to the substantial evidence question, we 
understand CFRD to challenge DSL’s findings that the proj-
ect had moderate public benefits, and that there would be 
minimal economic costs to the public if the project were not 
completed. We do not understand CFRD to challenge the 
finding that the project “will have at most minimal interfer-
ence with fishing and public recreation at Chenoweth Creek 
and the Columbia River.”
 Evaluating a challenge to an agency’s finding for 
substantial evidence “requires us to determine whether the 
record, taken as a whole, would permit a reasonable person 
to make the disputed finding.” United Academics of OSU v. 
OSU, 315 Or App 348, 355, 502 P3d 254 (2021). Here, Wal-
Mart presented evidence that, when viewed in the context 
of the record as a whole, would allow a reasonable person 
to make the challenged findings. Although CFRD argues 
vigorously otherwise, ultimately those arguments are ones 
that demonstrate that, on this record, a reasonable person 
would not have been compelled to make the findings that 
DSL did and could have remained reasonably unconvinced 
about the public benefits and economic costs to the public of 
the project. In other words, CFRD’s arguments are ones that 
could convince a reasonable factfinder to reject Wal-Mart’s 
evidence. But the fact that DSL’s findings were not compelled 
on this record does not mean that DSL’s findings on the evi-
dence presented were unreasonable, and it is not our role 
in this context to re-weigh the evidence in light of CFRD’s 
arguments about why it should be deemed unpersuasive. For 
those reasons, CFRD’s substantial evidence challenge fails.
 Affirmed.
