A188128
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/03/dept._of_human_services_v._t._b..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10869557/dept-of-human-services-v-t-b/
Caption: Dept. of Human Services v. T. B.
Date: 2026-06-03

218 June 3, 2026 No. 480
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of S. B. B., 
a Child.
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES,
Petitioner-Respondent,
and
S. B. B.,
Respondent,
v.
T. B.,
Appellant.
Crook County Circuit Court
24JU00749; A188128
Wade L. Whiting, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 22, 2026.
Kyle Sessions Vazquez, Deputy Public Defender, argued 
the cause for appellant. Also on the briefs was Shannon 
Storey, Chief Defender, Juvenile Appellate Section, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission.
E. Nani Apo, Assistant Attorney General, argued the 
cause for respondent Department of Human Services. Also 
on the brief were Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, and Paul 
L. Smith, Solicitor General.
Erica Hayne Friedman argued the cause for respondent 
child. Also on the brief was Youth, Rights & Justice.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
ORTEGA, P. J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 350 Or App 218 (2026) 219
220 Dept. of Human Services v. T. B.
 ORTEGA, P. J.
 Father appeals from a permanency judgment that 
changed his child’s plan from reunification to adoption.1 On 
appeal, he argues that the Oregon Department of Human 
Services (ODHS) did not meet its burden to show that it 
made reasonable efforts to reunify father and his child, 
because ODHS caused delay in establishing his paternity 
and did not make reasonable efforts during the periods that 
he was in jail. We conclude that the juvenile court did not 
err in determining that ODHS made reasonable efforts and 
affirm.
 Father does not ask us to take de novo review, and 
we decline to do so. ORAP 5.40(8). We review the juvenile 
court’s determination that ODHS made reasonable efforts 
for errors of law. Dept. of Human Services v. L. L. S. , 290 
Or App 132, 133, 413 P3d 1005 (2018). “In conducting that 
review, we are bound by the juvenile court’s explicit fac -
tual findings if there is evidence to support those findings.” 
Id. We also “presume that the court made any necessary 
implicit factual findings in a manner consistent with its 
ultimate legal conclusion.” Id. We summarize the facts most 
important to our analysis in accordance with that standard.
 Father’s child, S, was 15 months old at the time of the 
permanency hearing. ODHS became involved shortly after 
S’s birth in February 2024, when the hospital reported that 
S was born drug affected and that the relationship between 
mother and father was characterized by violence. During 
an argument in the early morning hours of February 8, 
while they were still at the hospital, father accused mother 
of cheating and questioned whether he was S’s biological 
father. Father left the hospital with security. On February 
8, ODHS removed S from parents’ care and placed her with 
mother’s grandmother, where S has remained.
 At that time, father “went back and forth” on 
whether he was S’s biological father, claiming both that 
he was and was not her father. ODHS treated father as S’s 
father throughout the case and mother never indicated that 
anyone else could be S’s father. ODHS filed its petition to 
 1 Mother is not a party to this appeal.
Cite as 350 Or App 218 (2026) 221
establish wardship of S three days after her birth and listed 
father as S’s “father.”
 At first, father was “sporadically engaged” with 
ODHS. He visited S once but left early, stating that “there 
isn’t a lot to do with a newborn.” Father was “unable or 
unwilling” to set up a time for supervised visits with S. 
Then, on March 16, father and mother had a physical alter-
cation, resulting in father’s arrest. Father remained in 
Crook County jail until April 4, when he pleaded no contest 
to strangulation of mother. The criminal court sentenced 
him to 24 months of probation, including 20 days in jail, with 
credit for time served. The criminal court ordered father to 
complete a substance abuse evaluation and treatment, com-
plete a batterer’s intervention treatment program, refrain 
from using drugs, submit to random drug testing, and 
refrain from contacting or attempting to contact mother.
 On March 25, ODHS referred father for services for 
alcohol and drug support, a mental health assessment, and 
parenting classes and mentoring. Father signed an action 
agreement with ODHS on April 10, but he did not engage 
with any services.
 On April 15, the juvenile court held the jurisdic -
tional trial for S. The jurisdictional judgment lists father as 
the “putative father.” The court found that three of the juris-
dictional allegations pertaining to father were established 
based on his admissions: “father’s substance abuse impairs 
his ability to safely parent the child, placing the child at risk 
of harm”; “child’s father has a pattern of uncontrolled, vol -
atile, and aggressive behavior that escalates into offensive 
physical contact with the child’s mother, placing the child at 
risk of harm”; and “father’s residential instability interferes 
with his ability to safely parent the child, placing the child 
at risk of harm.” Father did not challenge his paternity.
 Later in April, father tested positive for metham -
phetamine and THC. In May, father completed the crimi -
nal-court-ordered assessment for batterer’s treatment and 
was approved to enter the program, pending a clean drug 
test. However, on June 3, father tested positive for meth -
amphetamine from a test taken on May 29. On June 12, 
222 Dept. of Human Services v. T. B.
father tested presumptively positive for methamphetamine 
and was arrested for that probation violation. The criminal 
court sanctioned him to 20 days in the Crook County jail, 
and he was released on June 28.
 In July, ODHS reported that father had one visit 
with S since his first visit that happened before the juris -
dictional hearing. It went well, but father asked to stop vis-
its because his schedule was overwhelming and the “visits 
would set him up for failure.” As of July, father also denied 
substance use or mental health problems and declined to 
participate in any services.
 On July 21, father was arrested for a probation 
violation for contacting mother, and the court sanctioned 
father to 30 days in jail. He was released on August 19, and, 
on August 27, father was arrested during a domestic vio -
lence incident with mother and charged with fourth-degree 
assault. Father was ultimately acquitted of the assault 
charge on November 5, but he had remained in custody for 
the 70 days while that charge was pending.
 In early November, father completed the crimi -
nal-court-ordered substance abuse assessment. However, on 
November 13, father admitted to his probation officer that he 
used methamphetamine the week prior and that he contacted 
mother, beginning on the day he was released from jail. On 
November 21, the criminal court revoked father’s probation 
and sentenced him to 160 days in jail, with credit from August 
6, and 24 months of post-prison supervision. Father was 
released on January 24, 2025. On January 27, father admit -
ted to his probation officer that he contacted mother in per -
son, and he was arrested for violation of the no-contact order. 
Father was released from jail for that violation on March 27.
 Sometime during his incarceration in the fall, 
father told the family’s ODHS caseworker, Salaz, that he did 
not want to restart visits with S until he had DNA testing 
to confirm paternity. Salaz asked father why he was ques -
tioning paternity and father “said he didn’t know and he 
was certain he was the father but still wanted the paternity 
done.” Salaz put in a referral to get the DNA testing done, 
but she could not locate father when he was out of jail, and 
Cite as 350 Or App 218 (2026) 223
when he was in jail a court order was needed to get the test-
ing. In December, while father was in jail, ODHS obtained 
the court order and collected DNA from father for the test -
ing. In February 2025, while father was again in jail, the 
Child Support Division completed the DNA testing, which 
confirmed father’s paternity of S.
 After his release from jail in March, and after 
receiving paternity confirmation, father asked for visits 
with S. He also completed a mental health assessment and 
began substance use disorder treatment and a parenting 
class. Father testified that he needed 90 to 120 days to com-
plete substance use treatment and nine months for batter -
er’s intervention. He also had not yet started mental health 
treatment. Salaz testified that father needed several months 
to make sufficient progress. Father also obtained employ -
ment. He claimed that the DNA confirmation had motivated 
him to engage in services and that before that he “really 
wasn’t trying.” He visited S six times between April and the 
start of the permanency hearing on May 13. At the time of 
the hearing, father was staying in a shelter where children 
were not permitted.
 Salaz testified that after father’s recent release, he 
was willing to meet with her and engage. Previously, father 
would meet with Salaz in the jail and they would make a 
plan for meeting on his release, but father would not meet 
with her outside of jail. Each time Salaz learned that father 
was in jail again, she would contact him. During those vis -
its, Salaz would update father about S, show him pictures 
of S and go over the importance of meeting when he was 
released. Salaz also contacted father’s probation officer and 
learned that Crook County jail did not provide any services. 
At the time of the hearing, ODHS listed the efforts for father 
as including contact with father, funding to obtain an iden-
tification, approval of a supervisor for visitation with S in 
the resource parent’s home, visitation at ODHS, gas vouch-
ers for visits, and referrals for mental health treatment, 
substance use evaluation, treatment, and support, and par-
enting classes and mentoring.
 The juvenile court held the permanency hearing 
over two days—May 13 and 23, 2025. At the second hearing, 
224 Dept. of Human Services v. T. B.
ODHS presented evidence that, since the first hearing date, 
the police had arrested father for driving under the influ -
ence of a controlled substance and possession of metham -
phetamine, and he was again in jail. Salaz testified that 
virtual visits with S could be set up and that ODHS could 
purchase parenting books for father to read in jail.
 At the close of the hearing, as relevant here, father 
argued that ODHS failed to make reasonable efforts because 
it had delayed getting paternity testing done and had failed 
to facilitate services for him while he was incarcerated.
 The juvenile court determined, based on the total -
ity of the evidence, that ODHS had made reasonable efforts 
and that father had failed to make sufficient progress to 
allow S to safely return home, and changed S’s plan from 
reunification to adoption.
 On appeal, father’s sole argument is that ODHS did 
not prove that its efforts to reunify father and S were reason-
able. Under ORS 419B.476(2)(a), in order to change a child’s 
permanency plan from reunification to adoption, the juvenile 
court must, among other things, determine whether ODHS 
made “reasonable efforts” to reunify the parent and child. 2 
L. L. S., 290 Or App at 138. Reasonable efforts are “efforts 
that focus on ameliorating the adjudicated bases for juris -
diction, and that give parents a reasonable opportunity to 
demonstrate their ability to adjust their conduct and become 
minimally adequate parents.” Id. (internal quotation marks 
omitted). “The reasonableness of [O]DHS’s efforts depends 
upon the particular circumstances of each case.” Dept. of 
Human Services v. S. M. H., 283 Or App 295, 305, 388 P3d 
1204 (2017) (internal quotation marks omitted). ODHS has 
the burden to prove reasonable efforts by a preponderance of 
the evidence. Id.
 2 ORS 419B.476(2)(a) provides:
 “At a permanency hearing the court shall:
 “(a) If the case plan at the time of the hearing is to reunify the family, 
determine whether the Department of Human Services has made reasonable 
efforts or, if the ward is an Indian child, active efforts as described in ORS 
419B.645 to make it possible for the ward to safely return home and whether 
the parent has made sufficient progress to make it possible for the ward to 
safely return home. In making its determination, the court shall consider the 
ward’s health and safety the paramount concerns.”
Cite as 350 Or App 218 (2026) 225
 On appeal, father argues that ODHS failed to make 
reasonable efforts because it failed to confirm his paternity 
for a full year after S’s removal and failed to facilitate ser -
vices for father during the times he was in Crook County 
jail. Father argues that not having paternity established 
was a barrier to his participation in services and that estab-
lishing paternity was needed because ODHS could not have 
reunified S with a “putative” father. Father also asserts that 
ODHS did not make reasonable efforts for father while he 
was in jail, having done nothing after learning that the jail 
did not offer services. We conclude, based on the totality of 
the circumstances, that ODHS did prove reasonable efforts 
by a preponderance of the evidence.
 We first address the issue of paternity. We conclude, 
viewing the record as a whole, that ODHS’s efforts were 
reasonable with respect to establishing father’s paternity. 
Here, ODHS treated him as S’s father from the start of the 
case and put on evidence that father was not treated dif -
ferently with respect to offered services or visitation with 
S. Father admitted allegations in the jurisdictional petition 
that included that he was S’s father, and he did not request a 
DNA test until the fall of 2024. Even then, he acknowledged 
to Salaz that he was “certain” he was S’s father. Other than 
not wanting to restart visits with S until after the testing, 
father did not indicate to ODHS that establishing paternity 
was a barrier to him engaging in any services. Once father 
requested the testing, ODHS made efforts to complete it. 
On this record, the juvenile court could conclude that ODHS 
had no reason to believe that not having a paternity test 
was a barrier to father’s participation in services or that 
obtaining a test earlier would improve father’s engagement, 
given his repeated probation violations and his arrest for 
driving under the influence and possession that occurred 
between the two permanency hearing dates.3 See, e.g., Dept. 
of Human Services v. M. K., 257 Or App 409, 416, 306 P3d 
763 (2013) (stating that “[s]everal of our cases highlight the 
importance of considering whether a parent is likely to ben-
efit from a service”).
 3 We reject without extended discussion father’s assertion that, until ODHS 
confirmed paternity, he was a “legal stranger” to S. Under ORS 419B.875(1)(a)(C), 
father was a party to the proceeding as the “alleged genetic parent” of S.
226 Dept. of Human Services v. T. B.
 We next address father’s incarceration. Our case 
law has long established that ODHS “is not excused from 
making reasonable efforts toward reunification simply 
because a parent is incarcerated.” S. M. H., 283 Or App at 
306. In assessing ODHS’s efforts, “a juvenile court properly 
considers ‘the length and circumstances of a parent’s incar-
ceration,’ Dept. of Human Services v. S. W., 267 Or App 277, 
293-94, 340 P3d 675 (2014), and ‘evidence specifically tied 
to [a parent’s] willingness and ability to participate in ser -
vices,’ see Dept. of Human Services v. J. M., 275 Or App 429, 
449, 364 P3d 705 (2015), rev den, 358 Or 833 (2016).” Id. 
(brackets in original).
 Here, ODHS began offering father services before 
the jurisdictional hearing on April 15, but he visited S only 
once and “sporadically engaged” with ODHS. His first incar-
ceration was for 20 days, ending on April 4. Father did not 
engage with ODHS or any services following that incarcera-
tion, other than to visit S once, before his next term of incar-
ceration starting on June 12. Between June 2024 and March 
2025, father was in and out of jail for probation violations, 
due to his drug use and contacting mother. Those periods of 
jail time were sporadic and ranged from 20 days to just over 
two months. When father was out of jail, ODHS had diffi -
culty locating him, despite arranging meetings with father 
before he was released, and father would not engage in ser-
vices. Each time father was in jail, Salaz would reinitiate 
contact with father, would meet with him at the jail, update 
him on S, and try to plan with him for meeting and for ser -
vices on his release. Given the circumstances, ODHS’s fail-
ure to facilitate services to father while he was in jail was 
not unreasonable.
 This case is readily distinguishable from Dept. of 
Human Services v. M. C. C. , 303 Or App 372, 463 P3d 592 
(2020), a case relied on by father. In that case, the father was 
incarcerated for the life of the case on serious charges in 
federal prison. He engaged with services offered in prison, 
maintained contact with ODHS, and tried to arrange for his 
sister as a placement for the child. ODHS did not allow con-
tact between the child and the father’s sister and opposed 
an out-of-state placement so the child could remain close 
Cite as 350 Or App 218 (2026) 227
to the mother, even though the mother had no contact with 
ODHS or the child. We concluded that ODHS had not made 
reasonable efforts because it had “not made efforts that 
afforded father a reasonable opportunity to enlist the help 
of his sister to care for [the child], which he had sought to do 
since early in the case.” Id. at 381. We emphasized that, in 
that case, the father “was cooperative with [O]DHS in find-
ing an appropriate placement for [the child] and expressed 
his desire to bond with [the child].” Id. at 383.
 In contrast, here, father’s terms of incarceration 
were short, and each time father was out of jail he would 
not engage with ODHS or any services. In July, father was 
denying any substance use or mental health problems and 
was declining visits with S. During his fall incarceration, 
father declined to restart any visits with S. It was not until 
March 2025 that father engaged with ODHS. This is not a 
case where ODHS’s failure to facilitate any services for the 
parent in jail was the main barrier to father making prog -
ress on ameliorating the bases for jurisdiction, nor is it a 
case where ODHS failed to maintain contact with the parent 
while incarcerated or failed to inquire about whether ser -
vices could be provided in jail. See Dept. of Human Services 
v. A. R. S., 343 Or App 260, 266, 577 P3d 1228 (2025) (“It is 
a case where the county jail where father was housed would 
not allow the specific service to be provided at the jail—and 
ODHS is not required to do the impossible.”). Here, there 
was sufficient evidence from which the juvenile court could 
conclude that father would not have benefited from addi -
tional efforts during his short periods of incarceration and 
that, on the whole, ODHS’s efforts were reasonable.
 Affirmed.
