A184909
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/03/state_v._collin.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10869547/state-v-collin/
Caption: State v. Collin
Date: 2026-06-03

No. 484 June 3, 2026 243
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
RICKI SCOTT COLLIN,
Defendant-Appellant.
Lane County Circuit Court
21CR53965; A184909
Kamala H. Shugar, Judge.
Submitted March 3, 2026.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Peter G. Klym, Deputy Public Defender, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission, filed the briefs for appellant. 
Ricki Collin filed the supplemental brief pro se.
Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Interim Deputy Attorney General, and Erica L. Herb, 
Assistant Attorney General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
JOYCE, J.
Affirmed.
244 State v. Collin
 JOYCE, J.
 Defendant appeals a judgment of conviction for 
second-degree disorderly conduct and second-degree crim -
inal trespass, raising two assignments of error. In his first 
assignment of error, defendant claims that the trial court 
erred by denying his motion for a judgment of acquittal 
(MJOA) on the disorderly conduct count. In defendant’s sec-
ond assignment of error, he contends that the trial court 
plainly erred when it failed to instruct the jury that it had 
to concur on either a principal or aiding and abetting the -
ory of liability for both counts. Finally, defendant raises four 
pro se supplemental assignments of error, all of which are 
unpreserved. Defendant does not request plain error review 
for these supplemental assignments of error and we reject 
them without further discussion. See State v. Webb, 342 Or 
App 426, 445, 576 P3d 995, opinion adh’d to as modified 
on recons, 344 Or App 365, 578 P3d 1290 (2025) (rejecting 
the defendant’s pro se supplemental assignments of error 
because they were unpreserved and the defendant did not 
request plain error review).
 We conclude that the trial court did not err in deny-
ing defendant’s MJOA. We also conclude that the trial court 
plainly erred when it did not provide a jury concurrence 
instruction that required the jury to agree on a theory of 
liability for the disorderly conduct and criminal trespass 
counts. However, because the error was harmless with 
respect to both counts, we affirm.
 Motion for judgment of acquittal: In defendant’s 
first assignment of error, he contends that the trial court 
erred by denying his MJOA on the disorderly conduct count, 
arguing that the evidence was legally insufficient to prove 
that defendant both “inten[ded] to cause public inconve -
nience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creat[ed] a risk 
thereof” and “[e]ngage[d] in fighting or in violent, tumultu -
ous or threatening behavior.” ORS 166.025(1)(a). He raised 
the same issue in his MJOA in the trial court, so the claim of 
error is preserved. The state maintains that the trial court 
properly denied the MJOA.
Cite as 350 Or App 243 (2026) 245
 On review of the denial of an MJOA, our task is to 
examine the evidence “in the light most favorable to the state 
to determine whether a rational trier of fact, accepting rea-
sonable inferences and reasonable credibility choices, could 
have found the essential element[s] of the crime beyond a 
reasonable doubt.” State v. Cunningham, 320 Or 47, 63, 880 
P2d 431 (1994), cert den, 514 US 1005 (1995). To the extent 
inferences from circumstantial evidence are necessary to 
prove an element, it is a question of law what reasonable 
inferences may be made from the evidence. State v. Bivins , 
191 Or App 460, 467, 83 P3d 379 (2004). Reasonable infer -
ences are allowed, but “speculation and guesswork are not.” 
Id.
 A person commits second-degree disorderly conduct, 
as charged here, when a person, “with intent to cause public 
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating 
a risk thereof,” “[e]ngages in fighting or in violent, tumultu-
ous or threatening behavior[.]” ORS 166.025(1)(a). The first 
element requires the state to prove that a “defendant con -
sciously disregarded an unjustifiable risk that [their] behav-
ior would affect not just specific individuals, but the public 
in general.” State v. Love, 271 Or App 545, 554, 351 P3d 780 
(2015). “The text of [ORS 166.025(1)] does not, by its terms, 
require proof of actual public inconvenience, annoyance or 
alarm to any particular number of persons. It requires proof 
that defendants either intended to cause one of those condi-
tions or recklessly created a risk of inconvenience, annoy -
ance or alarm to the public[.]” State v. Willy, 155 Or App 279, 
283, 963 P2d 739 (1998) (emphasis in original).
 As to the second element, because there is no statu-
tory definition of “violent, tumultuous or threatening behav-
ior,” this court has narrowly construed the language to avoid 
infringing on constitutionally protected speech. State v. 
Hosley, 282 Or App 880, 883, 388 P3d 387 (2016). Thus, “ORS 
166.025(1)(a) makes unlawful only the use of physical force 
or physical conduct which is immediately likely to produce 
the use of such force.” State v. Cantwell, 66 Or App 848, 853, 
676 P2d 353, rev den, 297 Or 124 (1984). While “[a] person’s 
speech may provide circumstantial context for determining 
whether or not the person’s conduct was ‘immediately likely 
246 State v. Collin
to result in physical force,’ ” a person’s conduct that is itself 
speech or primarily speech will not fall within the scope of 
physical conduct that ORS 166.025(1)(a) prohibits. Hosley, 
282 Or App at 883.
 With that legal framework, we turn to the evidence. 
Defendant and his girlfriend, Hall, travelled to Eugene to 
confront government officials about Oregon’s mask man -
date and attempted to enter the municipal courthouse 
without wearing masks. After leaving the courthouse, 
defendant and Hall went to a local cookie shop because they 
had heard the owner, D, “was using violence to enforce what 
she believed to be the correct way to enforce the [mask] 
mandate.”
 Defendant livestreamed the following incident at 
issue from his phone, and that video was admitted into 
evidence. As defendant and Hall approached the shop, 
defendant said, “About to go test these guys at this cookie 
place. Got reports of this business owner chasing—chasing 
some people out of their store with a baseball bat. Should 
be right around this corner here.” Once defendant and Hall 
entered the shop, D began to ask if they had masks, and 
Hall responded, “I don’t wear a mask.” D said that they 
could not come in without masks, and defendant responded 
that D could not deny “public services” to anyone. D then 
asked defendant and Hall to leave her shop and told them 
they were now trespassing. In an attempt to move them 
out of the shop, D approached Hall chest-to-chest with her 
arms extended. Defendant told D, “Don’t touch her.” While 
continuing her attempt to usher them out of the shop, D 
“brushed up against” Hall, and Hall pushed D. D then 
retrieved a baseball bat from behind the shop counter while 
defendant said, “Don’t fucking touch her.” D walked back to 
defendant and Hall with her bat in hand, telling them to 
leave and saying she had “the right to use reasonable force.” 
D approached Hall with her bat pointed at her, and Hall 
grabbed the bat, pulling D towards her. Hall then began to 
physically attack D.
 During the beginning of the attack, the video was 
shaking and did not clearly show defendant’s physical inter-
action with Hall and D. However, D testified that the three 
Cite as 350 Or App 243 (2026) 247
of them became “sort of entangled,” and defendant at some 
point grabbed D’s bat from her hands. Defendant also testi-
fied that he had grabbed the bat from D during the alterca-
tion. Hall and D then fell to the floor as defendant exited the 
store with his phone still recording the incident. Defendant 
said, “Somebody call the police on this lady,” and D contin-
ued screaming for help and yelling at Hall to get out. At the 
same time, a person walked outside through a neighboring 
door, looked towards the shop, then turned and walked back 
inside. Shortly after, Hall exited the shop through the open 
shop door, leaving D inside on the floor. Defendant then told 
D, while pointing her bat at her, “You don’t get to fucking 
assault people and run a business. Yeah, we’ll be calling 
the cops on you. Don’t worry.” As defendant was walking 
away, D told defendant to give her the bat back, to which 
defendant responded, “Fuck off. You don’t get to keep your 
weapon after you assault someone with it.”
 In viewing the evidence in the light most favorable 
to the state, we conclude that the evidence was legally suf -
ficient for a rational factfinder to conclude that defendant 
had acted “with intent to cause public inconvenience, annoy-
ance or alarm, or recklessly creat[ed] a risk thereof.” As just 
described, the evidence shows that defendant and Hall ini -
tiated and livestreamed the verbal altercation with D about 
the state’s mask mandate in a publicly accessible place (D’s 
shop) in downtown Eugene during regular daytime business 
hours while the front door was open. Even accepting that 
most of the altercation occurred inside of the shop, the fact 
that the altercation occurred in a public store during the 
day and was livestreamed to defendant’s online audience 
is sufficient for a rational factfinder to conclude that defen-
dant at least recklessly created a risk that any members of 
the public who walked near or into the store, or who viewed 
defendant’s livestream, would have experienced “inconve -
nience, annoyance or alarm.” And while evidence of actual 
public inconvenience or alarm is unnecessary to prove this 
element, the fact that an uninvolved member of the public 
witnessed the altercation adds to the evidence a rational 
factfinder could use to conclude that defendant recklessly 
created a risk of public inconvenience by engaging in the 
conduct at issue.
248 State v. Collin
 The evidence was also legally sufficient for a rational 
factfinder to conclude that defendant had engaged in “fight-
ing or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.” The 
record shows at least one act by defendant that a reason -
able factfinder could conclude constitutes physical conduct 
which is immediately likely to result in physical force: defen-
dant’s grabbing of the baseball bat from D. The circumstan-
tial context surrounding that physical conduct, including 
some of defendant’s speech, further supports such a find -
ing. Defendant and Hall entered D’s shop and immediately 
confronted her about the state’s mask mandate and tres -
pass law. When D brushed against Hall while attempting 
to usher defendant and Hall out of the shop, Hall shoved D. 
Then, when D went to retrieve her baseball bat, defendant 
warned D to not “fucking touch” Hall. When D approached 
Hall with the baseball bat, Hall began physically attacking 
D. D testified that it was at this point that defendant, while 
“entangled” in the fight, grabbed and removed the bat from 
D’s hands. Given the surrounding context of the immedi -
ately preceding verbal confrontation, the attempts by D to 
remove defendant and Hall from the premises under threat 
of “reasonable force,” and Hall’s physical assault on D, a 
rational factfinder could conclude that defendant’s physi -
cal act of grabbing the bat from D was immediately likely 
to result in either physical force from defendant or further 
physical force from Hall. Thus, the trial court did not err in 
denying defendant’s MJOA.
 Jury concurrence: In defendant’s second assignment 
of error, he contends that the trial court erred when it failed 
to instruct the jury that it had to concur on a single theory 
of liability for the disorderly conduct and criminal trespass 
charges. Defendant concedes that he did not preserve this 
claim and asks this court to review for plain error.
 An error is “plain” if it (1) is one of law, (2) is “obvi-
ous” and “not reasonably in dispute,” and (3) appears “on the 
face of the record.” Ailes v. Portland Meadows, Inc., 312 Or 
376, 381, 823 P2d 956 (1991). In the context of jury instruc-
tions, because “the question of what must be included in 
a jury instruction is a question of law, and what was or 
was not included is determined readily by examining the 
Cite as 350 Or App 243 (2026) 249
instructions that were given[,] * * * the only issue is whether 
the error[ ] w[as] ‘obvious.’ ” State v. Lotches, 331 Or 455, 472, 
17 P3d 1045 (2000), cert den, 534 US 833 (2001).
 We review a trial court’s jury instructions for errors 
of law, and “[i]n determining whether evidence supports giv-
ing an instruction, this court reviews the evidence in the 
light most favorable to the party requesting the instruction.” 
State v. Burris, 301 Or App 430, 432, 456 P3d 684 (2019). 
The relevant procedural facts are as follows. During closing 
arguments, the state reiterated its theory that defendant 
had aided and abetted Hall in committing assault and bur -
glary. The state also clarified that defendant was liable for 
criminal trespass and disorderly conduct “simply based on 
[his] own actions,” and “not under an aiding and abetting 
theory.” The state added that “[t]his doesn’t have to do with 
just aiding and abetting Ms. Hall when it comes to criminal 
trespass and disorderly conduct. Those are 100 percent the 
actions of [defendant] himself.” At the end of its closing argu-
ment, the state again asked the jury to find defendant guilty 
on an aid-and-abet theory for the assault, harassment, and 
burglary charges, but noted that “the disorderly conduct 
and the criminal trespass [charges are] based entirely on 
[defendant’s] own actions.”
 During the state’s rebuttal closing argument, it 
again explained the aid-and-abet theory, but then asked the 
jury to “find [defendant] guilty of all five counts proposed,” 
and that if it “[could] not find it on the theory, for the charges 
in which he can be held responsible, himself, for his actions, 
that you do hold him responsible by being criminally liable 
by aiding and abetting Ms. Hall’s actions that day.”
 During jury deliberations, the jury sent the court 
a question asking, “Aiding [and] abetting applies to which 
specific charges?” Defendant objected to the court’s sug -
gested answer that the jury could apply the theory to all the 
charges. The court responded that “the law of aid and abet 
can be applied to any count.” Defendant argued that the 
state presented its case differently, and the court responded 
that defendant had not “require[d] the state to elect that 
theory as to a particular charge,” and it “didn’t give [the 
jury] an instruction that it only applied to certain charges.” 
250 State v. Collin
Defendant explained that “the concern is confusion” and 
reiterated that “aiding and abetting would only apply to 
the first three counts: burglary, the harassment, and the 
assault.” The state supported the court’s suggested answer 
as a “correct statement of the law” but noted that the law 
was “probably not as clear to the jury since the question 
came up.” The court concluded that it would not “limit[ ] the 
use of aid and abet, since [they] didn’t discuss it and neither 
party requested it.” It then submitted the following answer 
to the jury: “Answer to Question #1: You may find that aid 
and abet applies to none of the charges, some of the charges, 
or all of the charges.” The jury acquitted defendant of the 
burglary, harassment, and assault counts, but returned a 
guilty verdict for the disorderly conduct and criminal tres -
pass counts.1
 To return a guilty verdict, all jurors must agree that 
the “state has prove[n] each legislatively defined element of 
a crime” beyond a reasonable doubt. State v. Pipkin, 354 Or 
513, 527, 316 P3d 255 (2013). Since the elements necessary 
to prove liability as an aider and abettor 2 “ordinarily will 
not be coextensive with the elements necessary to prove lia-
bility as a principal,” the jury must agree that the state has 
proven each element under a single theory of liability. State 
v. Phillips, 354 Or 598, 606, 317 P3d 236 (2013). Within the 
plain error context, “[a]fter Phillips, it is ‘obvious’ that, when 
the state advances competing theories of liability based on 
a defendant’s acts as principal or as an aider-and-abettor 
* * * a jury must be instructed that [it] must agree that the 
 1 The state argues on appeal that the error is not “obvious” and thus “reason-
ably in dispute” in part because the jury’s question about aid-and-abet liability 
and the court’s answer to that question are not in the record on appeal. However, 
in reviewing the record we found that it includes both documents.
 2 ORS 161.155(2) provides, in part:
 “A person is criminally liable for the conduct of another person constitut-
ing a crime if:
 “* * * * *
 “(2) With the intent to promote or facilitate the commission of the crime 
the person:
“* * * * *
 “(b) Aids or abets or agrees or attempts to aid or abet such other person 
in planning or committing the crime[.]”
Cite as 350 Or App 243 (2026) 251
defendant is liable under one theory or the other.” State v. 
Gaines, 275 Or App 736, 748, 365 P3d 1103 (2015).
 Here, the state acknowledges that, while the jury 
instructions included a section on aid-and-abet liability,3 the 
trial court did not instruct the jury that it had to agree on 
a theory of liability for each count. The state nevertheless 
argues that the absence of a jury concurrence instruction 
here was not “obvious” plain error because, in the state’s 
view, it only advanced a principal liability theory for the 
disorderly conduct and criminal trespass charges for which 
defendant was convicted; thus, there were no “competing 
theories of liability” with respect to those charges. See State 
v. Miranda, 290 Or App 741, 487, 417 P3d 480 (2018) (con -
cluding that the failure to provide a concurrence instruction 
for the child endangerment charges was not “obvious” plain 
error because “the state’s only argument to the jury in clos-
ing was that defendant was liable [for those charges] as an 
accomplice” and “no meaningful principal liability theory 
[was] presented to the jury”).
 While the state may not have intended to advance 
both principal and aid-and-abet theories for the disorderly 
conduct and criminal trespass charges, the court’s answer to 
the jury’s question regarding the aid-and-abet theory never-
theless presented both theories to the jury with respect to 
those charges. We acknowledge that during closing argu -
ment, the state reiterated multiple times that it was not 
advancing an aid-and-abet theory for the disorderly con -
duct and criminal trespass charges specifically. However, 
the record shows that the jury asked the court to clarify 
which charges the state’s aid-and-abet theory applied to, 
and the court, despite defendant’s objection, submitted an 
answer stating the jury could apply the theory to “none of 
the charges, some of the charges, or all of the charges.” In 
light of these procedural facts, we conclude that the jury 
was ultimately presented with competing theories of liabil -
ity for all of the charges. Under Gaines, the absence of a 
 3 The aid-and-abet section of the main jury instructions states: “A person 
aids or abets another person in the commission of a crime if the person: (1) With 
the intent to promote or make easier the commission of the crime, (2) Encourages, 
procures, advises, or assists, by act or advice, the planning or commission of the 
crime.”
252 State v. Collin
jury concurrence instruction under such circumstances was 
plain error.
 We next address whether that error was harm -
less, i.e., whether there was little likelihood that the error 
affected the verdict. State v. Horton , 327 Or App 256, 262, 
535 P3d 338 (2023) (noting that if a plain error is harmless, 
we have no discretion to correct it and must affirm). In mak-
ing this determination, we consider the jury instructions as 
a whole, the evidence in the case, and the competing theories 
of liability as applied to the disorderly conduct and trespass 
statutes, respectively. See Phillips, 354 Or at 608 (conclud -
ing that the absence of a jury concurrence instruction was 
harmless because the two competing theories of liability in 
that case did not require “proof of discrete, separate facts” 
to prove the causation element of third-degree assault under 
either theory); Burris, 301 Or App at 432 (“For an error in 
jury instructions to constitute reversible error, it must have 
prejudiced the defendant when the instructions are consid -
ered as a whole.”).
 Disorderly conduct as charged here requires the 
state to prove that the defendant personally, “with intent 
to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or reck-
lessly creating a risk thereof,” “[e]ngage[d] in fighting or in 
violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior.” ORS 166.025(1)
(a). Under a principal theory of liability, the latter element 
would require proof that defendant himself either engaged 
in “physical force” or “physical conduct which is immediately 
likely to produce the use of such force.” Cantwell, 66 Or App 
at 853. Under an aid-and-abet theory of liability, however, 
the state would have to prove only that defendant aided or 
assisted Hall in engaging in the requisite physical force or 
conduct to commit disorderly conduct.
 In light of the evidence in this case, we conclude that 
there is little likelihood that the jury would have returned 
a different verdict had the trial court provided it with the 
appropriate jury concurrence instruction. Defendant’s 
primary physical conduct that would support a convic -
tion of disorderly conduct under either theory was his act 
of grabbing and taking the victim’s baseball bat from her 
hands. The evidence of that act was undisputed; the video 
Cite as 350 Or App 243 (2026) 253
recording showed that defendant obtained the victim’s bat 
at some point during Hall’s assault on the victim, and both 
the victim and defendant testified that he had taken the bat 
from her during the altercation. While it is possible that a 
juror found that defendant’s physical act of grabbing the bat 
was insufficient to support a guilty verdict under a princi -
pal theory of liability and instead found defendant guilty 
under aid-and-abet liability based on other conduct (such as 
his livestreaming the incident), such an outcome is highly 
unlikely in light of the undisputed evidence before the jury 
of defendant grabbing and taking the bat. Because there is 
little likelihood that the jury returned a guilty verdict under 
either theory of liability based on different facts, the jury 
concurrence error was harmless with respect to the disor -
derly conduct charge.
 Second-degree criminal trespass under a principal 
theory of liability requires the state to prove that defendant 
personally “enter[ed] or remain[ed] unlawfully * * * upon 
premises.” ORS 164.245(1). Under an aid-and-abet the -
ory, the state would have to prove that defendant aided or 
assisted Hall in entering or remaining unlawfully on the 
premises of D’s shop, which would not necessarily require 
facts showing that defendant entered and/or remained on 
the premises. The main jury instructions defined “enter or 
remain unlawfully” as including, among other things, the 
failure to “leave premises that are open to the public after 
being lawfully directed to do so by the person in charge.”
 The video evidence here showed defendant enter -
ing D’s shop with Hall and, after D told defendant and Hall 
to leave, remaining inside the shop long enough to film the 
physical altercation and to take D’s bat from her. There is 
no “discrete set of facts” here that would support one theory 
of liability but not the other. In other words, a jury’s find -
ing that defendant “aided and abetted” Hall’s trespass of D’s 
shop would necessarily be based, at least in part, on a find-
ing that defendant had simultaneously entered and refused 
to leave the property alongside Hall, which also proves 
trespass under a principal liability theory. See Phillips, 354 
Or at 613 (“Even though the trial court should have given 
defendant’s requested instruction to that effect, the error 
254 State v. Collin
was harmless because, on the facts in this case, the factual 
findings necessary to find defendant liable on one theory 
either subsumed or were the same as the factual findings on 
the other theory.”). Considering this evidence, there is little 
likelihood that the lack of a jury concurrence instruction 
affected the verdict for the trespass count.
 Having found that the plain error was harmless 
with respect to both charges, we “have no discretion [to cor-
rect the error] and must affirm.” Horton, 327 Or App at 262.
 Affirmed.
