A183185
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/06/03/state_v._escalante.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10869544/state-v-escalante/
Caption: State v. Escalante
Date: 2026-06-03

No. 483 June 3, 2026 233
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
STATE OF OREGON,
Plaintiff-Respondent,
v.
VICENTE ESCALANTE,
Defendant-Appellant.
Washington County Circuit Court
22CR52509; A183185
Andrew Erwin, Judge.
Submitted April 8, 2026.
Ernest G. Lannet, Chief Defender, Criminal Appellate 
Section, and Anna Johnson, Deputy Public Defender, Oregon 
Public Defense Commission, filed the brief for appellant.
Dan Rayfield, Attorney General, Benjamin Gutman, 
Interim Deputy Attorney General, and Shannon T. Reel, 
Assistant Attorney General, filed the brief for respondent.
Before Ortega, Presiding Judge, Joyce, Judge, and 
Hellman, Judge.
JOYCE, J.
Reversed and remanded.
234 State v. Escalante
 JOYCE, J.
 Defendant appeals from a judgment of conviction 
for strangulation constituting domestic violence and harass-
ment. He raises three assignments of error. In his first 
assignment of error, defendant contends that the trial court 
plainly erred by failing to reread jury instructions after the 
close of evidence that it had read at the start of the trial. In 
his second assignment of error, he contends that the trial 
court abused its discretion when it admitted a video of defen-
dant’s in-custody interview. In his final assignment of error, 
defendant contends that the trial court erred by ruling that 
defendant had “opened the door” for admission of photographs 
of the victim’s bruises from a prior incident involving defen-
dant. With respect to defendant’s first assignment of error, in 
light of the Supreme Court’s recent decision in State v. Shine, 
375 Or 112, ___ P3d ___ (2026) (Shine II) (decided after brief-
ing and argument in this case was complete), we conclude 
that the trial court plainly erred when it failed to reread 
certain jury instructions after the close of evidence. We exer-
cise our discretion to correct that error; therefore, we reverse 
defendant’s convictions and remand for a new trial. That dis-
position obviates the need for us to address defendant’s third 
assignment of error. However, because defendant’s second 
assignment of error is likely to arise on remand, we address 
that assignment of error and conclude that the trial court 
did not abuse its discretion when it admitted the video.
 Jury instructions: We first address whether the trial 
court plainly erred when it failed to reread certain jury instruc-
tions after the close of evidence. After jury selection, the trial 
court discussed the court’s approach to jury instructions:
 “I’m going to give [the jury] the first of two sets of writ -
ten instructions that [the jury] is going to get from me. The 
first set of instructions just kind of talks about what’s [the 
jury’s] job, what’s my job, how does this trial actually work.
 “The second set of instructions I’ll give [the jury] after 
[the jury has] heard all of the evidence * * * but before the 
closing arguments of the attorneys, I’ll give [the jury] a sec-
ond set of instructions that talks about the law that [it is] 
supposed to apply [to] the facts that [it has] been listening 
to against. That’s how [the jury gets] instructions from me.”
Cite as 350 Or App 233 (2026) 235
 Before reading the first set of instructions, the trial 
court provided both parties with a printed-out draft of the 
first set of instructions and offered them an opportunity to 
object. Neither defendant nor the state objected. The trial 
court then provided each member of the jury with a written 
copy of the instructions and read them aloud before opening 
statements. The first set of instructions included precau -
tionary instructions and descriptions of the functions of the 
court and jury. It also included instructions pertaining to 
the innocence of the defendant—proof beyond a reasonable 
doubt; defendant’s statements; defendant not testifying; 
evaluating witness testimony; vouching; modified evidence; 
inferences; direct or circumstantial evidence; and the defini-
tions of “intentionally” and “knowingly or with knowledge.”
 The trial lasted for two days. After the close of evi -
dence and prior to closing arguments, the trial court pro -
vided the parties with a draft of the second set of instruc -
tions, which ultimately included instructions pertaining to 
certain definitions, including those for “offensive physical 
contact,” “domestic violence,” and “physical injury”; evaluat-
ing witness testimony; the defense of self-defense; and the 
elements of each count. The trial court asked the parties if 
there were “[a]ny other instructions before we go to the crim-
inal charges that you folks are asking me to—to instruct 
on?” Both sides stated that they did not have any instruc -
tions to add. The trial court provided the jurors with written 
copies of the second set of instructions and then read them 
aloud.1 After the trial court sent the jury to deliberate, it 
asked if either party had “[e]xceptions to the instructions as 
read,” and, again, neither party raised any objection. The 
jury found defendant guilty on all counts.
 Now, defendant contends that the trial court plainly 
erred when it failed to reread aloud after the close of evi -
dence the jury instructions pertaining to the presumption 
of innocence and proof beyond a reasonable doubt, defen -
dant’s statements, evaluating witness testimony, inferences, 
 1 It is not clear whether the trial court provided the jury a final, complete 
copy of the written instructions that put the first and second set of instructions 
together for the jury to reference while hearing the second set of instructions at 
the close of evidence. However, the jury ultimately had written copies of both the 
first and second set of instructions to consult while deliberating.
236 State v. Escalante
direct and circumstantial evidence, and the definitions of 
“intentionally” and “knowingly.” Defendant concedes that 
his argument is unpreserved but requests that we review 
for plain error. An error is “plain” when it is one of law, the 
legal point is obvious and not reasonably in dispute, and the 
error is apparent on the record and does not require us to 
choose among competing inferences. State v. Vanornum, 354 
Or 614, 629, 317 P3d 889 (2013). We must further determine 
whether, if the trial court did plainly err, that plain error is 
harmless. We cannot reverse a defendant’s conviction based 
on harmless error. State v. Ortiz, 372 Or 658, 671, 554 P3d 
796 (2024) (“Under Article VII (Amended), section 3, of the 
Oregon Constitution, an appellate court may not reverse a 
criminal defendant’s conviction based on an error—whether 
preserved or unpreserved—that is harmless.”). If there is 
“little likelihood” that the error affected the verdict, the 
error is harmless. Id. (quoting State v. Davis, 336 Or 19, 32, 
77 P3d 1111 (2003)). If the trial court’s error is plain and 
not harmless, we still must decide whether to exercise our 
discretion to correct it. Id. at 672.
 When deciding whether to exercise our discretion 
to correct a plain error, we consider a nonexclusive list of 
factors, including “the competing interests of the parties; 
the nature of the case; the gravity of the error; the ends 
of justice in the particular case; how the error came to the 
court’s attention; and whether the policies behind the gen-
eral rule requiring preservation of error have been served.” 
Ailes v. Portland Meadows, Inc. , 312 Or 376, 382 n 6, 823 
P2d 956 (1991). We conclude that, in light of Shine, in failing 
to reread aloud the jury instructions at the close of evidence, 
the trial court committed plain error; that plain error was 
not harmless; and the gravity of the error and the ends of 
justice weigh in favor of our exercising our discretion to cor-
rect the plain error. Therefore, we reverse defendant’s con-
victions and remand for a new trial.
 To start, the trial court committed plain error. “[A] 
trial court lacks discretion to omit ‘matters of law neces -
sary for [the jury’s] information in giving its verdict’ from 
its oral presentation of the instructions”—or ‘charge’—”to 
the jury after the close of evidence.” State v. Shine, 334 Or 
Cite as 350 Or App 233 (2026) 237
App 360, 370, 557 P3d 181 (2024), aff ’d , 375 Or 112, ___ 
P3d ___ (2026) ( Shine I ) (quoting ORCP 59 B). The facts 
in Shine are very similar to those at issue here. The trial 
court there gave the jury, both verbally and in writing, two 
sets of instructions—one set before opening statements and 
the other over a week later after the close of evidence. Id. 
at 363-64. In the first set of instructions, the trial court 
included the standard instructions on “the presumption of 
innocence and proof beyond a reasonable doubt, defendant’s 
statements, defendant not testifying, evaluating witness 
testimony, inferences, direct and circumstantial evidence, 
and the definition of ‘knowingly and with knowledge.’ ” Id. 
at 363. For its reading of the second set of instructions, 
the trial court, over the defendant’s objection, omitted the 
instructions just listed and instead focused largely on defi -
nitions of terms in the offenses and those offenses’ elements 
in its verbal instructions to the jury. Id. at 363-64.
 On appeal, the defendant in Shine contended that 
the trial court’s refusal to reread the omitted instructions 
aloud to the jury after the close of evidence was error under 
ORCP 58 B and 59 B. Id. at 366. The state argued that the 
trial court did not err, because, pointing to the same rules as 
defendant, when to read certain instructions—either before 
the start of trial or as part of the charge to the jury after the 
close of evidence—was up to the trial court’s discretion. Id. 
at 366-67. We examined the text of ORCP 58 B and 59 B and 
ultimately agreed with the defendant, holding that, under 
those rules, the trial court “lacks discretion to omit ‘matters 
of law necessary for [the jury’s] information in giving its ver-
dict’ from its oral presentation of the instructions to the jury 
after the close of evidence.” Id. at 370 (quoting ORCP 59 B). 
We further held, and neither party disputed, that the instruc-
tions the trial court refused to reread aloud at the close of 
evidence were such matters of law. Id. at 366-67. Therefore, 
we concluded that the trial court erred. Id. at 370.
 After briefing and argument concluded in this 
case, the Supreme Court affirmed our holding in Shine. The 
Supreme Court explained that, while a trial court may read 
certain instructions both at the beginning and end of a trial, 
the instructions provided at the beginning that describe 
238 State v. Escalante
“matters of law necessary for [the jury’s] information in giv-
ing a verdict” are not a substitute for a complete oral state-
ment at the close of evidence for purposes of ORCP 59 B. 
Shine II, 375 Or at 129-30.
 As Shine makes clear, a trial court commits legal 
error when it fails to instruct the jury on matters of law 
necessary for the jury’s information in giving its verdict. It 
is also readily apparent on this record that the trial court 
failed to give some of the same jury instructions that were 
at issue in Shine —including instructions regarding the 
innocence of defendant and proof beyond a reasonable doubt, 
defendant’s statements, evaluating witness testimony, infer-
ences, direct and circumstantial evidence, and the defini -
tion of knowingly—which here, like in Shine , the state does 
not dispute are matters of law necessary for the jury’s infor-
mation in giving its verdict. Given the holding in Shine, it is 
obvious that the trial court erred.2 Therefore, the trial court 
plainly erred in failing to reread the relevant instructions at 
the close of evidence.
 Because the trial court committed plain error, we 
next consider whether that error was harmless and, if it 
was not, whether we will exercise our discretion to correct 
it. State v. Brown, 327 Or App 592, 599, 536 P3d 1069 (2023). 
In Shine, the Supreme Court concluded that the trial court’s 
error was not harmless. Shine II, 375 Or at 131. Specifically, 
the Supreme Court explained that “[t]he instructions that 
the trial court declined to reread at the close of the case 
were important instructions that protect defendants’ consti-
tutional rights.” Id. at 130 (citing Or Const, Art I, § 12 (right 
not to be compelled to testify against self), ORS 10.095(6) 
(providing that in criminal cases, jurors are to be instructed 
that “a person is innocent of a crime or wrong until the pros-
ecution proves otherwise, and guilt shall be established 
beyond a reasonable doubt”), and State v. Sperou , 365 Or 
121, 133, 442 P3d 581 (2019) (acts that undermine the pre -
sumption of innocence may deprive defendants of a fair 
 2 The state contends that any error is not “obvious.” In doing so, the state 
argues that the record supports a conclusion that defense counsel made a con-
scious decision to refrain from objecting to the trial court’s instructions. We 
address that consideration in our discussion on whether to exercise our discretion 
rather than on whether the error was plain.
Cite as 350 Or App 233 (2026) 239
trial)). The Supreme Court further explained that “a par -
ty’s argument is not a substitute for instructions from the 
court.” Id. at 131. It also discussed “recency bias,” empha -
sizing that timing matters, and explaining that we do not 
assume that an oral instruction at the beginning of a trial 
will be as effective as an instruction delivered right before 
deliberation. Id.
 Here, the state contends that, for purposes of 
assessing whether the error was harmless, this case differs 
in important ways from Shine. In so arguing, the state pri -
marily focuses on the fact that the trial in this case took 
place over the course of two days instead of eight, making 
the time shorter between when the first set of instructions 
were given and when the jury went to deliberate. Although 
the trial was shorter in this case, a substantial amount of 
time, during which the jury was inundated with all the 
information associated with the case itself, still passed 
between when the trial court read the first set of instruc -
tions and when the jury was sent to deliberate. Therefore, 
we hold that the reasoning in Shine controls, and the trial 
court’s error was not harmless.
 Finally, we exercise our discretion to correct the 
trial court’s error. “A court’s decision to recognize unpre -
served or unraised error * * * should be made with utmost 
caution.” Ailes, 312 Or at 382. Again, in making that deci -
sion, some of the factors we consider are “the competing 
interests of the parties; the nature of the case; the grav -
ity of the error; the ends of justice in the particular case; 
how the error came to the court’s attention; and whether 
the policies behind the general rule requiring preservation 
of error have been served.” Id. at 382 n 6. We recognize that 
the trial court provided defendant opportunities to object 
to the method and contents of the trial court’s instructions 
and that defendant did not object. Thus, in that sense, the 
purposes of preservation were not served. We nevertheless 
believe that that is outweighed by the gravity of the error 
and the ends of justice in this case.
 As the Supreme Court emphasized in Shine, the 
instructions that the trial court failed to reread are intended 
to “protect defendants’ constitutional rights.” Shine II, 375 
240 State v. Escalante
Or at 130. In failing to include instructions pertaining to 
those rights in its charge to the jury, the trial court cre -
ated a significant risk that defendant’s constitutional rights 
would not be adequately protected. The jury deciding defen-
dant’s case was not, for example, instructed at the close of 
evidence that defendant is innocent unless and until proven 
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. See UCrJI 1009. The jury 
was also not charged with what it means for there to be 
reasonable doubt. Id. The omission of such information is 
especially problematic when the trial court told the jury 
before trial that the “second set of instructions * * * talks 
about the law that you’re supposed to apply [to] the facts 
that you’ve been listening to against.” Thus, despite telling 
the jury that the second set of instructions would tell them 
the law they needed to apply, the charge to the jury here 
failed to “communicate all of the information fundamental 
to the fairness of our criminal justice system.” Shine I, 334 
Or App at 373. Any confusion about the basic constitutional 
principles on which our criminal justice system is built is 
very likely to affect the jury’s verdict. Therefore, we exercise 
our discretion to correct the trial court’s error.
 Admission of interview video: Although we reverse 
and remand for a new trial based on defendant’s first 
assignment of error, we nevertheless address his second 
assignment of error because it is likely to arise on remand.3 
State v. Savage, 305 Or App 339, 342, 470 P3d 387 (2020) 
(explaining that we will consider issues likely to arise on 
remand when the trial court “has determined a question of 
law that will still be at issue after the case is remanded”). 
In that assignment of error, defendant contends that the 
trial court abused its discretion in admitting a video of 
defendant’s interview with police while in custody. See OEC 
403 (“Although relevant, evidence may be excluded if its 
probative value is substantially outweighed by the danger 
of unfair prejudice, confusion of the issues, or misleading 
the jury * * *.”). In defendant’s view, though relevant, the 
 3 In contrast, defendant’s third assignment of error—in which he claims that 
the trial court erred in admitting evidence that it had previously ruled would be 
excluded but then admitted after concluding that defendant had opened the door 
to it—is not likely to arise on remand. Having received an evidentiary ruling in 
his favor, it is unlikely that defendant would then proceed to re-open the door. We 
therefore do not address it.
Cite as 350 Or App 233 (2026) 241
prejudicial nature of the video outweighed its probative 
value. We review for an abuse of discretion, State v. Boauod, 
302 Or App 67, 73, 459 P3d 903 (2020), and affirm.
 When police interviewed defendant in custody, they 
created both a video and audio recording of that interview. 
The video shows defendant in a jail cell and in handcuffs. 
Defendant described his version of what had happened with 
the victim. Defendant had also sustained injuries during 
the altercation and police took photographs of those inju -
ries. Defendant objected to admission of the video, arguing 
that it was unfairly prejudicial because it showed him in 
handcuffs and in a jail cell and that the state should be 
allowed to admit only the audio recording of the interview. 
In particular, defendant argued that the prejudicial effect of 
the visual aspect of the recording outweighed the probative 
value. In response, the state argued that the video showed 
defendant’s state at the time of the interview, including his 
injuries and demeanor. The trial court admitted the video, 
concluding under OEC 403 that the video was highly proba-
tive and, because the jury would know that defendant had 
been taken into custody, the prejudicial effect did not sub -
stantially outweigh its probative value.
 On appeal, defendant argues that the trial court 
abused its discretion. In his view, the video was unfairly prej-
udicial because the jury, having watched it, might conclude 
that he was a threat or dangerous because he was in a cell, 
handcuffed, while officers interviewed him. The trial court 
did not abuse its discretion. “ ‘[U]nfair prejudice’ does not 
mean evidence is harmful to the opponent’s case—a central 
reason for offering evidence.” State v. O’Key, 321 Or 285, 321, 
899 P2d 663 (1995) (citations and internal quotation marks 
omitted). “Rather, it means an undue tendency to suggest 
a decision on an improper basis, commonly although not 
always, an emotional one.” Id. Thus, “[t]he critical inquiry 
in determining whether evidence is unfairly prejudicial is 
whether the evidence improperly appeals to the preferences 
of the trier of fact for reasons that are unrelated to the 
power of the evidence to establish a material fact.” State v. 
Sewell, 257 Or App 462, 469, 307 P3d 464, rev den, 354 Or 
389 (2013) (internal citations omitted).
242 State v. Escalante
 Although the video was prejudicial, the trial court 
did not abuse its discretion in concluding that it was not 
unfairly prejudicial. The jury knew that police had arrested 
defendant and taken him into custody. The fact that the 
video showed him in jail and in handcuffs, in light of that 
evidence, would not have tended to make the jury likely to 
decide the case on an emotional or otherwise improper basis.
 Reversed and remanded.
