A183002
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/28/dombrowsky_and_beaumont.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10865719/dombrowsky-and-beaumont/
Caption: Dombrowsky and Beaumont
Date: 2026-05-28

92 May 28, 2026 No. 462
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
In the Matter of 
The Beaumont Family Trust of February 9, 2007
Lizabeth J. DOMBROWSKY,
Petitioner-Respondent,
and
Judy A. BEAUMONT, 
 individually and in her capacity as 
Successor Trustee of the Beaumont Family Trust of 
February 9, 2007,
Respondent-Appellant.
Jackson County Circuit Court
20PB01209; A183002
David G. Hoppe, Judge. (General judgment entered 
September 23, 2023).
Timothy C. Gerking, Judge. (General judgment entered 
November 15, 2023).
Argued and submitted January 29, 2025.
George W. Kelly argued the cause and filed the briefs for 
appellant.
Hannah Harding argued the cause for respondent. Also 
on the brief was Jarvis Glatte Bunick, LLP.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
Pagán, Judge.
PAGÁN, J.
Reversed and remanded.
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 93
94 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
 PAGÁN, J.
 This matter concerns the interpretation and admin-
istration of the Beaumont Family Trust. Respondent below, 
Judy Beaumont,1 one of the settlors of the trust along with 
her now deceased husband, Lee Beaumont III, appeals from 
a judgment that removed her as trustee, barred her from 
receiving further distributions from the trust, denied her 
counterclaims to reform the trust and enforce the trust’s in 
terrorem clause, and awarded Dombrowsky attorney fees. 
Beaumont asserts six assignments of error, arguing that the 
trial court erred by (1) determining that the term “joint lives” 
(or “joint lifetimes”) unambiguously referred to the period 
when both settlors were alive; (2) excluding Beaumont’s tes-
timony about her husband’s intent for the trust as hearsay; 
(3) removing Beaumont as trustee of the trust; (4) awarding 
Dombrowsky attorney fees; (5) not reforming the trust; and 
(6) not enforcing the trust’s in terrorem clause.
 We agree with Beaumont that the term “joint lives” 
is ambiguous and following from that conclusion, we further 
determine that the trial court erred by excluding testimony 
pertaining to ‘Lee’s state of mind when creating the trust, 
removing Beaumont as trustee, and awarding Dombrowsky 
attorney fees. We do not reach the question of whether 
Beaumont presented clear and convincing evidence that 
would warrant reformation of the trust because on remand 
the question will be decided on a different record. Lastly, 
we conclude that the trial court did not err in determin -
ing that the trust’s in terrorem clause was not triggered by 
Dombrowsky bringing this action.
 Thus, we reverse and remand for further proceed -
ings on the meaning of “joint lives.”
I. BACKGROUND
 When reviewing a trial court’s conclusion of 
whether a term in an agreement such as a trust is unambig-
uous, we review the trial court’s findings of historical fact 
 1 To avoid confusion based on party designations below and on appeal, we 
refer to the parties by their names. Because there are multiple people with the 
last name Beaumont, we refer to Judy Beaumont by last name, and for clarity, we 
refer to Lee Beaumont III as Lee. 
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 95
for any evidence in the record. Batzer Construction, Inc. v. 
Boyer, 204 Or App 309, 318, 129 P3d 773, rev den, 341 Or 
366 (2006). Additionally, “[i]f findings are not made on all 
such facts, and there is evidence from which such facts could 
be decided more than one way, we will presume that the 
facts were decided in a manner consistent with the ultimate 
[legal] conclusion.” Id. (internal quotation marks removed). 
We review the trial court’s legal conclusions for legal error. 
Id. We present the facts in line with that standard.
 We have broken the facts into four sections for clar-
ity: (1) creation and contents of the trust, (2) relevant pro -
visions of the trust, (3) events following Lee’s death, and (4) 
trial court proceedings.
A. Creation and Property of the Beaumont Family Trust
 In 2007, Beaumont and Lee met with an attorney 
to establish a trust to hold title for their real property and 
other assets. Both Beaumont and Lee had adult children 
from prior marriages, and they were included as secondary 
beneficiaries of the trust. At the initial signing, the couple 
transferred three parcels of real property into the trust: 
the couple’s residence (the Birdseye property), a commercial 
property, and a rental residence. The trust also provided for 
the disposition of a survivor’s trust from Lee’s parents, with 
instructions on how to distribute the assets to Lee’s family 
members, including Beaumont, if she survived him.
 Between the creation of the trust and Lee’s death in 
2018, other property was added to the trust, including bonds 
held in a brokerage account and two vehicles. By its terms, 
the trust became irrevocable after one of the settlors died.
B. Relevant Provisions of the Trust
 Both the parties and the trial court agreed that the 
trust instrument is poorly drafted. The trust instrument 
has 11 articles, which provide: the purpose and intent of the 
trust (Article 1), what property is in the trust (Articles 2 
and 3), requirements for revoking and amending the trust 
(Article 4), the fiduciary duties and powers of the Trustee 
(Articles 5 and 6), disposition of the trust property during 
the settlors’ joint lives (Article 7) and after the death of the 
96 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
surviving settlor (Article 9), how the trust is to be used to 
pay for expenses after the death of each settlor (Article 8), 
an in terrorem clause (Article 10), and general administra -
tive provisions (Article 11).
 The phrase at the heart of this dispute is “joint 
lives” or “joint lifetimes.” The phrase appears in the follow-
ing four places:
• (Article 1): “The Settlors acknowledge that the pur -
pose of this Trust is to establish a vehicle to hold title 
to real property and other assets for management and 
distributive purposes for their benefit as primary ben -
eficiaries during their joint lifetimes and thereafter for 
the benefit of secondary beneficiaries as hereinafter 
provided.”
• (Article 4(A)): “Either of the Settlors, during their joint 
lives, may at any time and upon successive occasions, 
revoke this Trust in whole or in part.”
• (Article 5(A)): “The original Trustee under this 
Declaration of Trust, shall be LEE C. BEAUMONT, III 
and JUDY A. BEAUMONT, to serve as Co-Trustees with 
all of the obligations, powers, and authority contained 
within this Trust Agreement. Notwithstanding any 
other provision to the contrary, the Settlors specifically 
authorize either of the original Co-trustees, during their 
joint lives and while serving as Co-trustees, to act inde -
pendently of the other and have the authority to perform 
all powers and acts as granted under this Declaration of 
Trust.”
• (Article 7): “During Settlors’ joint lives, the trust shall 
be administered and distributed as follows:
 “A. The Trustee shall distribute to or for Settlors’ 
benefit such portions of the income and principal of the 
trust as Settlors may from time to time request.
 “B. Settlors shall have possession and full manage-
ment of Settlors’ residence and real property known as 
1520 Birdseye Creek Road, Gold Hill, Oregon, Oregon 
[sic] and shall have the right to occupy it, or any succes-
sor residential premises, rent free.”
 Also relevant to the dispute, Article 10 of the agree-
ment contains the following in terrorem clause:
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 97
 “Any person contesting or challenging this Agreement, 
as now written and hereafter amended, or the adminis -
tration or distribution of any or all of the Trust Estate as 
provided herein, shall be given as a specific gift the sum of 
$1.00, and no more * * *.
 “Such contest or challenge includes but is not limited to 
the filing of any proceeding in any court, with the same to 
include but not limited to any probate department thereof, 
in the attempt or actually to have such court exercise juris-
diction over the Agreement, or of any Settlor, or of any 
Trustee or of any actual or contingent or proposed bene -
ficiary hereunder, or of any other natural or legal person 
in any fashion, or any or all of the Trust Estate, except as 
otherwise provided or limited by the terms of the Oregon 
Uniform Trust Code (ORS 130.235).”
C. Events Following Lee’s Death
 On April 10, 2018, Lee passed away. Having 
survived Lee, Beaumont became the sole trustee of the 
Beaumont Family Trust. On August 5, 2018, Lee’s son, Lee 
Beaumont IV (Beaumont’s stepson) found a copy of the trust 
agreement. He informed his sister, Dombrowsky, of the exis-
tence of the trust.
 After Lee’s death, Beaumont continued to man -
age the trust assets in the way she claimed she and Lee 
always had. Dombrowsky identified a number of Beaumont’s 
actions that caused her concern as a beneficiary of the trust, 
including several of Beaumont’s withdrawals from the trust 
accounts, that Beaumont initially put the proceeds from the 
sale of the Birdseye property into the trust account with 
other trust assets, that Dombrowsky did not receive any 
reports or accounting from Beaumont until she brought this 
action in February of 2020, and that the accounting reports 
she did receive did not cover the entirety of the time period 
since Lee’s death.
D. Trial Court Proceedings
 Dombrowsky, Lee’s daughter and Beaumont’s step-
daughter, filed a petition in which she alleged a breach of trust 
and sought remedies including that Beaumont be removed as 
trustee, that Beaumont reimburse the trust for any misap -
propriated funds, and for the trustee to administer the trust 
98 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
in accordance with the trust agreement. The petition sought 
for the court to further instruct and authorize Beaumont as 
the trustee in administering the trust as drafted and also 
requested court orders requiring that Beaumont only make 
distributions from the trust as set forth in Article 9 and, that 
Beaumont provide a full accounting of all the trust assets, 
that Beaumont pay back the trust for the reasonable value 
of any misappropriated funds, that Beaumont be removed 
as trustee if she was found to have misappropriated funds, 
that Beaumont was to be enjoined from using or distribut -
ing the trust assets to herself for her own benefit, and that 
Beaumont was to immediately perform her duty as trustee 
and provide a trustee’s report from the date of Lee’s death 
to the present. Beaumont’s response to the petition included 
several counterclaims, including as relevant here, a claim of 
mutual mistake requiring reformation of the trust and an 
invocation of the trust’s in terrorem clause.
 Parties went to trial in March 2023. There, 
Beaumont offered testimony of her and Lee’s intent, saying, 
“So the intention of the trust was to provide for the surviv -
ing spouse for the rest of their life. And then we put our 
wishes on paper, including every one of our kids and grand-
kids that were alive at that time.” Later, in her testimony, 
this exchange occurred:
“Q: What did you [Beaumont] believe would happen with 
the trust funds after the first of you died?
“A: The intention that my husband and I wrote this—”
Beaumont was then cut off when Dombrowsky objected to 
the testimony as hearsay. Beaumont’s counsel responded to 
the objection by saying, “Your Honor, I was just wondering if 
we could use a state of mind * * *.” The court sustained the 
objection. A similar exchange happened later in the trial 
during Lee IV’s (Beaumont’s stepson) testimony:
“Q: [Was] it your father’s wishes that his wife have no 
funds from the trust?
‘’MS. BUNICK: Objection. Calls for hearsay.
“THE COURT: Sustained.”
Beaumont did not raise state of mind after that objection.
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 99
 In its written order, the trial court found that the 
term “joint lives” was unambiguous and referred to the 
period when both Beaumont and Lee were alive. The court 
reasoned that Dombrowsky’s interpretation was unambig-
uously correct in Articles 4 and 5, and thus it used that 
same meaning in Articles 1 and 7, even though the court 
acknowledged that those provisions were more ambigu -
ous. The court also found that the use of the plural “set -
tlors” in Article 7 supported Dombrowsky’s interpretation. 
The court then granted Dombrowsky’s requested relief and 
removed Beaumont as trustee of the trust, determined that 
Beaumont had committed a serious breach as trustee by 
failing to provide requested information to the secondary 
beneficiaries, providing incomplete reports when she even -
tually responded to the requests for accounting, and mis -
using trust funds. Last, the court denied Beaumont’s affir -
mative defenses and counterclaims, including Beaumont’s 
requests to reform the trust and to invoke the trust’s in ter-
rorem clause. The court granted Dombrowsky attorney fees.
 Beaumont timely appealed.
II. ANALYSIS
A. Ambiguity of “Joint Lives/Lifetimes”
 Beaumont argues that the trial court erred by deter-
mining that the term “joint lives” unambiguously meant the 
period of time when both settlors were alive. We agree and 
conclude that the term is ambiguous because under the trial 
court’s interpretation of “joint lives,” the trust (1) leaves an 
inexplicable gap as to how the trust is to be managed by 
a surviving spouse, and (2) creates an irrational procedure 
for the disbursement of trust property to the secondary 
beneficiaries.
 To ground the discussion of intent and ambiguity, 
it is first helpful to briefly consider the general purpose of 
family trusts and why people use them. Family trusts are 
often used as tools for estate planning, where trusts have 
distinct advantages over outright disposition of a person or 
persons’ property through a will or inter vivos gifts. Myron 
Kove, George G. Bogert & George T. Bogert, Bogert’s the Law 
of Trusts and Trustees, § 231 (May 2025 ed). Family trusts, 
100 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
among other benefits, help protect against unforeseen con -
tingencies such as incompetency and disability, avoid pro -
bate proceedings, can produce tax savings for the settlors’ 
and beneficiaries, and in general “allow flexibility in the 
estate plan arrangements with respect to the disposition of 
trust income and principal and to the ultimate distribution 
of the [settlors’] estate.” Id.
 Our ultimate goal in interpreting a trust is to 
“determine and give effect to the intent of the [settlor], if 
possible.” Frakes v. Nay, 254 Or App 236, 246, 295 P3d 94, 
rev den 353 Or 747 (2013). However, extrinsic evidence is 
not admissible to establish the settlors’ intent if the trust 
instrument is fully integrated and unambiguous on its face. 
Downs v. Binn, 336 Or App 665, 673, 562 P3d 261 (2024), 
rev den, 373 Or 712 (2025). A trust provision is ambiguous 
“when the language of the instrument is reasonably capa -
ble of more than one plausible interpretation.” Id. (internal 
quotation marks removed). In analyzing a trust instrument, 
the principles from the more extensively developed area of 
contract law are often suitably analogous. See e.g., id. at 680 
(using an analogy to contracts to illustrate why modifica -
tion of a trust was an inappropriate remedy in that case); 
Samuel v. King, 186 Or App 684, 692, 64 P3d 1206, rev den, 
335 Or 443 (2003) (applying the Yogman analysis for deter-
mining if a contract is facially ambiguous to conclude that 
the trust at issue was not facially ambiguous). One such 
contract principle that is relevant here is that if provisions 
of a contract are unambiguous in isolation but are incon -
sistent when read together, the contract is inherently—i.e. 
facially—ambiguous. See Miller v. Miller, 276 Or 639, 647, 
555 P2d 1246 (1976) (“If, in the particular fact context, the 
recitals appear to be inconsistent with the operative clauses, 
as a matter of common sense there is an ambiguity or ques-
tion about the intent of the parties * * *.”).
 First, the meaning of the term “joint lives” is ambig-
uous within the text of the trust instrument because neither 
Beaumont’s nor Dombrowsky’s interpretation of the phrase 
creates coherent meaning of the trust as a whole when used 
as the exclusive meaning of the term. Our reasoning in 
Portland Fire Fighters’ Assn. v. City of Portland, 181 Or App 
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 101
85, 45 P3d 162, rev den, 334 Or 491 (2002) is instructive in 
this case. There, the Firefighters Association and the City 
disagreed about whether retirees had access to the griev -
ance process designated in the collective bargaining agree -
ment (CBA). Id. at 87. The Association argued that they 
could bring those grievances because the CBA stated that 
all grievances arising under the CBA must be addressed 
through the grievance process, while the City argued that 
they could not because the grievance process referred to 
“employees” and required first bringing the issue to a super-
visor. Id. at 92-93. The Employment Relations Board found 
that the CBA unambiguously did not allow the union to 
arbitrate retirees’ grievances. Id. at 92. We determined that 
the contract was ambiguous because while the different 
sections were unambiguous in isolation, “neither of the par-
ties’ competing interpretations readily could prevail without 
reconstructing the CBA as a whole into a state of artificially 
imposed harmony.” Id. at 94. That principle applies here.
 Here, as a preliminary matter, both Beaumont’s 
and Dombrowsky’s interpretations of the phrase “joint lives” 
are reasonable plain language readings of the term, which 
favors concluding that the term is ambiguous. Webster’s 
Third New Int’l Dictionary 1219 (unabridged ed 2002) defines 
“joint” when used as an adjective, as in “joint lives,” to mean 
“joined, united, or combined.” Beaumont reads the phrase to 
mean “combined” lifetimes, while Dombrowsky agrees with 
the trial court’s finding that it means a “united” lifetime.
 While the trial court’s interpretation of “joint lives” 
in Articles 4 and 5 appears to be the unambiguous meaning 
in those sections, applying that interpretation to every use 
of the term in the document results in an inexplicable gap 
in which the agreement is silent as to the purpose of the 
trust and how it is to be administered while only one set -
tlor is alive. The inconsistency can be seen when considering 
Articles 7, 8 and 9 together. Those three sections describe 
the rights to trust property and distributions during vari -
ous time periods, with Article 7 setting out what happens 
during the “joint lives” of the settlors, Article 8 setting out 
how the trust assets may be used to cover expenses asso -
ciated with the death of a settlor, and Article 9 setting out 
102 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
what happens to the trust after the death of the surviving 
settlor. Nowhere in those three sections (or anywhere else 
in the trust instrument) does the document indicate what 
should happen to the assets after one settlor has died but the 
other is still alive. Under Dombrowsky and the trial court’s 
reading of the terms, that period of time would be left as an 
administrative black hole, where the survivor is still trustee 
but no one, neither the survivor nor the secondary benefi -
ciaries, can receive any distributions from the trust or have 
any right to the trust property. Like in Portland Firefighters, 
that reading forces the trust instrument “as a whole into 
a state of artificially imposed harmony,” and that inconsis -
tency results in a trust that is facially ambiguous.
 Second, the trial court’s reading of the trust means 
that after the first settlor’s death, the surviving settlor has 
no rights to any of the trust property, but the property can-
not be dispersed to the secondary beneficiaries until the 
surviving settlor dies. In other words, the trust assets would 
benefit neither the primary nor secondary beneficiaries for 
an indeterminate amount of time while the surviving set -
tlor is still alive. It is reasonable to infer that the settlors 
did not intend to enter into a trust agreement that would 
prevent them and their families from receiving any benefit 
from the trust assets—including the settlors’ residence and 
their personal vehicles—for potentially many years.
 Dombrowsky attempts to dismiss any potential 
ambiguity by claiming that because the trial court’s use of 
the phrase appears to be unambiguous in some sections, 
that interpretation must have necessarily applied to all 
other uses of the term. She relies on the trial court’s con -
clusions, arguing that the use of plural “settlors” in Article 
7C indicates that “joint lives” can only reasonably refer to 
the period when both settlors are alive, and that because 
Article 8 sets out how trust assets are to be used for covering 
expenses when each settlor dies, the settlors do address the 
time period when only one settlor is alive to the full extent 
they intended. We are not persuaded by either argument.
 First, subsection (J) of the General Administrative 
Provisions (Article 11) provides that “[a]s used in this Trust 
Agreement, * * * the plural and singular number shall each 
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 103
be deemed to include the others when the context so indi -
cates.” Read in that light, the use of the plural “settlors” 
cannot on its own support the inference that the section was 
meant to apply only when both settlors were alive.
 Second, while Article 8 is relevant when only one 
settlor is alive, it is not a disposition of the trust property 
like Articles 7 and 9, and it pertains equally to when nei -
ther settlor is alive. Dombrowsky claims that that provision 
shows that the settlors contemplated the period when only 
one settlor is alive and chose only to address the administra-
tion and disposition of the trust for that one circumstance, 
but that reasoning does not fix the obvious gap—potentially 
of many years—created by the trust having no instructions 
for the disposition of assets during the surviving settlor’s 
lifetime.
 Because there is no single interpretation of the term 
“joint lives” that renders the trust instrument as a whole 
coherent, it is inherently ambiguous. “[W]hen a trust provi-
sion is ambiguous, extrinsic evidence of the grantor’s intent 
may be considered to resolve the ambiguity. In no event, 
however, may it be used to contradict or vary the terms of 
the writing.” Downs, 336 Or App at 674 (internal citations 
removed). Thus, we remand to the trial court for further 
consideration in light of these principles and any extrinsic 
evidence, such as the statements at issue that we address in 
the next section, that the parties might provide.
B. Exclusion of Hearsay
 Beaumont argues that the trial court erred by not 
permitting her testimony regarding Lee’s intended purpose 
of the trust because it was admissible under the state of 
mind hearsay exception, OEC 803(3) or, alternatively, had 
other circumstantial guarantees of trustworthiness that 
would allow its admission under OEC 803(28)(a). Because 
we are remanding for further proceedings based on the 
first assignment of error and the admissibility of the testi -
mony will likely be an issue again, we address Beaumont’s 
argument of admissibility under OEC 803(3) and conclude 
that statements of Lee’s intent or plan regarding the trust 
were admissible as to his state of mind. We do not reach her 
104 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
argument as to the admissibility of Lee’s beliefs about the 
purpose of the trust under OEC 803(28)(a) because we con -
clude the issue was not preserved.
 As a threshold matter, Dombrowsky argues that 
Beaumont did not preserve her challenge under either OEC 
803(3) or (28)(a). To preserve an issue for appeal, it must be 
raised to the trial court with sufficient specificity for the 
court to consider and correct the error, if warranted. State v. 
Wyatt, 331 Or 335, 344, 15 P3d 22 (2000). Here, Dombrowsky 
claims that Beaumont’s objection in which she stated, “I was 
wondering if we could use a state of mind * * *?” was not suf-
ficient to preserve the issue. We conclude that Beaumont pre-
served the argument under OEC 803(3). Beaumont named 
the hearsay exception she wanted to use, state of mind, 
which was more than sufficient to allow the trial court to 
consider and correct any error. We do however agree with 
Dombrowsky that Beaumont’s statements were insufficient 
for the trial court to understand that she was arguing that 
the evidence should be admitted under OEC 803(28)(a).
 Having concluded the objection under OEC 803(3) 
was preserved, we subsequently conclude that the trial court 
erred in sustaining the objection to Beaumont’s testimony 
because her testimony appeared to be, before it was cut off, 
of Lee’s statements regarding his intent or plan for the trust, 
which fall under the hearsay exception in OEC 803(3).
 “We review ‘the trial court’s ultimate legal con -
clusion, as to whether the hearsay statement is admissible 
under an exception to the hearsay rule, to determine if the 
trial court made an error of law.’ ” State v. Blaylock, 267 Or 
App 455, 460, 341 P3d 758 (2014), rev den, 357 Or 299 (2015) 
(quoting State v. Cook, 340 Or 530, 537, 135 P3d 260 (2006)). 
 OEC 803(3) allows for hearsay to be admitted when 
it is: “A statement of the declarant’s then existing state 
of mind, emotion, sensation or physical condition, such as 
intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling, pain or bodily 
health, but not including a statement of memory or belief to 
prove the fact remembered or believed unless it relates to the 
execution, revocation, identification, or terms of the declar-
ant’s will.” (emphasis added). A statement of a declarant’s 
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 105
state of mind is admissible as evidence that the declarant 
then acted in accordance with that intent, plan, or design. 
State v. Gonzalez, 275 Or App 474, 475, 363 P3d 1291 (2015).
 Here, the testimony objected to was as follows:
“Q: What did you [Beaumont] believe would happen with 
the trust funds after the first of you died?”
“A: The intention that my husband and I wrote this—”
While the wording of the question referred to Beaumont’s 
belief, her answer was framed as her and Lee’s intent. If 
Beaumont was referring to her and Lee’s intent at the time 
of the drafting of the trust instrument, that testimony would 
have been admissible under 803(3) as a statement of Lee’s 
state of mind. Therefore, the trial court erred in sustaining 
the objection to the testimony.
C. Removal of Beaumont as Trustee
 Beaumont argues that the trial court erred when it 
removed her as trustee after finding that she had materi -
ally breached the terms of the trust. Because we agree with 
Beaumont that the trust instrument is ambiguous and thus 
the trial court may find fewer breaches of trust on remand, 
we reverse.
 A trustee may be removed from their position if 
they materially breach the terms of the trust or violate the 
duties and obligations imposed on trustees by statute. ORS 
130.625. ORS 130.625(2) provides that a court may remove 
a trustee if the court finds:
“(a) The trustee has committed a serious breach of trust;
“ * * * * *
“(c) Removal of the trustee best serves the interests of the 
beneficiaries because the trustee is unfit or unwilling, or 
has persistently failed to administer the trust effectively[.]”
 However, not every breach of trust duties justifies 
removal of the trustee. See, e.g., Cloud v. U.S. National Bank, 
280 Or 83, 92, 570 P2d 350 (1977) (declining to remove trustee 
despite a breach of trustee duties because the trust was near 
termination). While the court must evaluate whether to 
remove a trustee based on the circumstances before it, the 
106 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
comments on ORS 130.625 in the Oregon Uniform Trust Code 
offer insight into evaluating those circumstances. See Valerie 
J. Vollmar, The Oregon Uniform Trust Code and Comments , 
42 Willamette L. Rev. 187, 332-33 (2006). The comments note 
that a “serious breach” can either be a single act that causes 
substantial harm or a “series of smaller breaches, none of 
which individually justify removal when considered alone, 
but which do when considered together.” Id. at 333.
 Depending on how the ambiguity of the term “joint 
lives” is resolved on remand, some of Beaumont’s acts might 
no longer be breaches of trust. Further, while Beaumont did 
not communicate with the secondary beneficiaries to the 
extent she was required to under the statute and that may 
weigh in favor of removal, Beaumont and Lee designated 
her as a trustee, even knowing that her knowledge of how to 
administer a trust may be limited. Therefore, if court finds 
fewer breaches of trust on remand, its analysis of the factors 
determining removal of Beaumont as trustee might lead to 
a different conclusion.
D. Attorney Fees
 Attorney fees may be awarded in trust litigation. 
ORS 130.815. Because we are remanding for further pro -
ceedings, the trial court’s award of attorney fees is reversed 
as a matter of law.
E. Trust Reformation
 Beaumont argues that it was error for the trial 
court not to reform the trust to provide for the surviving set-
tlor for the rest of their life because she provided testimonial 
evidence of her and Lee’s intention for the trust. Because 
we are remanding to resolve the ambiguity of what each 
instance of “joint lives” means, which will likely result in 
the admission of additional evidence into the record, we do 
not reach that assignment of error, as the record will likely 
be developed further on remand.
F. In Terrorem Clause
 Beaumont argues that the trial court should have 
enforced the trust’s in terrorem clause because the clause 
extends to challenges to the “administration” to the trust. 
Cite as 350 Or App 92 (2026) 107
We are unpersuaded by Beaumont’s argument because we 
conclude that the provisions of the in terrorem clause that 
include challenges to aspects of the trust other than its 
validity are not authorized by statute and, additionally, that 
it would violate public policy to permit a clause that removes 
a beneficiary’s ability to compel the trustee to administer 
the trust in accordance with the trust terms and the trust -
ee’s statutory obligations.
 Oregon law provides that in terrorem clauses in 
trusts are valid and enforceable. ORS 130.235(1). ORS 
130.235(4) defines an in terrorem clause as: “[A] provision 
in a trust that reduces or eliminates the interest of a ben -
eficiary under the trust if the beneficiary challenges the 
validity of part or all of the trust.” (emphasis added). The 
authority granted by that statute is specifically limited to 
challenges to validity, and as a form of forfeiture, in terro-
rem clauses should be construed strictly to their terms. See 
Fenner v. Fenner, 288 Or App 540, 546, 405 P3d 159 (2017), 
rev den, 362 Or 665 (2018). The same policy considerations 
apply to interpreting the statute that authorizes them.
 Because the statute does not address in terrorem 
clauses concerning challenges to trust administration, it 
is instructive to consider the trust code as a whole. ORS 
130.020(3) provides a number of mandatory rules for trusts 
that cannot be altered by the trust terms, including subsec-
tion (b), “[t]he duty of a trustee to act in good faith and in 
accordance with the purposes of the trust,” and subsection 
(c), “[t]he requirement that a trust and the terms of a trust 
be for the benefit of the trust beneficiaries * * *.” Further, an 
entire subchapter of the code sets out the duties and pow -
ers of the trustee, including, as relevant here, the duties to 
administer the trust, of loyalty, and of prudent adminis -
tration. (ORS 130.650-.733). Presumably, if the legislature 
intended to allow in terrorem clauses to extend to trust 
administration, it would have included that in the statute. 
Further, without the statutory duties placed on the trustee, 
beneficiaries would have no recourse against a trustee who 
was ineffective or acting in bad faith.
 Here, Dombrowsky does not challenge the trust 
validity. Her claim is that Beaumont was not administering 
108 Dombrowsky and Beaumont
the trust according to its terms. Dombrowsky’s position 
would be undermined if she did not agree that the trust 
itself is valid.
 Nevertheless, Beaumont argues that because chal -
lenges to the trustee’s administration and distributions, 
which are included in the trust’s in terrorem clause, and 
because ORS 135.235 authorizes in terrorem clauses pertain-
ing to trust validity, the trial court was obligated to enforce 
the in terrorem clause. But Beaumont does not address the 
lack of statutory authorization to extend the reach of in ter-
rorem clauses to trust administration and does not address 
the potential ramifications of allowing settlors to forbid ben-
eficiaries from challenging trust administration and distri -
butions, which, in a clause as broad as the one here, would 
undermine the ability of beneficiaries to enforce their rights 
in a trust.
III. CONCLUSION
 We determine that several of the rulings of the trial 
court were in error. It was error for the trial court to conclude 
that the term “joint lives” is unambiguous, to exclude evi -
dence of Lee’s intent or plan for the trust at the time the trust 
was created, to remove Beaumont as trustee, and to award 
Dombrowsky attorney fees. Because we are remanding for 
further proceedings, we do not reach whether Beaumont 
provided clear and convincing evidence that would permit 
reformation of the trust. However, we do determine that the 
trial court did not err by refusing to enforce the in terrorem 
clause against Dombrowsky for bringing a challenge to the 
administration of the trust.
 Reversed and remanded.
