A185052
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/28/m._r._d.__k._r._k._v._j._h._d..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10865716/m-r-d-k-r-k-v-j-h-d/
Caption: M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
Date: 2026-05-28

No. 459 May 28, 2026 57
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
M. R. D.,
Petitioner-Respondent,
 v.
J. H. D.,
Respondent-Appellant.
Baker County Circuit Court
24SK00993; A185052 (Control)
K. R. K.,
Petitioner-Respondent,
 v.
J. H. D.,
Respondent-Appellant.
Baker County Circuit Court
24SK00992; A185053
Matthew B. Shirtcliff, Judge.
Argued and submitted October 15, 2025.
Adam L. Dean argued the cause for appellant. Also on 
the brief was Dean Law Group, P. C.
No appearance for respondents.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
O’Connor, Judge.
POWERS, J.
Affirmed.
58 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 59
 POWERS, J.
 Respondent appeals from two judgments imposing 
permanent stalking protective orders (SPO) against him 
under ORS 30.866, advancing three arguments. In two 
arguments, he asserts that the trial court erred in grant -
ing SPOs to both petitioner M and petitioner K because the 
qualifying expressive contacts relied upon—which were 
the same incidents for each case—were insufficient under 
Oregon law and the non-expressive nature of those contacts 
would not have caused K reasonable apprehension or alarm 
for his personal safety. We conclude that, given the context 
of the contacts, including past violence, threats to kill peti -
tioners, violation of a previous SPO, and driving from out 
of town to find K to tell him that he wanted to “beat [K]’s 
motherfucking ass,” the evidence was legally sufficient to 
support entry of the SPOs. Respondent also asserts that the 
trial court erred in granting M an SPO because one of the 
qualifying contacts involved an incident between respon -
dent and M’s daughter-in-law, who is not an immediate fam-
ily or household member. Because that argument is not pre-
served for appellate review, we decline to reach the merits. 
Accordingly, we affirm.
 Absent de novo review, which respondent does not 
request and which is not appropriate in this case, we review 
the trial court’s factual findings “for any supporting evidence 
and its legal conclusions for legal error.” H. L. P. v. Jones , 
309 Or App 108, 109, 481 P3d 415 (2021). Given respondent’s 
challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence, “we view the evi-
dence and all reasonable inferences that may be drawn from 
it in the light most favorable to the trial court’s disposition 
and assess whether, when so viewed, the record is legally 
sufficient to permit that outcome.” Id. (internal quotation 
marks omitted). In so doing, we defer to the trial court’s 
implicit and explicit credibility determinations. M. C. H. 
v. Milligan, 208 Or App 229, 231, 145 P3d 180 (2006).
 We begin by describing the background, including 
the context of the parties’ relationship, in accordance with 
our standard of review. Respondent and petitioner M were 
married for approximately 20 years. Petitioner K is M’s son 
from a prior relationship. K and respondent had a severely 
60 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
strained relationship and a falling out—approximately 
eight years before the underlying events at issue in this 
case—due to a business dispute and respondent’s violence 
against M. Although K and M maintained a relationship, K 
and respondent had no relationship with one another since 
that falling out.
 K and M both described violent events before and 
during the two-year period related to the SPOs. See ORS 
30.866(6) (providing that an SPO action “must be commenced 
within two years of the conduct giving rise to the claim”). 
Before the two-year period, respondent punched holes in M’s 
car window because he was upset that she did not answer 
his phone call, and respondent threatened to choke M if she 
called the police during an argument. In a separate inter -
action, respondent locked M in an RV, pushed her into the 
bedroom, and grabbed her hair, while yelling that if M left 
him and took any of his personal items, he “would slit [K]’s 
throat, make [M] watch, and then [M] would be next.”
 In addition to those instances, K and M testified 
about other threats and acts of violence within the two-
year period. Specifically, respondent threatened that, if M 
touched his possessions, respondent would “kill [K] first and 
then [M] would be next.” M left the home in response to that 
threat, but she needed to return to get some of her things, 
and she told respondent that she was going to return. 
Knowing that M was coming back, respondent left an array 
of organized keys and a handgun on the table, which the 
trial court found to be displayed in a threatening manner. 
Respondent also threatened to go to M’s work and “throw[ ] 
a fit” if she did not send him money and told M’s boss that M 
stole money from him. At one point, while respondent was 
in Arizona, M went to their shared storage facility in Idaho 
to collect personal items. While there, respondent yelled at 
M through a security camera system, saying that he was 
“going to kick your ass” and to “come back next week and 
see what you get.” Respondent showed up at that storage 
facility the next day, “flipping [M] off” in the camera and 
showing her that he could arrive at her location quickly. M 
obtained a restraining order in the state of Idaho, which 
was in effect from December 2023 to January 2024. While 
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 61
that order was in effect, respondent contacted her through 
the video camera system at the storage facility for a second 
time and again flipped her off and yelled at her through the 
camera.
 With that background in mind, we turn to the two 
contacts at issue in this case, which occurred in March 2024. 
At that point, respondent and M had separated and were 
going through a divorce. Following a deposition related to the 
dissolution proceedings, respondent drove from Pendleton, 
Oregon, to Baker City, Oregon—an approximate hour and a 
half drive—looking for K. As K was driving away from his 
home, he noticed a vehicle approaching him. Because the 
road was narrow, K pulled over to let the oncoming vehicle 
pass. Before he could see who was driving the car, K noticed 
that the oncoming driver began “flipping [him] off.” K pulled 
up next to the vehicle, rolled down his window, and noticed 
it was respondent. At this point, both cars were stopped 
side-by-side. K asked what respondent wanted. Respondent 
answered that “everything you have is because of me you 
motherfucking piece of shit,” and “I want to beat your moth-
erfucking ass, you motherfucking piece of shit.” K testified 
that respondent was “in a rage and it’s—it’s just flat scary.” 
K rolled up the window and drove away. K tried to call his 
wife, B, at home and then called the police. K also called 
his mother, and they locked down both her business and 
K’s business in fear that respondent would go there. M had 
the police check her house to make sure respondent was not 
there and then met the police at K’s house, where she com-
pleted a police report.
 After meeting K on the street, respondent continued 
up the road and then turned onto the dead-end road to K’s 
home and pulled into K’s driveway. B was outside with their 
one-year-old son. She told respondent that he was not wel -
come and that he needed to leave. Respondent began yell -
ing, “FU, you’re all a bunch of cowards,” and “I’m coming for 
you.” B testified that he was leaning out of his window and 
that he was “angry” and “screaming.” Respondent backed 
out of the driveway and left.
 After those incidents, K and M each petitioned for 
an SPO. At a consolidated hearing, K and M each testified 
62 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
that they were afraid of respondent, that they knew about 
the threats that respondent had made against them, that 
they were aware of past violent acts, and that they knew 
respondent had extensive practice with firearms and typi -
cally carried a firearm. Respondent testified that he made 
the threats but denied looking for K, instead explaining that 
he was looking for his truck. At the end of the hearing, the 
parties argued about which incidents qualified as a contact, 
each presenting the court with supporting caselaw. The 
court noted that “the parties have cited between them over 
fifteen cases just now[,]” and so it asked the parties to brief 
their arguments based on the record. The parties agreed. 
In their written closing argument, petitioners asserted that 
the first contact involved the interaction on March 15, 2024, 
between respondent and K, and that respondent made a sec-
ond contact on March 15, 2024, with B.
 The trial court issued a letter opinion with its find-
ings and conclusions. The court found two separate contacts: 
(1) the interaction between respondent and K while in their 
vehicles, finding that “I want to kick your motherfucking 
ass” was a threat and (2) the interaction between respon -
dent and B, finding that “I am coming for you” was a threat. 
The court found that these were separate contacts, noting 
that respondent, when faced with the opportunity to turn 
his vehicle back toward Baker City, chose to drive up a dead-
end road to the home of K and make an additional threat 
to a separate individual, thus there was a sufficient pause 
related to separate episodes. With respect to whether the 
contacts were unwanted, the court found that it was undis-
puted that, by January 2024, M made it clear that she did 
not want contact with respondent and that, due to the pre -
vious severely strained relationship between K and respon-
dent and the fact that they had not had a relationship for 
years, respondent knew or should have known that K did 
not want contact.
 The trial court also found that the threats were 
sufficiently imminent. With respect to the first contact, the 
court found that respondent’s threat, “I want to beat your 
motherfucking ass,” was sufficiently imminent, explaining 
that respondent’s decision to keep driving towards K’s home 
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 63
demonstrated an intent to further seek out K, which sup -
ported the intent of his threat and its imminence. The court 
noted that respondent verified that he made the statement 
and that respondent became visibly angry during his trial 
testimony as he recounted the event. With respect to the 
statement, “I am coming for you,” the trial court found that 
the statement could only be interpreted as a threat of harm 
in light of the prior statements and actions of respondent, 
and thus, it was an unequivocal threat and, in light of the 
factual history and totality of the circumstances, sufficiently 
clear and imminent.
 The trial court further concluded that both petition-
ers and B were alarmed by the contacts, explicitly finding 
that M, K, and B were credible, and that the alarm caused 
reasonable apprehension on the part of both petitioners. The 
court noted that that was especially true in light of the his-
tory and prior behavior of respondent and the knowledge 
that respondent typically carried firearms. The court added 
that K was fully aware of the harm that respondent caused 
his mother and of respondent’s prior threats to kill him. The 
court explained that the alarm was objectively reasonable 
considering the clear and credible descriptions of rage by 
respondent dating back from before the two-year period. 
Respondent timely appealed, challenging both of the SPOs.
 On appeal, respondent asserts that the trial court 
erred because the qualifying expressive contacts relied 
upon—which were the same incidents for each case—were 
insufficient under Oregon law and the non-expressive 
nature of those contacts would not have caused petitioners 
reasonable apprehension or alarm for their personal safety. 
In addition, he argues that the trial court erred because one 
of the contacts involved an incident between respondent and 
B, who is not an immediate family or household member of 
M, and thus that incident cannot qualify as a contact with 
respect to M.
 We begin with the governing law. To obtain an SPO 
under ORS 30.866, the civil stalking statute, a petitioner 
must establish by a preponderance of the evidence that: 
(1) the respondent engaged in at least two unwanted con -
tacts with the petitioner or a member of the petitioner’s 
64 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
immediate family or household within the preceding two 
years; (2) each contact gave rise to subjective alarm that was 
objectively reasonable; and (3) the contacts, when considered 
together, gave rise to objectively reasonable apprehension 
regarding the petitioner’s personal safety or that of a house-
hold or family member. ORS 30.866(1); C. J. R. v. Fleming , 
265 Or App 342, 348-49, 336 P3d 534 (2014). 1 The statute 
also requires proof that the respondent acted with at least a 
reckless mental state. ORS 30.866(1)(a); C. Q. R. v. Wafula, 
305 Or App 344, 353, 471 P3d 786 (2020).
 ORS 163.730(3) provides a definition of what quali-
fies as a contact and includes:
 “(a) Coming into the visual or physical presence of the 
other person;
 “ * * * * *
 “(e) Speaking with the other person by any means[.]”2
 1 ORS 30.866(1) provides, in full: 
 “(1) A petitioner may bring a civil action in a circuit court for a court’s 
stalking protective order or for damages, or both, against a respondent if:
 “(a) The respondent intentionally, knowingly or recklessly engages in 
repeated and unwanted contact with the petitioner or a member of the peti-
tioner’s immediate family or household thereby alarming or coercing the 
petitioner;
 “(b) It is objectively reasonable for a person in the petitioner’s situation 
to have been alarmed or coerced by the contact; and
 “(c) The repeated and unwanted contact causes the petitioner reason -
able apprehension regarding the personal safety of the petitioner or a mem-
ber of the petitioner’s immediate family or household.”
 2 ORS 163.730 has been amended since the underlying incident in this case. 
Or Laws 2024, ch 90, § 1. Because the amendments do not affect our analysis, 
we refer to the current version of the statute in this opinion. ORS 163.730(3) pro -
vides, in full:
 “(3) ‘Contact’ includes but is not limited to:
 “(a) Coming into the visual or physical presence of the other person;
 “(b) Following the other person;
 “(c) Waiting outside the home, property, place of work or school of the 
other person or of a member of that person’s family or household;
 “(d) Sending or making written or electronic communications in any 
form to the other person;
 “(e) Speaking with the other person by any means;
 “(f) Communicating with the other person through a third person;
 “(g) Committing a crime against the other person;
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 65
 When the alleged contacts involve speech, consti -
tutional protections are implicated. K. R. v. Erazo , 248 Or 
App 700, 705, 274 P3d 214 (2012) (noting that “if a ‘con -
tact’ involves speech, Article I, section 8, of the Oregon 
Constitution requires proof that it is a threat”). Only state-
ments constituting a “threat” qualify as a contact. State v. 
Rangel, 328 Or 294, 303, 977 P2d 379 (1999) (explaining 
that, “[i]f the contact in question amounts to communica -
tion by speech or writing, only a threat will be sufficient to 
cause apprehension or fear resulting from the perception of 
danger, as ORS 163.730 requires” (internal quotation marks 
omitted)). A “threat” is a communication that creates fear 
of imminent and serious personal violence, is unequivocal, 
and is objectively likely to be followed by unlawful action. 
Rangel, 328 Or at 303. An imminent threat is one that 
is “ready to take place” or “near at hand,” but it need not 
convey a risk of “immediate” harm. S. L. L. v. MacDonald , 
267 Or App 628, 633, 340 P3d 773 (2014). A threat does not 
include hyperbole, rhetorical overstatement, or ineffectual 
expressions of anger. Rangel, 328 Or at 303. Speech falling 
short of a “threat” under Rangel cannot independently serve 
as a qualifying contact, although it may be considered as 
 “(h) Communicating with a third person who has some relationship to 
the other person with the intent of affecting the third person’s relationship 
with the other person;
 “(i) Communicating with business entities with the intent of affecting 
some right or interest of the other person;
 “(j) Damaging the other person’s home, property, place of work or school;
 “(k) Delivering directly or through a third person any object to the home, 
property, place of work or school of the other person;
 “(L) Service of process or other legal documents unless the other person 
is served as provided in ORCP 7 or 9;
 “(m) Obtaining, possessing, transferring, creating, uttering or convert -
ing to the person’s own use the personal identification of the other person;
 “(n) Disclosing an image of the other person, whose intimate parts are 
visible or who is engaged in sexual conduct, without the consent of the other 
person;
 “(o) The use of an electronic service, application, device or other elec -
tronic means to obtain, monitor or interfere with the location, communica -
tion or activities of the other person, without the consent of the other person; 
or
 “(p) Causing a third person to harass, humiliate or injure the other per -
son by disclosing the other person’s name, image or personal information, as 
that term is defined in ORS 30.835, without the consent of the other person.”
66 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
contextual evidence for nonexpressive conduct. M. C. H. v. 
Milligan, 208 Or App 229, 236-37, 145 P3d 180 (2006).
 In determining whether an expressive contact is an 
“unequivocal” threat of “serious physical harm,” we may look 
to contextual factors. M. D. O. v. Desantis, 302 Or App 751, 
761-62, 461 P3d 1066 (2020). We have explained that con -
tacts that may “appear innocuous when viewed in isolation 
often take on a different character when viewed either in 
combination or against the backdrop of one party’s assaul-
tive behavior towards the other.” L. B. v. Essin, 170 Or App 
509, 518, 12 P3d 1003 (2000), rev den, 331 Or 674 (2001).
 With that context in mind, we turn to the first con-
tact. Respondent specifically argues that his statement that 
“I want to beat your motherfucking ass, you motherfucking 
piece of shit” lacked imminency because respondent and K 
were in their respective vehicles on a public roadway, nei -
ther man got out of his vehicle, and respondent stated that 
he “wanted” to beat K’s “ass,” not that he “would” beat K’s 
“ass,” and thus the statement was hyperbole that expressed 
anger and frustration. Respondent asserts that the fact that 
both men remained in their vehicles supports the conclu -
sion that it was not an unequivocal threat that objectively 
instilled fear of imminent and personal violence.
 As an initial matter, although respondent and K 
were in their respective vehicles on a public roadway, that 
fact alone is not dispositive. Indeed, in M. D. O. , where the 
parties were in their respective trucks in a parking lot, we 
focused on the broader context of that statement beyond their 
immediate surroundings. 302 Or App at 762-63 (explain -
ing that, although the respondent “might be correct that 
he would have had to move his car or exit his car to cause 
injury to [the] petitioner, that does not mean his statement 
was not a threat of imminent serious harm— i.e., threaten-
ing harm that is near at hand” (internal quotation marks 
omitted)). Importantly, we must consider the entire context 
of respondent and K’s interaction, which includes past phys-
ical violence and threats.
 Here, K knew that respondent had threatened to 
kill him twice and had physically harmed his mother. He 
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 67
also knew that respondent had subjected M to disturbing 
and persistent communication through multiple channels, 
including texts and security camera systems, undeterred 
by requests to stop or the previous temporary restraining 
order. There is evidence to support that the parties had a 
highly acrimonious relationship and that any interaction 
would be unwanted. Further, respondent’s statement that he 
“want[ed] to beat [K]’s motherfucking ass” was accompanied 
by actions—particularly driving from out of town to look for 
K, immediately flipping K off, and then continuing to K’s 
house after K left. Against that backdrop, we conclude that 
there was evidence—including respondent driving approx -
imately an hour and a half to find K, confronting K, and 
telling K, “I want to beat your motherfucking ass, you moth-
erfucking piece of shit”—from which the trial court could 
conclude that respondent’s threat was objectively likely to 
be followed by unlawful acts. See ORS 163. 730( 3 )( a) ( defin-
ing contact as including “coming into the visual or physical 
presence of the other person”); see also L. B., 170 Or App at 
518 (noting that what could be an innocuous contact may 
be viewed differently when viewed in context of the par -
ty’s behavior toward another); M. D. O., 302 Or App at 762 
(concluding that the respondent’s statement—“If I don’t get 
you now, I’ll get you later”—was a threat of imminent seri -
ous harm based on contextual factors including the highly 
acrimonious relationship between the parties); S. L. L. , 
267 Or App at 633 (concluding that the respondent’s tele -
phonic threats were “imminent” based on contextual factors, 
such as past domestic violence and violation of a no-contact 
order); A. Z. v. Lange, 336 Or App 652, 656-57, 562 P3d 647 
(2024) (explaining that contextual factors, such as physi -
cal violence and obsessive conduct, provide meaning to the 
respondent’s message that “it’s not gonna end well for [the 
petitioner] and that he’s not gonna stop until he’s in jail”).
 For similar reasons, given the context and history 
between the parties, we conclude that the alarm was objec -
tively reasonable. Respondent’s reliance on State v. Hejazi, 
323 Or App 752, 524 P3d 534 (2023), is unavailing. In that 
case, we observed that the defendant and the person to 
whom he directed the statements were practically strangers 
and that the facts in that case did not indicate that they had 
68 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
any relationship aside from the three discrete encounters at 
issue. Id. at 758; see State v. Johnson, 328 Or App 340, 347, 
536 P3d 1029 (2023), rev den, 372 Or 588 (2024) (observing 
that the defendant and the victim in Hejazi were “practically 
strangers and that the facts in that case did not indicate 
that they had any relationship aside from the three encoun-
ters at issue”). Unlike Hejazi, however, the parties’ previ-
ous—and severely strained—relationship, which includes 
threats and violence, provides support for the trial court’s 
determination that K’s alarm was objectively reasonable. 
Accordingly, we conclude that the trial court did not err in 
determining that the contact was a qualifying contact.
 Turning to the second contact, respondent argues 
that “I am coming for you” was not an unequivocal threat, 
that it could have many meanings, and that it did not give 
rise to any specific temporal indication of imminency. We 
readily conclude that, based on the totality of the circum -
stances—including prior threats to kill both petitioners, 
physical violence, disregard of requests not to contact, includ-
ing a violation of a previous protective order, and driving an 
hour and a half looking for K—there is evidence to support 
that that statement, as the trial court found, could “only be 
interpreted as a threat of harm” that is near at hand.
 We reject respondent’s reliance on J. L. B. v. Braude, 
250 Or App 122, 279 P3d 290 (2012), to support his argu -
ment that the situations lacked serious, imminent harm 
because that case is factually distinguishable. In J. L. B., we 
reversed a trial court order granting an SPO obtained after 
the petitioner witnessed the respondent driving past her 
home more than a dozen times, sometimes slowly, parking 
by the driveway, and was often seen in the neighborhood. 
250 Or App at 125-26, 129-31. In that case, we explained 
that the respondents “did not enter [the] petitioner’s prop -
erty during those incidents, did not make threatening ges -
tures or comments (indeed, they did not attempt to commu-
nicate with [the] petitioner or her neighbors in any way), and 
did not wait at the end of her driveway for lengthy periods of 
time.” Id. at 129-30. That case is factually distinguishable 
from this situation. Here, respondent drove and parked in 
K’s driveway and yelled at B, “I’m coming for you,” while in a 
Cite as 350 Or App 57 (2026) 69
“rage,” and there was a known history of death threats and 
violence.
 Respondent’s reliance on M. F. v. Falkenstein, 236 
Or App 445, 236 P3d 798 (2010), to support his argument is 
similarly unavailing. In that case, we reversed a SPO after 
concluding that there was
“no evidence that [the] respondent’s actions were explic -
itly threatening; for example, there was no evidence that 
[the] respondent made threatening gestures or movements 
towards [the] petitioner or otherwise exhibited an intent to 
harm her. Nor was there evidence that any of the acts were 
implicitly threatening; for example, there was no evidence 
of prior acts of violence or abuse by respondent.”
236 Or App at 453. Here, however, there was evidence that 
respondent threatened petitioners, and there is evidence of 
prior acts of violence both before and during the two-year 
period at issue for the SPOs.
 In short, given the evidence of threats and harass -
ment, past violence, past violation of a temporary protec -
tive order, and distance that petitioner traveled to find K 
to threaten him, we conclude that there was evidence from 
which the trial court could conclude, as it did, that these 
incidents were qualifying contacts.
 In respondent’s second main argument, he asserts 
that the trial court erred in granting M’s SPO based an inci-
dent between respondent and B, who was neither a member 
of M’s immediate family nor household. At oral argument, 
respondent acknowledged that this argument was not raised 
before the trial court; however, he argued that, because he 
did not know that the trial court would rely on that when it 
issued the SPO with respect to M, respondent did not have 
an opportunity to raise the argument before the court.
 Generally, an issue not preserved in the trial court 
will not be considered on appeal. Ailes v. Portland Meadows, 
Inc., 312 Or 376, 380, 823 P2d 956 (1991). Preservation is 
a doctrine rooted in practicality, not technicality. State v. 
Skotland, 372 Or 319, 326, 549 P3d 534 (2024). Requiring 
an argument to be preserved advances fairness and effi -
ciency by affording the opposing parties and the trial court 
70 M. R. D. / K. R. K. v. J. H. D.
a meaningful opportunity to engage with the merits of an 
argument and potentially avoid error altogether. Id.
 Here, the contact was alleged in the stalking order 
petition, the incident was litigated, and there was significant 
testimony around that contact. Additionally, at the close of 
the hearing, the trial court requested additional briefing 
specifically on the issue of qualifying contacts. At no point, 
however, did respondent alert the trial court or petitioner to 
the argument advanced on appeal. Accordingly, we conclude 
the error is not preserved. Further, because respondent 
does not request plain-error review, we decline to reach the 
merits.
 Affirmed.
