A182097
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/28/siskiyou_pines_v._civil_west_engineering_services.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10865712/siskiyou-pines-v-civil-west-engineering-services/
Caption: Siskiyou Pines v. Civil West Engineering Services
Date: 2026-05-28

28 May 28, 2026 No. 456
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
 STATE OF OREGON
SISKIYOU PINES DEVELOPMENTS LLC, 
an Oregon limited liability company,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
CIVIL WEST ENGINEERING SERVICES, INC.; 
Manny Ramos; the City of Cave Junction; 
Meadow Martell; and Rebecca Patton,
Defendants-Respondents.
Josephine County Circuit Court
21CV35445; A182097
Robert S. Bain, Judge.
Argued and submitted April 11, 2025.
Nathan R. Morales argued the cause for appellant. Also 
on the briefs were Stoel Rives LLP and Rachelle D. Collins.
David M. Weitzman argued the cause for respondents 
Civil West Engineering Services, Inc. and Manny Ramos. 
Also on the brief were W. Scott Clement and Clement & 
Drotz, PLLC.
Casey S. Murdock argued the cause for respondents The 
City of Cave Junction, Meadow Martell and Rebecca Patton. 
Also on the brief was Frohnmayer Deatherage.
Before Shorr, Presiding Judge, Powers, Judge, and 
DeVore, Senior Judge.
SHORR, P. J.
Affirmed.
Cite as 350 Or App 28 (2026) 29
30 Siskiyou Pines v. Civil West Engineering Services
 SHORR, P. J.
 Plaintiff Siskiyou Pines Developments LLC brought 
this action asserting various tort claims against defendants 
the City of Cave Junction and two of its employees (collec -
tively, the City) and Civil West Engineering Services, Inc. 
and one of its employees (collectively, Civil West). The trial 
court granted defendants’ motions for summary judgment, 
and plaintiff appeals from the resulting general judgment 
dismissing all of its claims against defendants. We affirm.
 “We review a trial court’s grant of summary judg -
ment for errors of law and will affirm if there are no gen -
uine disputes about any material fact and the moving 
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Beneficial 
Oregon, Inc. v. Bivins, 313 Or App 275, 277, 496 P3d 1104 
(2021) (internal quotation marks omitted). In so doing, “we 
view the facts in the light most favorable to the nonmoving 
part[y],” here plaintiff, and we “examine whether no objec-
tively reasonable juror could find in their favor on the ques-
tion at issue.” Id.
 Plaintiff is a development company that purchased 
real property in Cave Junction to develop a residential hous-
ing subdivision. In May 2020, plaintiff advised the City that 
it was prepared to submit its final plat for approval. Civil 
West’s role in the approval process was as a private corpora-
tion under contract with the City to perform “various profes-
sional engineering services * * * as directed by the City.” The 
City required plaintiff to satisfy certain conditions before it 
would approve the final plat. In December 2020, frustrated 
by the City’s continued refusal to sign off on the final plat, 
plaintiff filed a petition for writ of mandamus. In November 
2021, the court issued a writ of mandamus requiring the 
City to sign off on the final plat, which the City did on 
December 9, 2021.1
 The procedural history in this case overlaps with 
the mandamus action. On September 8, 2021, plaintiff 
filed a complaint against Civil West, asserting claims of 
negligence, negligent misrepresentation, and intentional 
 1 The court’s decision in the mandamus action was not appealed and, as a 
result, is not before us.
Cite as 350 Or App 28 (2026) 31
interference with prospective economic advantage (IIPEA). 
On March 1, 2022, plaintiff served the City with a tort claim 
notice pursuant to ORS 30.275 of the Oregon Tort Claims 
Act (OTCA). The notice did not identify Civil West or any 
of its employees. On June 22, 2022, plaintiff amended its 
complaint to add a claim of IIPEA against the City. The City 
and Civil West both moved for summary judgment on multi-
ple grounds. The trial court granted summary judgment on 
several of those grounds, including, as relevant here: (1) on 
all claims against both defendants because plaintiff failed 
to provide timely tort claim notice; (2) on the negligence 
and negligent misrepresentation claims against Civil West 
because Civil West did not owe plaintiff a statutory duty for 
purposes of negligence; and (3) the IIPEA claims against 
both defendants because plaintiff failed to identify a suffi -
ciently specific prospective economic relationship. Plaintiff 
appeals, assigning error to the trial court’s grant of sum -
mary judgment on those three grounds.
 Plaintiff’s first assignment of error argues that the 
trial court erred in granting summary judgment on the basis 
that plaintiff failed to provide timely tort claim notice to the 
City and Civil West.2 ORS 30.275(1) provides that “[n]o action 
arising from any act or omission of a public body or an officer, 
employee or agent of a public body within the scope of the 
[OTCA] shall be maintained unless notice of claim is given.” 
ORS 30.275(2)(b) requires that notice shall be given “within 
180 days after the alleged loss or injury.” The required notice 
can be satisfied in several ways, including, as asserted by 
plaintiff here, by giving formal notice of the claim, ORS 
30.275(3)(a). Plaintiff bears “the burden of proving that notice 
of claim was given as required.” ORS 30.275(7).
 We begin with notice to the City. In its letter opin -
ion, the trial court concluded that plaintiff’s tort claim 
 2 Plaintiff raises several assignments of error. Plaintiff’s first assign -
ment raises a jurisdictional issue so we start—and ultimately end—with that 
assignment. See Kutz v. Lee, 291 Or App 470, 480, 422 P3d 362 (2018) (“When a 
defendant asserts that a plaintiff’s claims are subject to the OTCA and that the 
plaintiff failed to give timely notice, it raises a question of subject matter juris -
diction.”). As explained further in this opinion, we conclude that plaintiff failed 
to give timely notice to the City and Civil West. As a result, the trial court lacked 
jurisdiction over plaintiff’s claims and we do not need to reach plaintiff’s other 
assignments of error.
32 Siskiyou Pines v. Civil West Engineering Services
notice to the City, delivered on March 1, 2022, was untimely 
because plaintiff failed to provide notice within 180 days 
of the alleged loss or injury pursuant to ORS 30.275(2)(b). 
One hundred and eighty days prior to plaintiff’s delivery of 
notice to the City was September 2, 2021, during which time 
plaintiff’s mandamus proceeding was pending. The parties 
do not appear to dispute that, during the pendency of the 
mandamus proceeding, the City did not have jurisdiction to 
approve the final plat, 3 and therefore, any injury accruing 
during that time could not be attributed to the City, and 
notice was not timely provided for any injury accruing prior 
to the filing of mandamus. However, on appeal, plaintiff 
argues that the trial court erred in concluding that its tort 
claim notice to the City was untimely, relying solely on its 
contention that the City engaged in a continuing tort that 
continued at least through the date it delivered its tort claim 
notice on March 1, 2022. See Holdner v. Columbia County, 51 
Or App 605, 613, 627 P2d 4 (1981) (“[W]hen a continuing 
tort is involved, a notice of claim filed any time during the 
continuance of the conduct or within 180 days after its con-
clusion is necessarily timely.”). That is, plaintiff effectively 
concedes that it provided timely tort claim notice only if 
defendants engaged in a continuing tort.
 Assuming without deciding that plaintiff ade -
quately preserved its “continuing tort” argument, we con -
clude that plaintiff failed to sufficiently allege or present a 
disputed issue of fact that defendants engaged in a continu-
ing tort. 4 A party does not allege a continuing tort by so 
“[d]esignating a series of discrete acts, even if connected in 
design or intent.” Davis v. Bostick, 282 Or 667, 674, 580 P2d 
544 (1978). Rather, a continuing tort is “where either no sin-
gle act gives rise to the tort claim or the plaintiff’s harm can 
 3 ORS 227.179(2) provides: “The governing body shall retain jurisdiction to 
make a land use decision on the application until a petition for a writ of manda -
mus is filed. Upon filing a petition under ORS 34.130, jurisdiction for all decisions 
regarding the application, including settlement, shall be with the circuit court.”
 4 For its continuing-tort theory, plaintiff relies solely on the allegations in its 
complaint and a passing reference in its tort-claim notice. We assume without 
deciding that that created a sufficient factual record for the trial court to decide 
the issue on summary judgment. As we discuss, however, the allegations and 
tort-claim notice, even assuming their truth, do not provide the basis for a con -
tinuing tort as a matter of law.
Cite as 350 Or App 28 (2026) 33
be determined only at the end of a series of alleged wrongful 
acts based on the cumulative effect of the wrongful behav -
ior.” Curzi v. Oregon State Lottery, 286 Or App 254, 266, 398 
P3d 977, rev den, 362 Or 175 (2017) (emphasis in original).
 In its amended complaint, plaintiff defined “the 
Project” as plaintiff’s plan “to obtain preliminary then final 
plat approval for the first phase of development of a subdi -
vision, complete with all roads, sidewalks, and build-ready 
residential lots.”5 The complaint alleged that both defen -
dants caused:
“more than 24 months of delay of the Project and delayed 
the City’s approval of the Final Plat by more than 12 
months, which was signed by Defendant Patton on behalf 
of the City on December 9, 2021, and was later recorded in 
the deeds and records of Josephine County on December 
15, 2021. The lost profits suffered by Plaintiff as a result is 
estimated to be $8,160,000.”
Plaintiff also alleged actual damages in the amount of 
$330,000. Plaintiff’s allegations and claims for lost profits 
and damages, as set forth in the complaint, relate to the 
approval of the final plat and not to conduct occurring after 
the approval.
 However, plaintiff points us to the next section of the 
complaint. After alleging lost profits and damages resulting 
from the delay in final plat approval, plaintiff also alleges 
that, following recording of the final plat, the City continued 
to cause additional delays such as delaying permit approval 
for duplexes in the subdivision and charging excessive fees 
for those permits.
 Those allegations do not constitute a continuing 
tort. In making the allegations of additional post-approval 
delays, which were not tied to the claim for lost profits or 
damages, plaintiff apparently sought to demonstrate the 
City’s “improper” motivations and “personal enmity” toward 
plaintiff, rather than allege a continuing tort. Regardless of 
the apparent motivations, plaintiff did not allege a separate 
harm apart from the City’s failure to approve the final plat. 
 5 The same definition of the Project appears in plaintiff’s original complaint 
against Civil West and plaintiff’s opening brief on appeal.
34 Siskiyou Pines v. Civil West Engineering Services
Moreover, plaintiff’s complaint framed the project as a plan to 
obtain “final plat approval for the first phase of development 
of a subdivision”—and not as completion of the subdivision in 
its entirety. The delay in final plat approval was separately 
actionable because plaintiff claimed that it had been harmed 
by that delay in the amount of $8,490,000 of lost profits and 
actual damages. See Davis , 282 Or at 672-73 (no continuing 
tort where misconduct was “separately actionable” and “each 
was capable of producing compensable harm”). This is not 
a continuing tort situation where “plaintiff’s harm can be 
determined only at the end of a series of alleged wrongful 
acts.” Curzi, 286 Or App at 266. Rather, plaintiff’s allegations 
amount to “repetitious discrete torts which result in similar 
but separate injuries.” Holdner, 51 Or App at 613.
 Because plaintiff has not alleged a continuing tort, 
we agree with the trial court that plaintiff’s notice to the 
City on March 1, 2022, was untimely because it was not 
made within 180 days after the alleged loss or injury pur -
suant to ORS 30.275(2)(b). One hundred eighty days prior to 
the notice, plaintiff’s mandamus proceeding was still pend-
ing. During that time, the City did not have jurisdiction to 
approve the final plat. The trial court did not err in grant -
ing summary judgment for the City because plaintiff’s tort 
claim notice was not timely.
 We turn next to whether the trial court erred in 
concluding that plaintiff failed to give timely notice to Civil 
West. In its letter opinion, the trial court concluded:
“It is not disputed that plaintiffs never gave [Civil West], 
as agents for the city, a tort claim notice. Plaintiff did give 
notice to the Cave Junction defendants on March 1, 2022. 
Whether notice to the Civil West defendants was neces -
sary as agents of the public body, the court does not need 
to decide because the notice that was given was untimely.”
On appeal, plaintiff contends that the trial court erred in 
granting summary judgment for Civil West based on lack of 
timely notice without first determining whether Civil West 
was an agent of the City, because if they were not, then plain-
tiff was not required to provide them with any notice under 
the OTCA. Civil West appears to agree that the trial court 
erred in not expressly determining whether Civil West was 
Cite as 350 Or App 28 (2026) 35
the City’s agent, but argues that we can nevertheless affirm 
because there were no disputed issues of fact on that issue.
 It is not entirely clear to us that the trial court 
skipped a step as the parties assert, 6 but regardless, we 
conclude that the court did not err in granting summary 
judgment because Civil West argued and presented facts 
that they were agents and those facts were undisputed. See 
Ziebert v. Sun Valley Lumber, Inc., 198 Or App 162, 170 n 5, 
107 P3d 668, rev den, 339 Or 66 (2005) (affirming summary 
judgment on an alternative basis that was argued below 
and presented again on appeal). ORS 30.275(1) requires a 
plaintiff to give notice to an “agent of a public body.” In its 
motion for summary judgment, defendant Civil West pre -
sented facts to support its assertion that it was “undisputed 
that [Civil West] and [its employee Ramos] were agents of 
the City,” entitled to receive timely tort claim notice under 
the OTCA, and that no notice has ever been served upon 
Civil West. Plaintiff then had the burden of producing suf -
ficient evidence to create a genuine factual dispute on that 
issue. See Sharma v. Providence Health & Services-Oregon, 
289 Or App 644, 656, 412 P3d 202, rev den, 363 Or 283 
(2018) (explaining that under ORCP 47 C, plaintiff “had the 
burden of producing evidence on any issue that defendants 
raised in their summary judgment motions”). Plaintiff 
failed to do so.7 In the trial court, plaintiff did not address, 
dispute, or produce any evidence to create a genuine factual 
dispute on the issue of whether Civil West was the City’s 
agent.8 Given that failure and the trial court’s finding that 
 6 A plausible alternative interpretation of the trial court’s ruling is that it 
acknowledged that Civil West was an agent of the City, noted that Civil West had 
not been provided with separate notice, apart from the formal notice that plain-
tiff provided the City, and then declined to decide whether plaintiff was required 
to provide Civil West with its own separate notice because the notice provided to 
the City was nevertheless untimely.
 7 In its response to defendants’ motions for summary judgment, plaintiff 
argued only that its claims were timely because House Bill (HB) 4212 (2020) 
tolled the statute of limitations until June 30, 2022, for claims accruing during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The trial court correctly rejected that argument, and 
plaintiff does not reprise it on appeal. See Yeager v. Montgomery , 331 Or App 
263, 266, 546 P3d 10 (2024) (concluding that the extended statute-of-limitations 
period in HB 4212 ended on December 31, 2021).
 8 At oral argument on appeal, plaintiff agreed that it had not expressly 
disputed that Civil West was an agent of the City in the summary judgment 
proceeding.
36 Siskiyou Pines v. Civil West Engineering Services
no timely notice was ever provided to Civil West, the trial 
court did not err in granting summary judgment for Civil 
West on the tort claim notice issue. See ORCP 47 D (pro -
viding that if the party opposing summary judgment does 
not “set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine 
issue as to any material fact * * *, the court shall grant the 
motion, if appropriate”).
 The trial court’s grant of summary judgment in 
favor of the City and Civil West based on untimely tort 
claim notice disposed of all claims against both defendants. 
Because we affirm that grant of summary judgment, we 
need not reach plaintiff’s remaining assignments of error 
that challenge the trial court’s summary judgment rulings 
dismissing individual legal claims. The trial court did not 
err in dismissing plaintiff’s claims against defendants.
 Affirmed.
