A186539
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/20/jewel_school_dist._v._kc.pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10862978/jewel-school-dist-v-kc/
Caption: Jewel School Dist. v. KC
Date: 2026-05-20

No. 429 May 20, 2026 657
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
JEWELL SCHOOL DISTRICT,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
Kacey KC, 
Oregon State Forester; 
Mike Wilson, State Forest Division Chief; 
and Department of Forestry,
Defendants-Respondents.
Clatsop County Circuit Court
24CV13514; A186539
Beau V. Peterson, Judge.
Argued and submitted March 18, 2026.
John A. DiLorenzo, Jr., argued the cause for appellant. 
Also on the briefs was Davis Wright Tremaine LLP.
Carson L. Whitehead, Assistant Attorney General, 
argued the case for respondents. Also on the brief were Dan 
Rayfield, Attorney General, and Benjamin Gutman, Deputy 
Attorney General.
Before Tookey, Presiding Judge, Jacquot, Judge, and 
Kistler, Senior Judge.
TOOKEY, P. J.
Reversed and remanded.
658 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
 TOOKEY, P. J.
 In this case concerning land designated as “state for-
ests” under ORS 530.010, plaintiff, Jewell School District, a 
public school district located in Clatsop County, asserts that 
defendants, the Oregon Department of Forestry, the Oregon 
State Forester, and the State Forest Division Chief, have 
failed to comply with the Northwest Oregon State Forests 
Management Plan (the 2010 NWFMP). Specifically, plain -
tiff contends that defendants have failed to comply with one 
of the “Asset Management Guidelines” in the 2010 NWFMP, 
by failing to “[m]aintain a budgeting and financial manage-
ment system that assures that revenues derived from these 
state forest lands are sufficient to cover the department’s 
costs of implementing th[e] plan.”
 Plaintiff sought a declaratory judgment and accom-
panying injunctive relief, and the trial court dismissed plain-
tiff’s complaint for lack of standing, determining that “the 
relief that this court could order would not necessarily pro -
vide real relief from the alleged injury.” The trial court also 
denied plaintiff’s motion to amend its complaint as futile.
 On appeal, plaintiff raises two assignments of 
error. First, plaintiff asserts that the trial court erred when 
it dismissed plaintiff’s complaint. Second, plaintiff contends 
that the trial court erred when it denied plaintiff’s motion 
to file an amended complaint. We agree with plaintiff that 
the trial court erred when it dismissed plaintiff’s complaint. 
That conclusion obviates the need to consider plaintiff’s sec-
ond assignment of error. We reverse and remand.
I. BACKGROUND
A. Historical Backdrop
 “Oregon counties and the state have a long history 
of cooperation in the management of Oregon’s forestlands.” 
County of Linn v. State, 319 Or App 288, 292, 510 P3d 962, 
rev den, 370 Or 214 (2022). Under the pertinent statutory 
scheme, ORS 530.010 to 530.181, Oregon counties are autho-
rized “to convey land to the Board [of Forestry], and such 
land is then designated as state forest.” County of Linn, 319 
Or App at 292 (citing ORS 530.010); see also Tillamook Co. 
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 659
v. State Board of Forestry, 302 Or 404, 407-09, 730 P2d 1214 
(1986) (describing the statutory scheme). After such trans -
fer, “the state bears certain management responsibilities 
for that land, and the state and the county that conveyed 
the land to the state divide revenues derived from that land 
under a statutory distribution formula.” County of Linn, 319 
Or App at 293; see also ORS 530.050 (setting forth man -
agement responsibilities of the State Forester); ORS 530.110 
(setting forth distribution formula for revenue derived from 
state forest land acquired from counties).
 Under the statutory distribution formula, revenue 
generated from management of the state forests is split 
between the county within which the revenue was generated 
and the state. ORS 530.110. The parties agree that, at least 
as a general matter, ultimately, the state retains a total of 
36.25 percent of the revenue, and the remainder—63.75 per-
cent of the revenue—is paid to the county. See ORS 530.110. 
Of the 63.75 percent that is paid to the county, 25 percent 
is “credited and paid into the county school fund,” not less 
than 10 percent goes to “the county general fund,” and the 
remainder is “prorated and apportioned to the various tax-
ing districts in which the lands [that generated the revenue] 
are situated.” ORS 530.115.
 The “statutory plan” described above “contemplates 
consensual dealings between the counties and the state 
(through the Board of Forestry), dealings that would cre -
ate enforceable rights insofar as the state’s management of 
formerly county owned forest land is concerned.” Tillamook 
County, 302 Or at 416. We have recognized that counties 
that have transferred land to the state under the statutory 
plan “have a protected, recognizable interest—be it one that 
arises from contract, trust, or otherwise—which entitles 
them to a percentage of revenue as set forth in” that statu-
tory scheme. County of Linn, 319 Or App at 304.
 As noted, plaintiff is a school district located in 
Clatsop County. Clatsop County is one of the Oregon coun -
ties that transferred forest land to the state pursuant to 
the statutory scheme described above, and it receives reve -
nue from the state’s management of that forest land. And a 
660 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
portion of that revenue is transferred to plaintiff pursuant 
to ORS 530.115.
B. The 2010 NWFMP
 In 2010, the Department of Forestry prepared the 
2010 NWFMP, which the Board of Forestry adopted as an 
administrative rule. OAR 629-035-0105(1)(a). As will be 
explained, the 2010 NWFMP presupposes that compliance 
with the 2010 NWFMP will financially benefit local taxing 
districts, such as plaintiff. Given the centrality of the 2010 
NWFMP to our analysis, we summarize its provisions below.
 According to the “preface” in the 2010 NWFMP, it is 
a “visionary plan” aimed toward creating a forest that “pro-
duces sustainable and predictable forest products that gen-
erate jobs and revenues for the benefit of the state, counties, 
and local taxing districts .” (Emphases added.) The preface 
further states that, among other goals, the 2010 NWFMP 
aims to “assure sustainable timber and revenue for the ben-
efit of the Forest Trust Land Counties [e.g., Clatsop County], 
and will also provide for the sustainable forest ecosystems 
and healthy watersheds that are important to Oregonians.”
 The first chapter of the 2010 NWFMP, among 
other things, sets forth its “purpose and scope.” That chap-
ter explains that the “key set of management strategies” 
in the 2010 NWFMP aim to, among other things, “concur -
rently achieve more desirable fish and wildlife habitats and 
improved forest biological diversity[,] and to produce reve -
nue through harvesting of forest products.”
 The second chapter of the 2010 NWFMP—concern -
ing “planning and resources”—recognizes that “timber on 
the northwest Oregon state forests is an asset to the coun -
ties, local taxing districts, and the Common School Fund.” 
(Emphasis added.)
 The third chapter of the 2010 NWFMP presents “the 
guiding principles, forest vision, and resource management 
goals” of the 2010 NWFMP. Among the “guiding principles” 
is that the 2010 NWFMP will “acknowledge the protected 
and recognizable interest of the counties from which most of 
the Board of Forestry Lands were originally derived.”
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 661
 The fourth chapter of the 2010 NWFMP “presents 
the resource management strategies, which are the heart 
of the plan.” Those strategies aim to, among other things, 
produce “a high level of sustainable timber and revenue.”
 Particularly relevant in this case is the fifth chap -
ter of the 2010 NWFMP, titled “Implementation,” which 
“describes guidance and standards for processes and activ -
ities that will be undertaken to implement the strategies 
described in th[e] forest management plan.” And specifi -
cally, a section in that chapter titled “Asset Management 
Guidelines,” which recognizes that the “northwest Oregon 
state forests are a tangible asset of the people of Oregon, 
and of the counties and local taxing districts where the for-
ests are located,” as they provide “both an ecological and 
economic foundation for local communities and the north -
western Oregon region.” 1 (Emphasis added.) It also high -
lights that “[m]aintaining and/or enhancing the value of the 
assets described in this plan is fundamental to maintaining 
the ability of these forest lands to provide for sustainable 
timber.”
 T h a t s e c t i o n o f c h a p t e r fi v e —i.e., “Asset Management 
Guidelines”—contains a bulleted list of “Guidelines for 
Asset Management,” and provides that implementation of 
the 2010 NWFMP “will be consistent” with the Guidelines 
for Asset Management “in order to assure that the asset 
value of these forests is maintained or enhanced through 
plan implementation.” Among those Guidelines for Asset 
Management is a bullet point—which, as explained below, 
the complaint alleges defendants are not in compliance 
with—that reads:
“Maintain a budgeting and financial management system 
that assures that revenues derived from these state for -
est lands are sufficient to cover the department’s costs of 
implementing this plan.”2
 1 Assets are defined in the 2010 NWFMP “as the tangible resources and 
infrastructure on state forest lands,” including “lands,” “forest products,” and 
“fish and wildlife.”
 2 We note that another Asset Management Guideline in the 2010 NWFMP 
is a bullet point providing, “Implement timber accountability strategies and sys -
tems designed to assure that the state and other beneficiaries receive anticipated 
revenue from the sale of timber and other products.” (Emphasis added.)
662 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
 Further, under a heading reading “Summary 
of Anticipated Outcomes from Implementing the Asset 
Management Guidelines,” the 2010 NWFMP provides that 
“[i]mplementation of the plan’s strategies is expected to 
result in significant revenue to the state, counties, and local 
taxing districts.”
C. Plaintiff’s Complaint
 As noted, plaintiff is a public school district located 
in Clatsop County. Plaintiff filed a complaint against defen-
dants, who it alleges “manage and administer [state for -
ests] located within Clatsop County, including the lands 
from which [the school district] derives revenue.” The com-
plaint alleges a single cause of action for declaratory judg -
ment under the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act, ORS 
28.020.
 In particular, plaintiff alleges that Clatsop County 
conveyed “substantial acres of Forest Trust Lands to the 
State pursuant” to the statutory scheme described above, 
and the 2010 NWFMP requires the State Forester to “[m]
aintain a budgeting and financial management system 
that assures that revenues derived from these state forest 
lands are sufficient to cover the department’s costs of imple-
menting th[e] plan.” The complaint further alleges that, 
notwithstanding the requirements of the 2010 NWFMP, 
the “policies implemented by Defendants fail to generate 
sufficient revenue to comply with [that] mandate, resulting 
in insufficient funding for Defendants’ management oper -
ations—and a proportionate decrease in funding for the 
District.”
 Indeed, plaintiff alleges in its complaint that it 
has “received a substantial portion of its funding from the 
revenues generated through Defendants’ management of 
forestlands conveyed by Clatsop County to the State,” but 
that “Defendants have pursued policies that fail to gen -
erate the level of revenue required under Defendants’ 
own rules —resulting in significant revenue shortfalls for 
both Defendants and the [School] District.” (Emphasis in 
original.)
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 663
 In its prayer for relief, plaintiff’s complaint seeks (1) 
a “declaration that Defendants’ policies are in contravention 
of the requirements of the 2010 NWFMP by failing to gen -
erate sufficient revenue ‘to cover the department’s costs of 
implementing’ the management plan and that Defendants 
must either increase timber revenues or substantially 
reduce their budgets,” and (2) an “injunction that requires 
Defendants to comply with the declaratory relief.”
D. The Motion to Dismiss and the Trial Court’s Ruling
 Defendants moved to dismiss the complaint under 
ORCP 21 A(1)(a), asserting that plaintiff “lacks standing to 
assert the claim for relief it asserts.” Defendants argued, 
among other points, that plaintiff could not “demonstrate 
that the relief it requests would have any impact on it at all” 
because plaintiff did not “demand relief that would require 
an increase in revenues to taxing districts in Clatsop County 
or anywhere else” but instead “demands relief that would 
allow either an increase in overall state forest revenue or a 
decrease in the Department budget.” (Emphases in original.) 
As defendants saw it, neither “option is likely to increase 
revenues to Clatsop County and its taxing districts.”
 The trial court agreed with defendants, reasoning 
that “the relief that this court could order would not neces-
sarily provide real relief from the alleged injury” insofar as 
the Department of Forestry could “reduce its costs substan-
tially, it could increase harvest levels in” areas other than 
Clatsop County, “or do both,” and that “none of those actions 
would result in an increase in the timber revenue received” 
by plaintiff.
 As the trial court saw it, “only if the [Department 
of Forestry] was ordered to increase harvest levels equally 
across its management area or specifically within the for -
est land that generates revenue for Plaintiff would the 
relief requested have a real impact on the Plaintiff, and 
those orders would clearly be outside the authority of this 
court and are not the relief requested by Plaintiff in any 
event.”
 The trial court subsequently dismissed plaintiff’s 
complaint, and plaintiff appeals the resulting judgment.
664 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
II. ANALYSIS
A. Legal Standard for Standing and Standard of Review
 The term “standing,” as relevant here, “means the 
right to obtain an adjudication.” Eckles v. State of Oregon , 
306 Or 380, 383, 760 P2d 846 (1988), appeal dismissed, 490 
US 1032, 109 S Ct 1928, 104 L Ed 2d 400 (1989) (discussing 
ways the legal term “standing” is used). Whether a plaintiff 
has standing “largely depends on the statute under which 
the plaintiff seeks relief.” MT & M Gaming, Inc. v. City of 
Portland, 360 Or 544, 553, 383 P3d 800 (2016).
 As noted, in this case, plaintiff seeks relief under 
the Uniform Declaratory Judgments Act. The relevant stat-
ute, ORS 28.020, provides:
“Any person interested under a deed, will, written contract 
or other writing constituting a contract, or whose rights, 
status or other legal relations are affected by a constitu -
tion, statute, municipal charter, ordinance, contract or 
franchise may have determined any question of construc -
tion or validity arising under any such instrument, consti -
tution, statute, municipal charter, ordinance, contract or 
franchise and obtain a declaration of rights, status or other 
legal relations thereunder.”
 To establish standing under that statute, “a plain -
tiff must show that its claim meets three requirements.” 
ACLU of Oregon v. City of Portland, 338 Or App 750, 768, 567 
P3d 1067, rev allowed, 374 Or 372 (2025). First, “the plaintiff 
must establish that the challenged law causes some injury to 
or impact upon a legally recognized interest of the plaintiff’s, 
beyond an abstract interest in the correct application or the 
validity of the law.” MT & M Gaming, Inc. , 360 Or at 554 
(brackets and internal quotation marks omitted). Second, 
the plaintiff “must show that the claimed injury or impact 
is real or probable, not hypothetical or speculative.” Id. at 
555. And, third, the plaintiff “must show that a decision by 
the court will in some sense rectify the injury, i.e., that it 
will have a practical effect on the rights that the plaintiff is 
seeking to vindicate.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted).
 In considering those requirements, as we under -
stand it, “certainty” is not required. See League of Oregon 
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 665
Cities v. State of Oregon, 334 Or 645, 649, 56 P3d 892 (2002) 
(plaintiffs had standing to seek to “invalidate Ballot Measure 
7 (2000),” although “the consequences that plaintiffs * * * 
anticipate are not certain to result from the implementation 
of Measure 7”). Moreover, at this stage of the proceeding, the 
pleadings need only “bear the reasonable inference” that a 
decision by the court will in some sense rectify the injury. 
Hinkley v. Eugene Water & Electric Board, 189 Or App 181, 
186-87, 74 P3d 1146 (2003) (the plaintiff’s allegations “suf -
ficient” where complaint alleged the defendant’s “failure to 
follow the requirements of law in entering into * * * contracts 
caused [the] defendant to incur[ ] higher costs of operations 
contrary to its obligations to its ratepayers,” because those 
allegations “bear the reasonable inference that the resultant 
higher costs will be passed through to ratepayers, including 
[the plaintiff]” (internal quotation marks omitted)). And, 
in “reviewing the judgment of dismissal[,] we assume the 
truth of all facts alleged in [plaintiff’s] complaint, drawing 
all inferences in favor of plaintiff[ ].” Id. at 183.3
 Further, we have said that, ultimately, “stand -
ing to challenge a statute under the Uniform Declaratory 
Judgments Act extends to all who allege and demonstrate 
a legally recognized interest affected by the statute or ordi-
nance.” Oregon Restaurant and Lodging Assn. v. City of 
Bend, 313 Or App 772, 778, 497 P3d 306 (2021).
 “Whether a plaintiff has standing to bring a declar-
atory judgment action is a legal question, which we review 
for legal error.” Id. at 777.4
 3 We note that, in the trial court, this case was decided on the pleadings, 
without consideration of evidence outside the pleadings. See ORCP 21 A(2)(b) 
(permitting trial court to consider evidence outside the pleadings on certain 
motions). Had such evidence been submitted in the trial court and considered 
by the trial court in ruling on defendants’ motion to dismiss, we would “assume 
the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint to the extent that they are not con -
tradicted by additional facts in or outside of the record.” Nordbye v. BRCP/GM 
Ellington, 271 Or App 168, 174, 349 P3d 639 (2015).
 4 We apply the same standing analysis with regard to plaintiff’s request for 
injunctive relief. That is because the Supreme Court “has long applied essentially 
the same standing requirements that ordinarily apply in declaratory judgment 
actions” to determine a party’s standing to obtain injunctive relief. Morgan v. 
Sisters School District No. 6 , 353 Or 189, 201, 301 P3d 419 (2013) (noting “the 
same standing standards apply to plaintiff’s request for declaratory and injunc -
tive relief”). Thus, our analysis in this opinion applies equally to plaintiff’s 
request for a declaratory judgment and to plaintiff’s request for injunctive relief. 
666 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
B. The Parties’ Arguments
 On appeal, plaintiff argues the trial court erred 
in ruling that it did not have standing, highlighting defi -
ciencies in the trial court’s reasoning as it relates to plain -
tiff’s standing. As to the first requirement of the standing 
analysis, plaintiff asserts it has a “legally recognized inter-
est” as “the intended beneficiary of the statutory contract 
between Clatsop County and the State pursuant to which 
the [state forest lands] were established nearly a century 
ago and under which the lands continue to be managed” 
and a “legally recognized interest in the substantial reve -
nue it receives as a school district within Clatsop County.” 
Additionally, plaintiff contends that it has a “legally rec -
ognized interest[ ] in the management of the Forest Trust 
Land,” i.e., the land conveyed by Clatsop County to the state. 
As to the second requirement, plaintiff argues that defen -
dants’ “failure to comply with the 2010 NWFMP constitutes 
a concrete present injury to the School District’s interests” 
because “it suffers a concrete injury when Defendants fail to 
manage those [state forests] as required by law” regardless 
“of whether that mismanagement causes a separate finan -
cial injury to the School District” and, in any event, defen -
dants’ “mismanagement has caused a substantial finan -
cial injury to the School District by reducing the revenue it 
has received (and will continue to receive) from the lands.” 
(Emphasis in original.) Finally, as to the third requirement, 
plaintiff argues that declaring that defendants “must com -
ply with the 2010 NWFMP would directly redress the injury 
to the School District’s interest in the management” of state 
forests and that “increasing revenue across the lands man-
aged under the 2010 NWFMP to comply with [the particular 
Asset Management Guideline at issue] would necessarily 
generate additional revenue within Clatsop County.”
 Defendants respond, regarding the first require -
ment of the standing analysis, that plaintiff “has not 
demonstrated that it has a sufficient interest in the correct 
management of state forest lands, in general, to support 
standing” and “to the extent plaintiff has any interest at 
all, that interest is limited to receipt of its statutory share 
of revenue from Clatsop County’s distribution of state forest 
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 667
revenues.” Regarding the second requirement, defendants 
argue, among other points, that to “the extent plaintiff 
contends it has suffered or will suffer financial injury, that 
contention is speculative and hypothetical.” Regarding the 
third requirement, defendants contend that because “coun-
ties and their taxing districts only receive revenues from 
timber sales within county boundaries, an overall increase 
in timber revenue may have no impact on the revenue to a 
specific county or taxing district.” That is, even “if the court 
ordered the relief plaintiff requested—an order to increase 
revenue or reduc[e] costs—and the State Forest Division 
increased revenues overall, that order may have no impact 
at all on plaintiff.” Further, defendants contend that, if “the 
Department were to decrease its management costs—which 
is one of the possible options under the 2010 NWFMP, as 
plaintiff alleged in its complaint—then it could comply with 
the plan without any increase in revenues to plaintiff.”
 Additionally, as an alternative basis to affirm, 
defendants assert that “the trial court did not have sub -
ject matter jurisdiction to issue a declaration usurping the 
Department’s or the Board’s discretion to manage the state 
forests,” which is, in defendants’ view, what the relief sought 
by plaintiff would do. That is, defendants argue, an “order 
to defendants to change their management of state forest 
lands in accordance with the court’s reading of the flexible 
and adaptable 2010 NWFMP would usurp authority that 
the legislature reserved for the Board and that the Board 
has assumed in the structure and content of its rules.”
C. Analysis
 Having considered the parties’ arguments, we con -
clude that the trial court erred and that plaintiff had stand-
ing to seek declaratory and injunctive relief.5
 As an initial matter, and concerning the first 
requirement, plaintiff has a financial interest in the rev -
enue generated by the management of the state forests 
in Clatsop County, see Eckles , 306 Or at 385 (stating that 
“[t]he interest perhaps most often recognized as sufficient 
 5 In reaching our conclusion, we express no opinion on whether the statu -
tory scheme concerning state forests created a “statutory contract” as plaintiff 
argues, as reaching that issue is unnecessary to our analysis. 
668 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
for standing under ORS 28.020 is a present or foreseeable 
financial interest”), and given the provisions of the 2010 
NWFMP, we think that plaintiff has a corollary financial 
interest in defendants’ compliance with the 2010 NWFMP 
that is beyond “an abstract interest in the correct applica -
tion” of the 2010 NWFMP, League of Oregon Cities, 334 Or 
at 658 (noting that, to establish standing under ORS 28.020, 
“this court has held that a plaintiff must show some injury 
or other impact upon a legally recognized interest beyond an 
abstract interest in the correct application or the validity of 
a law”).
 As noted, by its own terms, the 2010 NWFMP is 
designed to, among other things, create a forest that “pro -
duces sustainable and predictable forest products that gen-
erate jobs and revenues for the benefit of the state, counties, 
and local taxing districts.” (Emphases added.) And plaintiff 
is a taxing district, which the terms of the 2010 NWFMP 
are expressly designed to benefit. See MT & M Gaming, Inc., 
360 Or at 558 (explaining that, under Supreme Court prece-
dent, “a plaintiff whose interests do fall generally within the 
intended objectives of the targeted statute has standing to 
bring a declaratory judgment act with regard to the statute” 
(emphasis in original)).
 Plaintiff’s complaint alleged that, historically, it 
has “received a substantial portion of its funding from the 
revenues generated through Defendants’ management of 
forestlands conveyed by Clatsop County to the State,” but 
that “Defendants have pursued policies that fail to generate 
the level of revenue required under Defendants’ own rules,” 
because defendants have failed to comply with one of the 
2010 NWFMP’s “Asset Management Guidelines.” (Emphasis 
in original.) And, as noted, under a heading reading 
“Summary of Anticipated Outcomes from Implementing the 
Asset Management Guidelines,” the 2010 NWFMP expressly 
provides that “[i]mplementation of the plan’s strategies is 
expected to result in significant revenue to the state, coun -
ties, and local taxing districts” (emphasis added)—e.g., school 
districts such as plaintiff. Further, the Asset Management 
Guidelines in the 2010 NWFMP—one of which plaintiff con-
tends that defendants are not in compliance with—exist, at 
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 669
least in part, to “assure that the asset value of these forests” 
is “maintained or enhanced through plan implementation.”
 Thus, we conclude that plaintiff has a financial 
interest in the revenue generated by the management of 
the state forests in Clatsop County, and because the 2010 
NWFMP contemplates, among other points, that manage -
ment of state forests in accordance with the 2010 NWFMP 
will provide “substantial revenue” to local taxing districts 
such as plaintiff, and is designed to benefit, among others, 
local taxing districts such as plaintiff, plaintiff has a corol -
lary financial interest in defendants’ implementation of the 
terms of the 2010 NWFMP.
 Concerning the second requirement—”whether 
plaintiff[ has] shown that their injury or impact is real 
or probable, and not hypothetical or speculative,” Oregon 
Restaurant and Lodging Assn. , 313 Or App at 778—as 
noted, plaintiff has alleged that defendants’ “policies” have 
“fail[ed] to generate sufficient revenue” to comply with the 
2010 NWFMP, which has resulted in a “decrease in fund -
ing for the District.” That is sufficient to satisfy the second 
requirement. See id. 778-79 (allegation by businesses “that 
depend on patronage in Bend” that a “reduction in funds 
for tourism promotion [in Bend] would have concrete and 
plausible fiscal ramifications” sufficiently alleged an “injury 
or impact [that] is real or probable, and not hypothetical 
or speculative”). Particularly here, where, as discussed 
above, the purpose of the Asset Management Guidelines is 
to “assure that the asset value of [certain] forests,” includ -
ing forests in Clatsop County, the management of which 
plaintiff derives revenue from, is “maintained or enhanced 
through plan implementation.”
 Regarding the third requirement—that a plaintiff 
show “that a decision by the court will in some sense rec -
tify the injury, i.e., that it will have a practical effect on the 
rights that the plaintiff is seeking to vindicate,” id. at 778 
(internal quotation marks omitted)—we conclude that that 
requirement, too, is satisfied.
 As noted, the provision of the 2010 NWFMP plain -
tiff contends defendants have failed to comply with is that 
670 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
they must “[m]aintain a budgeting and financial manage -
ment system that assures that revenues derived from these 
state forest lands are sufficient to cover the department’s 
costs of implementing this plan.” Plaintiff seeks a declara -
tion and injunction requiring defendants to “either increase 
timber revenues or substantially reduce their budgets.”
 The trial court determined that the third require -
ment was not satisfied because “the relief that this court 
could order would not necessarily provide real relief from 
the alleged injury,” insofar as the Department of Forestry 
could “reduce its costs substantially, it could increase har -
vest levels in” areas other than Clatsop County, “or do both,” 
and that “[n]one of those actions would result in an increase 
in the timber revenue received” by the district.
 The difficulty with the trial court’s reasoning is 
twofold. First, we think that it is speculative, on this record, 
that the Department of Forestry would “reduce costs sub -
stantially” or increase harvest levels in areas other than 
Clatsop County to make up for any shortfall as the trial 
court reasoned. And, as noted, as we understand it, the com-
plaint need not demonstrate with certainty that the relief 
requested would rectify plaintiff’s injury, only that there 
is a reasonable inference that it would. We think such an 
inference can be drawn here, given the allegations in the 
complaint described above.6
 Second, and perhaps more fundamentally, the trial 
court’s ruling misses the mark because it disregards the 
nature and purpose of the 2010 NWFMP itself. As detailed 
above, one purpose of the 2010 NWFMP is to manage a for-
est that “produces sustainable and predictable forest prod -
ucts that generate jobs and revenues for the benefit of the 
state, counties, and local taxing districts.” It does so by 
 6 Further, we note that plaintiff asserts that Clatsop County is the county 
with the “second highest * * * Land acreage managed under the 2010 NWFMP,” 
and defendants do not contend that that is inaccurate.
 In that regard, we also note that, as we understand the statutory distribu -
tion formula and plaintiff’s view of the Asset Management Guidelines, for every 
$100 generated by the Department of Forestry from logging in Clatsop County 
to “assure[ ] that revenues derived from these state forest lands are sufficient to 
cover the department’s costs of implementing” the plan, the state would retain 
approximately $36.25 while $63.75 would go to Clatsop County. 
Cite as 349 Or App 657 (2026) 671
implementing “the plan’s strategies [which are] expected to 
result in significant revenue to the state, counties, and local 
taxing districts,” and the “Asset Management Guidelines”—
one of which plaintiff contends defendants are out of com -
pliance with—exist “in order to assure that the asset value 
of these forests is maintained or enhanced through plan 
implementation.”
 Given that framework, which, as noted, presupposes 
that compliance with the 2010 NWFMP generally (and the 
Asset Management Guidelines specifically) will financially 
benefit local taxing districts such as plaintiff, plaintiff’s 
allegation that defendants have failed to comply with one of 
the Asset Management Guidelines in the 2010 NWFMP, in 
our view, alleges an injury to plaintiff’s financial interests 
that could be remedied by requiring defendants to comply 
with the 2010 NWFMP.
 As for defendants’ alternative argument— i.e., that 
“the trial court did not have subject matter jurisdiction 
to issue a declaration usurping the Department’s or the 
Board’s discretion to manage the state forests,” because it 
would “interfere” with “the discretionary power vested in an 
agency”—defendants rely principally on Ashland Drilling, 
Inc. v. Jackson County, 168 Or App 624, 4 P3d 748, rev den, 
331 Or 429 (2000).
 In that case, the plaintiffs sought a declaration that 
the Water Resources Commission had “failed to implement” 
a certain “program by failing to undertake specific enforce -
ment and implementation actions.” Id. at 629. We explained 
that “[c]ourts will not interfere by declaratory judgment or 
injunctive relief with the discretionary power vested in an 
agency, unless some compelling reasons exist.” Id. at 632. 
We reasoned that the plaintiffs’ claim failed because the rel-
evant statute, ORS 537.780, provided only that, with regard 
to the particular program, the “commission ‘may’ undertake 
particular implementation and enforcement actions,” and 
by seeking a declaration that it did, the plaintiffs sought to 
have the court “override the legislature’s delegation of dis -
cretion to the commission by declaring that the commission 
must undertake particular enforcement actions.” Id. (quot-
ing ORS 537.780 (emphases in Ashland Drilling)).
672 Jewel School Dist. v. KC
 This case is different from Ashland Drilling . Here, 
plaintiff does not seek a declaration that would “override” 
an agency’s exercise of discretion, as the plaintiffs did in 
Ashland Drilling, but instead seeks a declaration and injunc-
tion requiring defendants to comply with an administrative 
rule. As noted, the 2010 NWFMP provides that implemen -
tation of the 2010 NWFMP “will be consistent” (not “may” 
be consistent) with the Asset Management Guidelines. As 
plaintiff does not seek a declaration or injunction dictating 
how defendants exercise their discretion under the terms of 
the 2010 NWFMP, Ashland Drilling is inapposite.7
 In sum, having considered the parties’ arguments, 
we conclude that the trial court erred when it concluded that 
plaintiff lacks standing and dismissed plaintiff’s complaint. 
Plaintiff has sufficiently alleged a financial interest in the 
revenue generated by the management of the state forests 
in Clatsop County, and given the provisions of the 2010 
NWFMP, we think that it has a corollary financial inter -
est in defendants’ compliance with the 2010 NWFMP that 
is beyond “an abstract interest in the correct application” 
of the 2010 NWFMP. Plaintiff has also sufficiently alleged 
that the injury or impact is real or probable, and not hypo -
thetical or speculative, and that a decision by the court will 
in some sense rectify the injury. Finally, the relief sought 
by plaintiff will not interfere with the discretionary power 
vested in an agency. Consequently, we reverse and remand.
 Reversed and remanded.
 7 Regarding plaintiff’s allegation that defendants are not in compliance with 
the Asset Management Guideline related to maintaining budgeting and finan-
cial management systems as described above, we express no opinion on what in 
particular that Asset Management Guideline requires defendants to do. That 
issue has not been briefed and is not before us. That issue can be addressed in 
connection with the merits of this proceeding.
