A184113
Source: https://storage.courtlistener.com/pdf/2026/05/20/santoro_v._eagle_crest_estate_homesite_owners_assn..pdf
CourtListener: https://www.courtlistener.com/opinion/10862973/santoro-v-eagle-crest-estate-homesite-owners-assn/
Caption: Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
Date: 2026-05-20

No. 435 May 20, 2026 725
IN THE COURT OF APPEALS OF THE 
STATE OF OREGON
Alfred P. SANTORO 
and Joan E. Santoro, 
Trustees of the Santoro and Smith Family Trust, 
dated 12/23/1996,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
EAGLE CREST ESTATE HOMESITE OWNERS 
ASSOCIATION, 
an Oregon nonprofit corporation,
Defendant-Respondent.
Deschutes County Circuit Court
16CV39203; A184113
Beth M. Bagley, Judge.
Argued and submitted February 18, 2026.
J. Christian Malone argued the cause for appellants. 
Also on the briefs was Bristlecone Law.
Jordyn Benya argued the cause for respondent. Also on 
the briefs were Jeffrey W. Hansen and Chock Barhoum LLP.
Before Egan, Presiding Judge, Pagán, Judge, and 
Walters, Senior Judge.
WALTERS, S. J.
Reversed and remanded.
726 Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
Cite as 349 Or App 725 (2026) 727
 WALTERS, S. J.
 This is the second appeal in this contract case, and 
we again reverse the decision of the trial court. This time, 
we conclude that the trial court erred in deciding that the 
defendant did not breach its contractual obligation to act in 
good faith. Accordingly, we remand for entry of judgment in 
favor of plaintiffs and in accordance with this opinion.
 When, after a bench trial, the party with the bur -
den of persuasion contends on appeal that they were entitled 
to prevail as a matter of law, “our standard of review is the 
same as for a directed verdict.” Powers v. Dague, 342 Or App 
569, 572-73, 577 P3d 1161 (2025). “Directed verdict ‘is appro-
priate only when a [party] is entitled to judgment as a mat-
ter of law.” Id. at 573 (quoting Kelley v. Washington County, 
303 Or App 20, 21, 463 P3d 36 (2020) (citations omitted)). In 
this case, as we will explain, the relevant facts are undis -
puted, and the parties’ arguments address whether the trial 
court, sitting as factfinder, applied the correct legal stan -
dards. Under those circumstances, “we review to determine 
whether the court instructed itself incorrectly as to the law.” 
State v. Zamora-Skaar, 308 Or App 337, 353, 480 P3d 1034 
(2020). As explained below, we conclude that the court did 
not apply the relevant legal principles and that, under those 
principles, properly applied, the factfinder could reach only 
one conclusion—that defendant breached the contract.
FACTUAL SUMMARY
 Plaintiffs purchased a lot in Eagle Crest, a planned 
residential community, in which
“the homeowners are bound by a recorded declaration of 
covenants, conditions, and restrictions for Eagle Crest 
Estate Homesites (CC&Rs). Among other things, those 
CC&Rs establish a homeowner’s association (HOA). The 
HOA has a sub-group architectural review committee 
(committee). The CC&Rs require all homeowners to sub -
mit their proposed construction plans to the committee for 
approval before construction.”
Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn. , 319 
Or App 793, 795, 512 P3d 828 (2022) ( Santoro I). In 2016, 
in accordance with the CC&Rs, plaintiffs submitted 
728 Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
construction plans that included a garage with a 12-foot door 
to accommodate a recreational vehicle (RV) (an oversized or 
RV garage). Id. The committee conditionally approved their 
plans with two modifications: “(1) replacing the over-sized 
garage door with a standard one no taller than eight feet; 
and (2) reducing the proposed paving in the back-out area 
of the driveway.” Id. at 796. The committee stated that it 
denied plaintiffs’ proposal for “aesthetic reasons,” citing sec-
tion 5.2(a) of the CC&Rs, which gives the committee broad 
authority to consider “style, design, appearance, [and] har -
mony of external design” when reviewing construction pro -
posals. Id.
 Plaintiffs appealed and argued that neither the 
CC&Rs nor the committee’s own guidelines expressly pro -
hibit oversized garages and that other homes in Eagle Crest 
have RV garages. Id. The committee unanimously denied 
plaintiffs’ appeal. Id. Plaintiffs then filed an action for 
breach of contract and declaratory judgment, arguing that 
the “unambiguous terms of the CC&Rs imposed an affirma-
tive duty of good faith on the committee and that it failed to 
fulfill that obligation by denying plaintiffs’ proposal to build 
an RV garage.” Id.
 After a bench trial, the trial court ruled for defen -
dant, making the following findings and reaching the fol -
lowing conclusions:
“Citing section 5.1 and 5.2(a) of the CC&Rs, the court found 
that defendant * * * had broad authority under the CC&Rs 
to deny plaintiffs’ application. The court further found 
that the committee denied the application because ‘the 
RV/ oversized garage was not consistent with the overall 
aesthetic and character of the community.’ The court then 
concluded that, because plaintiffs presented no evidence 
at trial establishing fraud, bad faith, or a lack of honest 
judgment, defendant acted within its authority and did not 
breach the contract.”
Id. at 797.
 On appeal, this court held that, under section 5.4 of 
the CC&Rs, the committee had an express obligation to act 
in good faith and that, in considering only whether defen -
dant had acted in bad faith, the trial court had applied the 
Cite as 349 Or App 725 (2026) 729
incorrect legal standard. Id. at 799. In assessing whether 
the trial court’s error was harmless, we observed that:
“[t]he trial court’s conclusion that defendant did not act in 
bad faith or with a lack of honest judgment does not nec -
essarily mean that defendant fulfilled its affirmative duty 
to act in good faith. As observed with regard to contract 
claims for breach of the implied duty of good faith, it is not 
necessarily sufficient just to act honestly. See generally Best 
v. U. S. National Bank, 303 Or 557, 564, 739 P2d 554 (1987) 
(‘It is therefore not necessarily sufficient, as the Bank con -
tends, that the Bank acted honestly in setting its [non-suf-
ficient funds (NSF)] fees[.]’).”
Id. at 799-800 (brackets in Santoro I). Quoting Best, 303 Or 
at 563, we explained that
“ ‘[w]hen one party to a contract is given discretion in the 
performance of some aspect of the contract, the parties 
ordinarily contemplate that that discretion will be exer-
cised for particular purposes. If the discretion is exer -
cised for purposes not contemplated by the parties, the 
party exercising discretion has performed in bad faith.’ ”
Id. at 800. We concluded that there was a potential that the 
committee’s decision was exercised for purposes not contem-
plated by the parties, that, as a matter of law, the trial court’s 
decision that defendant’s conduct lacked bad faith, dishon -
esty, or fraud did not necessarily equate to a conclusion that 
defendant acted in good faith, and, therefore, that the trial 
court’s error was not harmless. Id. at 801. Accordingly, we 
remanded the case to the trial court to reconsider its deci -
sion in light of our opinion. Id.
 On remand, the parties agreed that there was no 
need for a retrial or to reopen the record established during 
the original bench trial and provided the court with brief -
ing and oral argument. Plaintiffs submitted that the record 
demonstrated that defendant had violated its contractual 
obligations, including the obligation to act in good faith, 
when it denied their building application. Plaintiffs asserted 
that the contract between the parties expressly authorized 
them to keep, place, maintain, or park a recreational vehi -
cle, pointing to section 4.9 of the CC&Rs, which provides as 
follows:
730 Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
 “ 4.9 VEHICLES AND PARKING :
 “(a) Type Restriction . No mobile home, recreational 
vehicle (including campers) exceeding 1,500 pounds in gross 
weight, trailer of any kind, truck with a rated load capacity 
greater than 3/4 ton, or boat shall be kept, placed, main -
tained or parked for more than 6 hours or such other period 
as may be permitted pursuant to the Estate Homesite 
Association Policies and Procedures on any portion of the 
Property except in enclosed garages , areas designated by 
the Board, or screened from view in a manner approved by 
the Architectural Committee.”
(Emphases added.) Plaintiffs argued that the committee’s 
authority to deny its application was limited by two sections 
of the CC&Rs: section 5.4, providing that the committee’s 
decision must be in good faith and “may not violate any 
of the provisions set out in this Declaration,” and section 
5.2(b), providing that the committee’s authority “shall not 
be construed as modifying, altering, or waiving any of the 
provisions” set out in the CC&Rs. Plaintiffs contended that 
the committee’s decision precluding them from building a 
garage with a door that would enable them to park an RV in 
that garage modified, altered, waived, or violated the park-
ing provisions of the CC&Rs and that the committee’s deci-
sion violated its obligation to perform its contractual obliga-
tions in good faith.
 In an oral ruling from the bench, the trial court 
disagreed. The court reasserted and readopted its previous 
factual findings, set out the provisions of the CC&Rs that it 
considered controlling, including sections 4.9, 5.2 and 5.4, 
and made the following factual finding:
 “The [committee] denied plaintiffs’ construction plans 
because the proposed construction of an oversized garage 
with 12 foot door was inconsistent with the overall appear-
ance and design aesthetic of the community and would cre-
ate disunity.”
The court then concluded that “defendant acted consistently 
in accord with and as could reasonably be expected by plain-
tiffs with respect to the CC&Rs to execute its primary func-
tion of ensuring the harmony of external design with declar-
ant’s general scheme,” and “acted in good faith.”
Cite as 349 Or App 725 (2026) 731
ARGUMENTS AND ANALYSIS
 Before this court, plaintiffs contend, in three some-
what different but related assignments of error, that the 
trial court failed to correctly address the provision of the 
contract between the parties that lies at the crux of all three 
of their arguments—section 4.9 of the CC&Rs, requiring 
that recreational vehicles be parked in enclosed garages.
 In their first assignment of error, plaintiffs argue 
that the trial court failed to abide by this court’s ruling in 
Santoro I and to interpret the contract to determine the 
scope of authority delegated to the committee. The trial 
court, plaintiffs insist, merely converted its initial finding 
that the committee did not lack honest judgment or act in 
bad faith into an equivalent finding that it acted in good 
faith. We reject that argument without discussion; the trial 
court conducted the analysis ordered in Santoro I.
 In their second assignment of error, plaintiffs argue 
that section 4.9 expressly authorized them to park an RV 
in an enclosed garage and that the trial court erred when 
it failed to conclude that defendant breached the contract 
by denying their plans to exercise that authority, thereby 
modifying, altering, waiving, or violating the terms of the 
contract between the parties.
 Defendant responds that the trial court was correct 
when it concluded,
 “Nothing in the CC&Rs, bylaws or any other governing 
document requires owners to have or the [committee] to 
approve oversized garages for RV storage at Eagle Crest 
lots. The [committee]’s decision to approve or deny con -
struction plans, in this case to deny, does not modify, alter, 
waive or abrogate any provisions of the CC&Rs.”
Defendant argues that the CC&Rs give the committee dis -
cretion to deny building requests when their provisions do not 
require the requested construction. According to defendant, 
section 4.9 is a permissive provision that allows the parking 
of RVs in enclosed garages but that does not require the com-
mittee to approve plans to build an oversized garage. Thus, 
defendant contends, the committee’s exercise of its approval 
authority does not violate, or even modify, alter, or waive, the 
732 Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
provisions of section 4.9; that provision does not require the 
committee to approve construction of an oversized garage.
 To the extent that the terms of a contract are unam-
biguous, “[c]ontract interpretation presents a question of law 
that we review for legal error.” Santoro I, 319 Or App at 798. 
The express provisions of the CC&Rs are part of the con -
tract between the parties, and, in this respect, defendant’s 
interpretation of their provisions is correct as a matter of 
law. The committee’s denial of plaintiffs’ application to build 
a garage with a 12-foot door did not violate, modify, alter, 
or waive the provisions of section 4.9. Although that section 
authorizes the parking of RVs in enclosed garages, it does 
not expressly require that the committee approve all appli -
cations to construct the garages with 12-foot doors.
 That is not the end of plaintiffs’ argument, how -
ever. In their third assignment of error, plaintiffs argue that 
the trial court erred in failing to find that the committee 
breached its contractual obligation to act in good faith. Citing 
Best, 303 Or at 563, plaintiffs contend that that obligation is 
an obligation to effectuate the reasonable contractual expec-
tations of the parties and that, as a matter of law, section 
4.9 gives rise to a reasonable expectation that members will 
be permitted to build garages in which they can park RVs. 
Plaintiffs submit that, in view of the contractual provisions 
permitting “recreational vehicles” and “enclosed garages” 
and the lack of any limitations on garage door height, plain-
tiffs and other homeowners could reasonably expect that a 
request to build a garage with a door high enough to permit 
the storage of an RV would not be disallowed based on the 
height of the door alone. The undisputed testimony at trial 
and the assumption that underlies the arguments of both 
parties and the ruling of the trial court is that an RV can -
not be parked in a garage unless the door to the garage is at 
least 12 feet in height (an “RV” or “oversized” door); an RV 
cannot be parked in a garage with an eight-foot-high-door (a 
“regular” or “standard” door).
 Defendant responds that an expectation that the 
committee would approve all requests to build garages with 
RV doors (RV garages) would be objectively unreasonable. 
Defendant relies on the committee’s contractual right to deny 
Cite as 349 Or App 725 (2026) 733
construction requests for aesthetic reasons and argues that, 
under the CC&Rs, plaintiffs, as well as the other property 
owners, must have a reasonable expectation that the com -
mittee will maintain and enforce a specific aesthetic, char -
acter, and design uniformly across the entire community. To 
defendant’s way of thinking, just as the CC&Rs permit the 
construction of garages, they also permit the construction 
of homes, outside storage, and landscaping. But, defendant 
contends, that permission does not require the committee 
to approve plans to construct each of those features simply 
because they meet the definition of a home, storage shed, or 
landscaping, even if the plans propose construction of a log 
cabin, a rainbow-colored storage shed, or a garden area for 
growing vegetables that are likely to attract pests. Defendant 
contends that plaintiffs’ expectation that the terms of the con-
tract should be construed in a manner that prioritizes their 
design preferences over the interests of the rest of the prop -
erty owners in the community is unreasonable. According to 
defendant, the trial court correctly determined that the com-
mittee acted in good faith and in accordance with the parties’ 
reasonable expectations when it denied plaintiffs’ application 
because their proposed garage design did not fit with the 
look, feel, and character of the community.
 It is apparent to us that the parties are arguing 
past each other. The thrust of plaintiffs’ good faith argu -
ment is not that the committee was required to approve all 
applications to build RV garages. Plaintiffs seem to recog -
nize that, just as the committee would not be required to 
approve all applications to build all houses, storage sheds, 
or landscaping, regardless of their design, the committee 
was not required to approve all applications to build RV 
garages. Rather, plaintiffs argue, they reasonably expected 
that they would be permitted to construct an RV garage of 
some design. They might not be permitted to construct an 
RV garage made of logs, painted in rainbow colors, or con -
stituting an attractive nuisance, but, at the very least, they 
would be permitted to construct a garage of a size and with 
a door of a height that would permit them to park an RV.
 Defendant does not meet that argument. Defendant 
seems to assume that, if the committee considered the 
734 Santoro v. Eagle Crest Estate Homesite Owners Assn.
height of the garage door to be an aesthetic matter, then it is 
of no consequence that the effect of that decision would be to 
preclude homeowners from owning RVs and storing them in 
enclosed garages in accordance with the CC&Rs. The trial 
court seems to have made that same assumption, ruling as 
follows:
 “In this matter, defendant acted consistently in accord 
with and as could reasonably be expected by plaintiffs with 
respect to the CC&Rs to execute its primary function of 
ensuring the harmony of external design with declarant’s 
general scheme.”
Neither defendant nor the trial court address the question 
of whether the CC&Rs give rise to a reasonable expectation 
that the committee’s review function will not be exercised to 
effectively preclude all RV garages.
 As we tried to make abundantly clear in Santoro I, 
the duty of good faith requires that parties act in an objec -
tively reasonable manner in the performance and enforce -
ment of their contracts. Id. at 799-800; see Best , 303 Or at 
561-66 (discussing cases and Restatement of Contracts). We 
quoted Best for the proposition that “evasion of the spirit of 
the bargain” can constitute bad faith, and we specifically 
instructed that
 “When one party to a contract is given discretion in the 
performance of some aspect of the contract, the parties 
ordinarily contemplate that that discretion will be exer -
cised for particular purposes. If the discretion is exercised 
for purposes not contemplated by the parties, the party 
exercising discretion has performed in bad faith.”
Santoro I, 319 Or App at 800 (quoting Best, 303 Or at 563). 
On remand, the trial court found, as a matter of fact, that 
the committee exercised its discretion for aesthetic purposes, 
and, based on that finding, reached the legal conclusion that 
the committee met its obligation of good faith.
 That analysis fails to account for the reasonable 
expectation, arising from the CC&Rs, that homeowners 
would be able to park RVs in enclosed garages. As a mat -
ter of law, in light of the CC&R provisions, the commit -
tee’s discretion had to be exercised consistently with that 
Cite as 349 Or App 725 (2026) 735
expectation. See Santoro I, 319 Or App at 800 (explaining 
limitations on discretion). The committee may have rejected 
plaintiffs’ construction plans to promote a certain aesthetic, 
and may have done so in all honesty, but, as a matter of 
law, defendant’s promise to act in good faith precluded it 
from exercising that authority to effectively ban construc -
tion of a garage that plaintiffs had an objectively reasonable 
expectation they could build. Applying the law correctly to 
the undisputed facts, the only conclusion a factfinder could 
reach is that, in denying plaintiffs’ construction request 
because their design provided for an RV-size door, defendant 
breached its contract with plaintiffs.1
 We leave it to the trial court to determine, in the 
first instance, the appropriate remedies for defendant’s 
breach. We remand for entry of judgment in favor of plain -
tiffs and in accordance with this opinion.
 Reversed and remanded.
 1 In reaching that conclusion, we do not consider the evidence that plaintiffs 
proffered and that the trial court considered based on the committee’s actions 
approving the construction of other garages and buildings. The question of 
whether such evidence is admissible to establish the reasonable expectations of 
the parties is not before us.
