EXTRAORDINARY
OFFICIAL GAZETTE
THE BAHAMAS
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
                1st April, 2026                                            (A)             NASSAU

MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
Arrangement of Regulations
Regulation
PART I - PRELIMINARY 3
1. Citation and commencement................................................................................ 3
2. Interpretation........................................................................................................ 3
3. Application........................................................................................................... 5
PART II – CERTIFICATION 6
4. Declaration and certificate................................................................................... 6
5. Carriage of documents......................................................................................... 6
6. Maritime Labour Certificate................................................................................. 6
7. Declaration of maritime labour compliance......................................................... 7
8. Interim Maritime Labour Certificate.................................................................... 7
9. Renewal of Maritime Labour Certificate.............................................................. 7
10. Suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of declaration or certificate.................... 8
PART III – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SEAFARERS TO 
WORK ON A SHIP 8
11. Minimum age for seafarer.................................................................................... 8
12. Medical certificate................................................................................................ 9
13. Validity of medical certificate.............................................................................. 9
14. Training and qualifications................................................................................. 10
15. Recruitment and placement services.................................................................. 10
PART IV – CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 11
16. Seafarers’ employment agreement...................................................................... 11
17. Wages................................................................................................................. 13
18. Hours of rest....................................................................................................... 14
19. Annual leave...................................................................................................... 15
20. Shore leave......................................................................................................... 15
21. Repatriation........................................................................................................ 15
22. Abandonment..................................................................................................... 17
23. Entitlement of seafarer to demand discharge. .................................................... 17
24. Seafarer compensation for the ship’s loss or foundering.................................... 18
25. Manning levels................................................................................................... 18
26. Career and skill development and opportunities for seafarers’ employment...... 18
PART V – ACCOMMODATION, RECREATIONAL FACILITIES, FOOD 
AND CATERING 18
27. Accommodation and recreational facilities........................................................ 18
28. Food and catering............................................................................................... 25
PART VI – HEALTH PROTECTION, MEDICAL CARE, WELFARE 
AND SOCIAL PROTECTION 26
29. Medical care on board ship and ashore............................................................... 26
30. Liability of owner............................................................................................... 27
31. Health and safety protection and accident prevention........................................ 28
32. Social security scheme....................................................................................... 28
PART VII - MISCELLANEOUS 29
33. Inspection and detention of Bahamian ships...................................................... 29
34. Inspection and detention of foreign ships........................................................... 29
35. Electronic or paper communication.................................................................... 29
36. On-board complaint procedures for Bahamian ships.......................................... 30
37. Onshore seafarer complaint-handling procedures.............................................. 30
38. Marine casualties................................................................................................ 31
39. Guidance on Convention.................................................................................... 31
40. Penalty................................................................................................................ 31
41. Revocation of Sub. Leg. V ol. IV , Ch. 268 p. 155................................................ 31
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
MERCHANT SHIPPING ACT 
(NO. 33 OF 2021)
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
The Minister, in exercise of the powers conferred by sections 69 and 227 of the  
Merchant Shipping Act, 2021 makes the following regulations —
PART I - PRELIMINARY
1. Citation and commencement.
(1) These  Regulations  may be  cited  as  the  Merchant  Shipping  (Maritime  
Labour Convention) Regulations, 2026.
(2) These Regulations shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 2026. 
2. Interpretation.
In these regulations —
“Act” means the Merchant Shipping Act, 2021 (No. 33 of 2021);
“armed robbery against ships”  means any illegal act of violence or  
detention or any act of depredation, or threat thereof, other than an  
act of piracy, committed for private ends and directed against a ship  
or against persons or property on board such a ship, within a State’s  
internal waters, archipelagic waters and territorial sea, or any act  
inciting or of intentionally facilitating such an act;
“authorised  officer”  means  a  person  appointed  by  the  competent  
authority; 
“Authority” means The Bahamas Maritime Authority established under  
section 3 of The Bahamas Maritime Authority Act (Ch. 283);
“company” in relation to a ship means —
(a) the owner of a ship; or
(b) any  other  organisation  or  person  that  has  assumed  
responsibility for operation of the ship from the owner who, 
on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over all  
the duties and responsibility imposed by the Code;
“Convention” means the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006;
Page - 3
S.I. No. 42 of 2026
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
“Director”  means  means  the  Managing  Director  of  The  Bahamas  
Maritime  Authority appointed  under  section  4  of  The  Bahamas  
Maritime Authority Act (Ch. 283);
“gross tonnage”  means, for a  ship having its tonnage determined, the  
measurement of a ship calculated in accordance with –
(a) the  International  Convention  on  Tonnage  Measurement  of 
Ships, 1969;
(b) the regulations relating to tonnage measurement;
“international voyage” means a voyage from a port in one country to a  
port in another country;
“Maritime Labour Certificate ” means a certificate, referred to under  
regulation 6, evidencing proof that the ship meets the requirements  
of the Convention;
“medical  practitioner” includes  those  persons  who  are  approved  to  
practise medicine by The Bahamas Medical Council or by a state  
that has  ratified the Convention as amended or  STCW 1978 as  
amended;
“Minister” means the Minister responsible for Maritime Affairs;
“next  of  kin”  means  the  person  who  is  mentioned  on  the  Seafarer  
Employment Agreement as next of Kin;
“owner” means the owner of the ship or another organization or person,  
such as the manager, agent or bareboat charterer, who has assumed  
the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and  
who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to take over the  
duties and responsibilities imposed on shipowners in accordance  
with the Convention, regardless of whether any other organization  
or persons fulfill certain of the duties or reprehensibilities on behalf  
of the shipowner;
“passenger” means any person carried on board a ship except —
(a) the master and seafarers or any other person employed or  
engaged in any capacity on board the ship on the business of  
the ship;
(b) a child under one year of age;
(c) shipwrecked or distressed persons carried on board the ship;
“passenger ship” means a ship carrying more than twelve passengers;
“piracy” has the same meaning as in the United Nations Conventions on  
the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS); 
“recognised  organisation” means an  organisation  authorised  by  the  
Authority  to  perform,  on  its  behalf,  statutory  certification  and  
services under — 
Page - 4
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(a) applicable international instruments;
(b) this Act; or 
(c) any regulations made under this Act, in accordance with such  
criteria and standards as specified by the Authority including  
the standards of the “Code for Recognised Organisations”  
published by the Maritime Safety Committee of the IMO as  
Resolution MSC.349(92) and any subsequent editions;
“repatriation”  means the seafarer’s right to be returned to their home  
country;
“seafarer” means  a  person,  including  the  master,  who  is  employed,  
engaged  or  works  in  any capacity  on  board a  ship  and  whose 
normal place of work is on board a ship;
“seafarers’ employment  agreement”  means  the  binding  contract  of  
employment and articles of agreement; 
“seafarer  recruitment  and  placement  service”  means  a  person,  
company, institution, agency or other organisation, engaged in —
(a) the recruitment of seafarers on behalf of owners; or
(b) the placement of seafarers with owners;
“ship” means a ship other than one which navigates exclusively in areas  
where port regulations apply;
“special purpose ship” means a ship constructed in compliance with the  
International  Maritime  Organization  Code  of  Safety for  Special  
Purpose Ships which is a mechanically self-propelled ship which by 
reason of its  functions carries on board more than twelve special  
personnel;
“STCW Convention” means the International Convention on Standards  
of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers 1978, as  
amended.
3. Application.
These Regulations apply to —
(a) Bahamian ships engaged in commercial activities, except —
(i) ships engaged in fishing;
(ii) warships or naval ships; or
(iii) any other ship as determined by the Director and specified in 
a Marine Notice issued by the Authority;
(b) non-Bahamian  ships  while  in  Bahamian  waters,  where  the  
Authority determines, if —
Page - 5
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(i) the State whose flag the vessel flies has not yet ratified or  
implemented the Convention; or
(ii) the flag State of the vessel has brought the Convention into  
effect,  but  the  ship  does  not  carry  a  Maritime  Labour  
Certificate or an interim Maritime Labour Certificate;
(c) seafarers, except the categories of personnel that are deemed not to  
be seafarers for the purpose of the Convention  as determined by the 
Director and specified in a Marine Notice issued by the Authority.
PART II – CERTIFICATION
4. Declaration and certificate.
A owner shall not operate a ship except where the ship has been issued with a  
valid —
(a) Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance DMLC-Part I;
(b) Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance DMLC-Part II;
(c) Maritime Labour Certificate.
5. Carriage of documents.
(1) A  owner  shall  ensure  that  the  Maritime  Labour  Certificate  and  the  
declaration of maritime labour compliance, accompanied by an English-
language translation, if applicable, are at all times on board the ship.
(2) The  Maritime Labour Certificate  and the declaration of maritime labour  
compliance shall be posted in a conspicuous place on board the ship.
(3) A copy of the Maritime Labour Certificate and the declaration of maritime 
labour compliance shall be made available, upon request, to seafarers, flag 
authorised State inspectors, authorised officers in port States, owners ’ and 
seafarers’ representatives  and  any  other  person  authorised  by  the  
Authority.
6. Maritime Labour Certificate.
(1) A owner  shall  apply  in  writing  to  the  recognised  organisation  for  a  
Maritime Labour Certificate.
(2) The recognised organisation may issue a Maritime Labour Certificate , if 
the  recognised  organisation  is  satisfied  that  the  Bahamian  ship  is  in  
compliance with these Regulations and after inspection of the ship.
(3) The Maritime Labour Certificate shall be valid for a period not exceeding  
five years.
Page - 6
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(4) This regulation applies to —
(a) a Bahamian ship that is 500 gross tonnage or over and engaged in  
international voyages;
(b) any other ship —
(i) that is 500 gross tonnage or over; and
(ii) which operates in the territorial waters of The Bahamas.
7. Declaration of maritime labour compliance.
(1) A owner shall make application to the Authority for the completion and  
issue of Part I of the declaration of maritime labour compliance prior to  
the application for a Maritime Labour Certificate.
(2) The Authority shall forward the completed declaration of maritime labour  
compliance Part I to the owner, for the completion of Part II.
(3) The owner shall submit Part I and Part II of the declaration of maritime  
labour compliance, to  the recognised organisation for inspection prior to  
the issue of the Maritime Labour Certificate.
(4) The declaration of maritime labour compliance shall be attached to the  
Maritime Labour Certificate.
8. Interim Maritime Labour Certificate.
(1) The recognised organisation may, on request, issue an interim  Maritime 
Labour Certificate where —
(a) a ship is on a delivery voyage;
(b) a ship is transferred to the Bahamian register; or
(c) a owner  assumes responsibility f or the operation of a ship from  
another owner.
(2) An interim Maritime Labour Certificate is valid for a period not exceeding 
six months.
9. Renewal of Maritime Labour Certificate.
(1) The recognised organisation may renew a Maritime Labour Certificate not 
exceeding five years , where the recognised organisation is satisfied, after  
inspection  of  the  ship,  that  the  ship  is  in  compliance  with  these  
Regulations.
(2) An owner shall apply for a new Part I of the maritime labour compliance  
at intervals not exceeding five years and before renewing the Maritime  
Labour Certificate.
Page - 7
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
10. Suspension, withdrawal or cancellation of declaration or certificate.
The recognised organisation may, by notice in writing, suspend, withdraw or  
cancel  a  declaration of  maritime  labour  compliance  and a  Maritime  Labour 
Certificate,  if  the  owner  fails  to  comply  with  the  requirements  under  the  
Convention or these Regulations, or the required corrective action has not been  
taken.
PART III – MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR SEAFARERS 
TO WORK ON A SHIP
11. Minimum age for seafarer.
(1) No person under the age of sixteen shall be employed, engaged, or work  
on board a ship except —
(a) upon work approved by the Director  on board a school-ship or  
training ship; 
(b) where the Director certifies that he is satisfied, having due regard to  
the health and physical condition of the person; or
(c) it will be an immediate benefit to the person.
(2) No young person shall be employed to work in the  engine-room of any  
vessel,  unless  that  young  person  is  an  apprentice  working  under  
supervision.
(3) The  employment, engagement, or  work of  young persons  as  seafarers  
shall be prohibited where the work is likely to be hazardous or jeopardize  
their health or safety and such work shall be determined by the Authority.
(4) A young person shall not engage in night work except where —
(a) the effective training of a seafarer, in accordance with established  
programmes and schedules, may be impaired; 
(b) night work is the specific nature of the duty of a seafarer; or
(c) the recognised training programme requires a seafarer under the age 
of eighteen to perform duties at night and that work will not be  
detrimental to the seafarer's health or well being.
(5) For the purposes of this regulation —
"night work" shall cover a period of at least 9 hours starting no later than  
midnight and ending no earlier than 5:00 am hours local time;
“young person” means a person under the age of eighteen.
Page - 8
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
12. Medical certificate.
All  seafarers  shall  hold  a  medical  certificate  that  is  issued by an approved  
practitioner prior to signing on a ship and for the full period of their service on  
board.
13. Validity of medical certificate.
(1) The medical certificate is valid for a maximum period of two years for a  
seafarer who is eighteen years or older and for a maximum period of one  
year for a seafarer who is younger than eighteen years old.
(2) The practitioner who conducts the examination of the seafarer shall be  
approved by the Bahamas Medical Council or by a state that has ratified  
the Maritime Labour Convention 2006 as amended or STCW 1978 as  
amended.
(3) A seafarer  who  has  been  issued  a  medical  certificate  shall  carry the  
medical certificate on board for the duration of the seafarer's employment  
on board the ship.
(4) In the event that a medical certificate of a seafarer expires while a ship is  
at sea, the seafarer shall apply for an extension and the Authority may in  
urgent cases, permit a seafarer to work without a valid medical certificate  
until  the  next  port  of  call,  where  the  seafarer  may  obtain  a  medical  
certificate from a qualified medical practitioner, provided that — 
(a) the period of such permission shall not exceed three months; and 
(b) the seafarer is in possession of his expired medical certificate.
(5) A seafarer who has been refused a medical certificate or has a limitation  
imposed  on their  ability to work,  has  the  right  to be  re-examined by  
another independent medical practitioner or by an independent medical  
referee.
(6) The independent medical referee may in urgent cases, permit a seafarer to  
work without a valid medical certificate until the next port of call, where  
the seafarer may obtain a medical certificate from a qualified medical  
practitioner.
(7) Where the period of validity of a medical certificate expires during the  
course of the voyage, the medical certificate shall continue in force until  
the next port of call where the seafarer may obtain a medical certificate  
from a qualified medical practitioner, provided that the period shall not  
exceed three months.
(8) A  medical  certificate  for  a  seafarer  working  on  a  ship  engaged  in  
international  voyages  shall  be  written  in  English  or  have  an  English  
translation appended thereto
Page - 9
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
14. Training and qualifications.
(1) A seafarer shall not be permitted to work on a ship  except where  that  
seafarer —
(a) has successfully completed training for personal safety;
(b) is  trained  or  certified  as  competent  or  otherwise  qualified  to  
perform the seafarer’s duties.
(2) The training and certification requirements under paragraph (1) shall be in  
accordance with  Merchant  Shipping  Seafarers’ Training,  Certification,  
Manning and Watchkeeping Regulations.
15. Recruitment and placement services.
(1) A seafarer recruitment and placement service  operating in the territory of  
the Commonwealth of The Bahamas, shall —
(a) operate in an orderly manner that protec ts and promotes seafarers’  
employment rights as provided by this regulation;
(b) maintain,  and  make  available  for  inspection  by the  Director  of  
Labour, an up-to-date register of all seafarers recruited or placed by  
the service;
(c) ensure that seafarers are informed of their rights and duties  under 
the seafarers' employment agreement prior to the engagement;
(d) ensure proper arrangements for a seafarer, to examine the seafarers'  
employment  agreement  prior  to,  and  after  the  seafarers'  
employment agreement is signed;
(e) provide each seafarer with a copy of the seafarers ’ employment  
agreement;
(f) verify that seafarers recruited or placed by that service are qualified  
for the position;
(g) verify that the seafarers' employment agreement is in accordance  
with the Convention and all amendments made thereto;
(h) ensure, as far as practicable, that the owner has the means to protect  
seafarers from being stranded in a foreign port;
(i) examine  and respond to any complaint  concerning the  seafarers  
recruited  and  placed  by the  service  and  advise  the  Director  of 
Labour of unresolved complaints;
(j) establish  a  system  of  protection,  by  way  of  insurance  or  an  
equivalent  appropriate  measure,  to  compensate  seafarers  for  
monetary loss that they may incur as a result of the forfeiture of a  
recruitment and placement service or the relevant registered owner  
under  the  seafarers’  employment  agreement  to  meet  their  
Page - 10
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
obligations to them and ensure that seafarer are informed, prior to  
or in the process of engagement, of their rights under that system.
(2) A seafarer recruitment and placement service  shall not impose any fees or 
other  charges  on  a  seafarer  for  recruiting,  placing,  or  providing  
employment to the seafarer, except the cost of —
(a) obtaining a medical certificate;
(b) a seafarer’s record book;
(c) a passport, or other travel documents, excluding the cost of visas; or
(d) any training required for a particular position on board the ship.
(3) No  seafarer  recruitment  or  placement  service  shall  use  any  means,  
mechanisms or lists intended to prevent or deter any person from gaining  
employment for which they are qualified.
(4) Where the owner of a Bahamian ship  employs or engages a seafarer using 
a recruitment and placement service in a country in which the Convention 
does  not  apply,  the  owner  shall  ensure  that  those  services  meet  the  
requirements pursuant to this regulation.
(5) A seafarer recruitment and placement service operating in a country in  
which the Convention does not apply, shall ensure that a Statement of  
Compliance issued by an approved recognised organisation  is submitted  
to  The  Bahamas  confirming  that  their  services  and  operations  are  in  
compliance with the Convention and this regulation.
(6) Recruitment  and  placement  services  shall  adhere  to  the  mandatory  
policies outlined in a Marine Notice issued by the Authority.
PART IV – CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
16. Seafarers’ employment agreement.
(1) A owner  shall  enter  into  a  seafarers’ employment  agreement  with  a  
seafarer whom the owner employs, engages or works on board the ship.
(2) The seafarers’ employment agreement shall be signed by both the seafarer  
and the owner or the owner's representative, and both parties shall have a  
signed copy of the seafarers’ employment agreement.
(3) The maximum period of service on board a ship shall be less than twelve  
months.
(4) A seafarer shall be permitted to examine and seek advice on the seafarers’  
employment agreement prior to signing the agreement.
(5) Where  a  seafarer  is  not considered  a  seafarer  for  the  purpose  of  the 
Convention, the  owner  shall  enter  into  a  contractual  or  similar  
Page - 11
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
arrangement  to  that  of  the  seafarers’  employment  agreement  under  
paragraph (1).
(6) A owner shall ensure that clear information as to the conditions of the  
seafarer’s employment can be easily obtained  on board  the ship by the  
seafarer  and  a  copy of  the  seafarer's  employment  agreement  shall  be  
accessible for review by the authorized officers.
(7) A owner or the master shall ensure that every seafarer is given a document 
containing a record of the seafarer ’s employment  on board the ship and  
that document shall not contain any statement as to the quality of the  
seafarer’s work or their wages.
(8) Where  the  language  of  the  seafarers’ employment  agreement  and any  
applicable collective bargaining agreement is not in the English language,  
the following documents shall be available in the English language or  
translation —
(a) a copy of a standard form of the seafarers’ employment agreement;  
and
(b) the parts of the collective bargaining agreement that are subject to  
port State inspection.
(9) The  seafarers’  employment  agreement  shall  contain  the  following  
particulars —
(a) the seafarer’s full name, date of birth or age, and birthplace;
(b) the owner’s name and address;
(c) the  place  where , and  date  when , the  seafarers’  employment  
agreement is entered into;
(d) the capacity in which the seafarer is to be employed;
(e) the  amount  of  the  seafarer’s  wages  or,  where  applicable,  the  
formula used for calculating it;
(f) the amount of paid annual leave or, where applicable, the formula  
used for calculating it;
(g) the  termination  of  the  agreement  and  the  conditions  thereof,  
including if the agreement has been made for —
(i) indefinite  period,  the  conditions  entitling  either  party  to  
terminate it, and the required notice period, which shall not  
be less for the owner than for the seafarer;
(ii) a definite period, the date fixed for its expiry; and
(iii) a voyage, the port of destination and the time which has to  
expire after arrival before the seafarer should be discharged;
(h) the health and social security protection benefits to be provided to  
the seafarer by the owner;
Page - 12
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(i) the seafarer’s entitlement to repatriation;
(j) reference to the collective bargaining agreement, if applicable; and
(k) any  other  particulars  published  on  a  Marine  Notice  by  the  
Authority.
(10) Where a collective bargaining agreement forms all or a part of a seafarers’ 
employment agreement, a copy of that agreement shall be available  on 
board the ship.
(11) For the purposes of this regulation, the minimum period of notice required 
to be  given by the  seafarer  and owner  for  the  early termination of  a  
seafarers’ employment  agreement  shall  be  seven days  except  for  the  
exceptional circumstances specified in regulation 23 and a Marine Notice  
issued by the Authority.
(12) Where a seafarer is held captive on or off a ship as a result of acts of  
piracy  or  armed  robbery  against  the  ship,  the  seafarers’ employment  
agreement shall continue to have effect, regardless of whether —
(a) the date fixed for its expiry has passed; or 
(b) either party has given notice to suspend or terminate it.
17. Wages.
(1) Payments due to seafare rs working on ships registered with The Bahamas  
are made at no greater than monthly intervals and in accordance with the  
mutually agreed and signed seafarers’ employment agreement.
(2) A seafarer shall be given a monthly account of the payments due and the  
amounts  paid,  including  wages,  additional  payments  and  the  rate  of  
exchange used, where payment has been made in a currency or at a rate  
different from that agreed, including any deductions made.
(3) The  owner  shall  take  measures to  provide  seafarers  with  a  means  to 
transmit all or part  of their earnings to their families or dependants or  
legal beneficiaries.
(4) Measures to ensure that seafarers are able to transmit their earnings to  
their families include —
(a) a  system  for  enabling  seafarers,  at  the  time  of  their  entering  
employment or during it, to allot, if they so desire, a proportion of  
their wages for remittance at regular intervals to their families by  
bank transfers or similar means; and
(b) a requirement that allotments should be remitted in due time and  
directly to the person or persons nominated by the seafarers.
Page - 13
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(5) A charge  for  the  service  under  this  regulation  shall  be  reasonable  in  
amount, and the rate of currency exchange, at the prevailing market rate  
and not unfavourable to the seafarer.
(6) For the purpose of calculating wages, the normal hours of work at sea and 
in port should not exceed eight hours per day.
(7) A seafarer  shall  be  compensated  for  overtime  worked  and  such  
remuneration shall be applied to the seafarer's account.
(8) Where a seafarer is held captive on or off  a ship as a result of acts of  
piracy or armed robbery against the ship, wages and other entitlements  
under the seafarers’ employment agreement, or applicable national laws,  
including the remittance of allotments, shall continue to be paid during the 
period of captivity and repatriation as stipulated in a Marine Notice.
18. Hours of rest.
(1) The  master  shall,  so  far  as  is  reasonably practicable,  ensure  that  the  
minimum number of hours of rest shall be observed for seafarers  and any 
exceptions to this regulation shall be determined by the Authority.
(2) The hours of rest referred to in paragraph (1) may be divided into no more  
than two periods, one of which shall be at least six hours in length, and the 
interval between consecutive periods of rest shall not exceed fourteen  
hours.
(3) Musters, fire-fighting and lifeboat drills, and drills prescribed by national  
laws and regulations , shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes the  
disturbance of rest periods.
(4) When a seafarer is on call, the seafarer shall have adequate compensatory  
rest period, if the normal period of rest is disturbed by calls to work.
(5) A table with the shipboard working arrangements shall be posted in an  
easily accessible place  on board the ship and the table shall contain, for  
every position at least —
(a) the schedule of service at sea and service in port; and
(b) the minimum hours of rest required under paragraph (1).
(6) The table referred to under paragraph (5), shall be in the form approved by 
the Authority in the working language of the ship and in the English  
language.
(7) The master shall —
(a) maintain a record of a seafarer ’s daily hours of rest, in the form  
determined by the Authority and in the working language of the  
ship and in the English language; and 
Page - 14
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(b) give the seafarer a copy of the record pertaining to the seafarer ’s 
daily hours of rest, endorsed by the master or a person designated  
by the master and the seafarer.
(8) The Authority, in consultation with the Director of Labour, may authorise  
or register collective bargaining agreements permitting exceptions to the  
limits set out in the collective bargaining agreements.
(9) Without prejudice to the preceding paragraphs, the master may require a  
seafarer to perform any hours of work, where in the opinion of the master  
it is necessary in an emergency threatening the safety of the ship or any  
person on board the ship or damage to cargo or for the purpose of giving  
assistance to other ships or persons in distress at sea. 
(10) For the purposes of this regulation —
(a) “hours of work” means time during which seafarers are required to  
do work on account of the ship;
(b) “hours of rest ” means time outside of hours of work but does not  
include short breaks.
19. Annual leave.
(1) A owner shall  require that seafarers employed on ships are given paid  
annual leave under the seafarers’ employment agreement.
(2) The annual leave with pay entitlements shall be calculated on the basis of  
a minimum of 2.5 calendar days per month of employment.
(3) The manner in which the length of service is calculated shall be specified 
in a Marine Notice.
20. Shore leave.
A owner shall give shore leave to seafarers.
21. Repatriation.
(1) A seafarer is entitled to be repatriated to the destination provided in the  
seafarers employment agreement. 
(2) If the seafarers employment agreement does not identify a destination, and 
there has been no agreement between the seafarer and the shipowner as to  
the  destination,  the  seafarer  is  entitled  to  to  be  repatriated  to  the  
international airport of the seafarer's choice at —
(a) the  place  at  which  the  seafarer  entered  into  the  seafarer's  
employment agreement; or
(b) the seafarer's country of residence.
(3) A owner shall repatriate a seafarer at no cost to the seafarer —
Page - 15
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(a) where  the  seafarers’ employment  agreement  expires  while  the  
seafarer is abroad; 
(b) upon the expiry of the period of notice given in accordance with the  
provisions of the seafarers’ employment agreement; 
(c) where the seafarers’ employment agreement is terminated —
(i) by the owner; or
(ii) by  the  seafarer  for  reasons  specified  in  a  Marine  Notice  
issued by the Authority;
(d) where the seafarer is no longer able to carry out the seafarer’s duties 
under the employment agreement or cannot be expected to carry out 
the duties in the specific circumstances.
(4) A owner shall —
(a) not require a seafarer to make an advance payment towards the cost  
of repatriation at the beginning of the seafarer’s employment; and
(b) not recover the cost of repatriation from the seafarers’ wages or  
other entitlements,
except  where, the  seafarer  has  contravened the  seafarer’s  employment  
obligations.
(5) A owner of a Bahamian ship shall provide the Authority with evidence of  
financial security for the repatriation of seafarers as described in a Marine  
Notice issued by the Authority.
(6) Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, a owner may recover the cost  
of repatriation under third-party contractual arrangements.
(7) Where a owner fails to make arrangements for, or to meet, the cost of  
repatriation of seafarers —
(a) the Authority will arrange for repatriation of the seafarers;
(b) costs incurred in repatriating seafarers shall be recoverable from the  
owner;
(c) the expenses of repatriation shall in no case be a charge upon the  
seafarers, except as provided in paragraph (4);
(d) the  ship  or  other  ships  of  the  owner  may  be  detained  by  the  
Authority until the reimbursement has been made.
(8) A copy of these Regulation s, written in the English language, shall be  
carried on board a Bahamian ship and shall be available to seafarers.
Page - 16
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
22. Abandonment.
(1) A seafarer shall be deemed to have been abandoned where, in violation of  
the  requirements  of  this  regulation  or  the  terms  of  the  seafarers’  
employment agreement, the owner—
(a) fails to cover the cost of the seafarer’s repatriation;
(b) has left the seafarer without the necessary maintenance and support; 
and
(c) has  otherwise  unilaterally  severed  their  ties  with  the  seafarer  
including  failure  to  pay contractual  wages  for  a  period  of  two  
months.
(2) For  the  purposes  of  paragraph  (1),  “ necessary  maintenance  and  
support” include adequate food, accommodation, drinking water supplies, 
essential fuel for survival on board the ship and necessary medical care.
23. Entitlement of seafarer to demand discharge. 
(1) The master of every ship shall notify the crew of — 
(a) the itinerary of the ship and any changes that may arise thereto;
(b) any act of war, danger or other similar circumstance that can pose a  
risk of danger; or
(c) any circumstances in a port for which the ship is bound, that pose a  
significant health risk.
(2) A seafarer shall be entitled to demand discharge from the ship where —
(a) there is a possibility that the ship can be — 
(i) taken by a party engaged in war; or
(ii) damaged  by  an  act  of  war  or  is  in  danger  that  can  be  
considered  to  be  of  a  similar  circumstance  or  that  such  
danger has increased;
(b) a malignant epidemic disease is prevailing in a port for which the  
ship is bound.
(3) A demand  for  discharge  must  be  made  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  
seafarer has been informed of the circumstances.
(4) If the voyage has not been commenced, the seafarer shall be entitled to  
discharge at once or otherwise in the first port or anchoring place the ship  
is to call. 
(5) If the ship is not to call any port or anchoring place before it is expected to 
pass through areas where circumstances prevail as mentioned in paragraph 
(2), the master shall upon request of the seafarer give him access to sign  
off if an opportunity occurs to send him ashore.
Page - 17
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(6) If the seafarer obtains discharge, the owner shall pay the expenses for the  
seafarer’s  repatriation  with  subsistence  allowance  to  his  domicile  or,  
according to the directions of the owner, to the place of engagement. 
(7) Where a seafarer obtains a similar engagement on another ship at the  
place of discharge he shall not be entitled to receive the expenses and  
allowance referred to in paragraph (6). 
24. Seafarer compensation for the ship’s loss or foundering.
(1) In every case of loss or foundering of any ship, the owner shall pay to  
each seafarer on board an indemnity against unemployment resulting from 
such loss or foundering.
(2) The rules referred to in paragraph (1) of this regulation shall be without  
prejudice to any other rights a seafarer may have under the national laws  
or regulations concerned for losses or injuries arising from a ship’s loss or  
foundering.
25. Manning levels.
Every ship shall be manned by a crew that is adequate, in terms of size and  
qualifications, to ensure the safety and security of the ship and its personnel,  
under all operating conditions, in accordance with the minimum safe manning  
document  or  Marine  Notice  issued  by  the  Authority,  and  comply  with  the  
regulations  governing  training,  certification,  manning  and  watchkeeping  of  
seafarers.
26. Career  and  skill  development  and  opportunities  for  seafarers’  
employment.
The  Minister  shall  cause  to  be  implemented  n ational  policies to  promote  
employment  in  the  maritime  sector  and  to  encourage  career  and  skill  
development and greater employment opportunities for seafarers domiciled in  
The Bahamas as specified in a Marine Notice issued by the Authority.
PART V – ACCOMMODATION, RECREATIONAL 
FACILITIES, FOOD AND CATERING
27. Accommodation and recreational facilities.
(1) A owner shall provide and maintain safe and decent accommodation and  
recreational facilities for seafarers working or living  on board  the ship,  
consistent with promoting with seafarer's health and well-being.
(2) For the purposes of these Regulations, a ship —
Page - 18
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(a) constructed before the date of entry into force of the Convention  
shall comply with the relevant provisions of the Merchant Shipping 
(Crew Accommodation) Regulations, 1997;1
(b) shall be deemed to have been constructed on the date when its keel  
is laid or when it is at a similar stage of construction.
(3) The master or a person designated by the master shall —
(a) inspect the crew accommodation at intervals not exceeding seven  
days;
(b) be accompanied by a minimum of one member of the crew during  
the inspection of the crew accommodation; and
(c) cause to be entered in the ship’s official log book —
(i) the time and date of the inspection;
(ii) the  names  and  ranks  of  the  persons  conducting  the  
inspection; and
(iii) the particulars of the crew accommodation or any part of it  
that is not compliant with these Regulations.
(4) The official log book of the ship shall be made available for review by an  
authorised officer.
(5) For the purposes of these Regulations,  unless exemptions or equivalences  
are agreed by the Authority —
(a) a ship shall be designed and constructed so that —
(i) where full  and free  movement is  necessary,  the  seafarer ’s 
accommodation  shall  have  a  clear  headroom  of  203  
centimetres or more provided that the Authority may permit  
reduction in headroom in any space, or part of any space, in  
such  accommodation  where  the  Authority is  satisfied  that  
such reduction is reasonable and will not result in discomfort  
to the seafarers;
(ii) the accommodation shall be adequately insulated;
(iii) in ships other than passenger ships, sleeping rooms shall be  
situated above the load line amidships or aft, except that in  
exceptional cases, where the size, type or intended service of  
the ship renders any other location impracticable, sleeping  
rooms may be located in the fore part of the ship, but in no  
case forward of the collision bulkhead;
(iv) in  a  passenger  ship,  and  in  a  special  purpose  ship,  the  
Authority may, on condition that satisfactory arrangements  
are made for lighting and ventilation, permit the location of  
11997 No. 1508 UK SI
Page - 19
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
sleeping rooms below the load line, but in no case shall they  
be located immediately beneath working alleyways;
(v) there shall be no direct openings into sleeping rooms from  
cargo  and  machinery spaces  or  from  galleys,  storerooms,  
drying  rooms  or  communal  sanitary areas;  that  part  of  a  
bulkhead separating such places  from sleeping rooms  and  
external bulkheads shall be efficiently constructed of steel or  
other approved substance and be watertight and gas-tight;
(vi) the materials used to construct internal bulkheads, panelling  
and sheeting,  floors  and joinings  shall  be  suitable  for  the  
purpose and conducive to ensuring a healthy environment;
(vii) proper lighting and sufficient drainage shall be provided;
(viii) accommodation and recreational and catering facilities shall  
meet the requirements set out in regulation 28;
(ix) a ship regularly trading to mosquito infested ports shall be  
fitted with appropriate devices;
(b) with regards to ventilation and heating —
(i) sleeping  rooms  and  mess  rooms  shall  be  adequately  
ventilated;
(ii) ships  shall  be  equipped with  air  conditioning  for  seafarer  
accommodation,  for  any separate  radio  room and  for  any  
centralized machinery control room, except those regularly  
engaged in trade where temperate climatic conditions do not  
require this;
(iii) all  sanitary spaces  shall  have  ventilation  to  the  open  air,  
independently of any other part of the accommodation; and
(iv) adequate heat through an appropriate heating system shall be  
provided, except in ships exclusively on voyages in tropical  
climates;
(c) with regards to lighting —
(i) subject to such special arrangements as may be permitted by  
the Authority for passenger ships, sleeping rooms and mess  
rooms shall be lit by natural light and provided with adequate  
artificial light;
(ii) all seafarer accommodation shall comply with the standards  
of  natural  and  artificial  lighting  in  accordance  with  the  
regulations governing the accommodation for the crew prior  
to 20 August, 2013;
(d) with regards to sanitary facilities —
Page - 20
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(i) a seafarer shall have convenient access on the ship to sanitary 
facilities, with separate sanitary facilities being provided for  
men and women;
(ii) there shall be  sanitary facilities within easy access  of the  
navigating bridge and the machinery space or near the engine  
room control centre;
(iii) in a ship, a minimum of one toilet, one washbasin and one  
tub or shower or both for every six persons or less who do  
not have personal facilities shall be provided at a convenient  
location;
(iv) with the exception of a passenger ship, each sleeping room  
shall  be  provided  with  a  washbasin  having  hot  and  cold  
running  fresh  water,  except  where  such  a  washbasin  is  
situated in a private bathroom;
(v) in  a  passenger  ship  normally engaged  on  voyages  of  not  
exceeding  four hours’ duration, the Authority may approve  
special  arrangements  or  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  
facilities required;
(vi) hot and cold running fresh water shall be available in all  
wash places.
(6) Where sleeping accommodation on board a ship is required —
(a) in a ship other than a passenger ship, an individual sleeping room  
shall be provided for each seafarer;
(b) subject to the minimum floor area requirements referred to under  
paragraph (7) —
(i) on  ships  of  less  than  3,000  gross  tonnage  other  than  a  
passenger ship and a special purpose ship, sleeping rooms  
may be occupied by a maximum of two seafarers;
(ii) on a passenger ship, sleeping rooms may be occupied by a  
maximum of  four seafarers not carrying out the duties of a  
ships’ officer;
(iii) on a passenger ship where seafarers perform the duty of petty  
officers, there shall be no more than two persons per sleeping 
room;
(iv) on special purpose ships sleeping rooms may accommodate  
more than four persons;
(c) separate sleeping rooms shall be provided for men and women;
(d) as  far  as  practicable,  sleeping  rooms  of  seafarers  shall  be  so  
arranged that watches are separated and that no seafarer working  
during the day shall share a room with watchkeepers;
Page - 21
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(e) sleeping rooms shall be of adequate size and —
(i) for each occupant, the furniture, of smooth, hard material not  
liable to warp or corrode, shall include a clothes locker of  
ample space, with a minimum volume of 475 litres, and a  
drawer or equivalent space with a minimum volume of 56  
litres; if the drawer is incorporated in the clothes locker then  
the combined minimum volume of the clothes locker shall be  
500 litres; it shall be fitted with a shelf and able to be locked  
by the occupant;
(ii) each sleeping room shall be provided with a table or desk,  
which may be of the fixed, drop-leaf or slide-out type, with  
comfortable seating accommodation;
(f) berths shall meet the following standards —
(i) separate berth for each seafarer shall be provided;
(ii) the inside dimensions of a berth shall be a minimum of 198  
centimetres by 80 centimetres;
(iii) there shall be adequate berth arrangements on board;
(iv) berths shall not be arranged in tiers of more than  two; if a  
berth is placed along the ship’s side, there shall be only a  
single tier where a sidelight is situated above a berth;
(v) the lower berth in a double tier shall be a minimum of 30  
centimetres above the floor; the upper berth shall be placed  
approximately  midway  between  the  bottom  of  the  lower  
berth and the lower side of the deckhead beams;
(vi) the framework and the lee-board, if any, of a berth shall be of  
approved material, hard, smooth, and not likely to corrode or  
to harbour vermin;
(vii) if tubular frames are used for the construction of berths, they  
shall be completely sealed and without perforations;
(viii) when one berth is placed over another, a dust-proof bottom  
shall be fitted beneath the bottom mattress or spring bottom  
of the upper berth; and
(ix) clean good quality bedding shall be supplied by a owner to  
seafarers during the seafarers’ service on board the ship, and  
the seafarers shall be responsible for the return of the bedding 
at times specified by the master on completion of service on  
the ship.
(7) Unless otherwise provided for in these Regulations, sleeping rooms shall  
have the following minimum floor areas —
Page - 22
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(a) in single berth seafarers’ sleeping rooms , the floor area shall be a  
minimum of —
(i) 4.5  square  metres  in  ships  not  exceeding  3,000  gross  
tonnage;
(ii) 5.5 square metres in ships of 3,000 gross tonnage or over but  
less than 10,000 gross tonnage;
(iii) 7 square metres in ships of 10,000 gross tonnage or more;
(b) in order to provide single berth sleeping rooms on ships of less than  
3,000 gross tonnage, passenger ships and special purpose ships, the  
Authority may allow a reduced floor area;
(c) in ships not exceeding 3,000 gross tonnage, other than a passenger  
ship and a special purpose ship, where sleeping rooms are occupied  
by two seafarers, the floor area of such sleeping rooms shall be a  
minimum of 7 square metres;
(d) on a passenger ship and a special purpose ship the floor area of  
sleeping rooms for seafarers not performing the duties of a ships’  
officer shall be a minimum of —
(i) 7.5 square metres in rooms accommodating two persons;
(ii) 11.5 square metres in rooms accommodating three persons;
(iii) 14.5 square metres in rooms accommodating four persons;
(e) on a special purpose ship sleeping rooms where more than  four 
seafarers are accommodated, the floor area shall be a minimum of  
3.6 square metres per person;
(f) on a ship other than a passenger ship and special purpose ship, for  
seafarers who perform the duties of ships’ officers where no private  
sitting room or day room is provided, the floor area per person shall  
be a minimum of —
(i) 7.5  square  metres  in  ships  not  exceeding  3,000  gross  
tonnage;
(ii) 8.5 square metres in ships of 3,000 gross tonnage or more but 
not exceeding 10,000 gross tonnage;
(iii) 10 square metres in ships of 10,000 gross tonnage or more;
(g) on a passenger ship and a special purpose ship, the floor area for  
seafarers performing the duties of a ships’ officer where no private  
sitting room or day room is provided, the floor area per person for a  
junior officer shall be a minimum of 7.5 square metres and for  
senior officer a minimum of 8.5 square metres;
(h) the master, the chief engineer and the chief navigating officer, and  
where  practicable,  the  second  engineer  officer,  shall  have,  in  
Page - 23
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
addition to their sleeping rooms, an adjoining sitting room,  day  
room or equivalent additional space.
(8) A mess room shall —
(a) be located apart from the sleeping rooms and as close as practicable  
to the galley; and
(b) be  of  adequate  size  and  comfort  and  properly  furnished  and  
equipped, including ongoing facilities for refreshment.
(9) A ship  carrying  fifteen  or  more  seafarers  and  engaged  in  a  voyage  
exceeding  three days duration shall be provided with separate  hospital 
accommodation  for  medical  care  and  that  accommodation  shall  be  
accessible, comfortable and conducive to the seafarer receiving prompt  
and adequate care and the Authority may agree to any exemptions to this  
requirement for ships engaged in coast trade.
(10) A owner shall provide laundry facilities for seafarers.
(11) A owner  shall  provide  recreational  facilities,  amenities  and  services,  
including social connectivity for seafarers and a ship shall —
(a) have a space on open deck to which the seafarers can have access  
when off duty, which are of adequate area having regard to the size  
of the ship and the number of seafarers on board;
(b) be provided with separate offices or a common ship’s office for use  
by  deck  and  engine  departments,  unless  an  exemption  or  
equivalence is agreed by the Authority.
(12) The  Authority  may  permit  fairly  applied  variations  in  respect  of  the  
requirements in this regulation on condition that such variations do not  
result in overall facilities less favourable than those which would result  
from the application of those requirements.
(13) The Authority may, exempt —
(a) ships  not  exceeding  200  gross  tonnage  from  the  following  
provisions of this regulation, where it is reasonable to do so, taking  
into account the size of the ship and the number of persons on board 
—
(i) paragraphs 5(b)(ii), 5(d)(iv) and 10; and
(ii) paragraph 7(a), (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) in respect of floor area 
only;
(b) ships  not  exceeding 3000  gross  tonnage  from the  provisions  of  
paragraphs 7(a), 7(h), 8(a), 5(d)(ii) and 11(b); and
(c) special purpose ships from the provisions of paragraph 7(a).
Page - 24
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
28. Food and catering.
(1) A owner shall ensure that —
(a) the  food  and  drinking  water  on  board the  ship  are  of  suitable  
quantity, nutritional value and quality, for the number of seafarers  
on board and the duration and nature of the voyage;
(b) the  catering  department  is  organised  and  equipped  to  provide  
seafarers with adequate, varied and nutritious meals, prepared and  
served in hygienic conditions  taking into consideration religious  
requirements and cultural practices;
(c) catering staff are properly trained or instructed; and
(d) a seafarer engaged as a cook  on board  the ship shall complete a  
training course approved or recognised by the Authority,  except  
where the Authority permits a non-fully qualified cook to serve on a 
specified ship for a limited period.
(2) A seafarer  on board  a ship shall, during the period of engagement, be  
provided with food free of charge.
(3) The master or a person designated by the master shall —
(a) inspect the following at intervals not exceeding seven days —
(i) supplies of food and drinking water;
(ii) spaces and equipment used for the storage and handling of  
food and drinking water; and 
(iii) galley and other equipment for the preparation and service of  
meals;
(b) be accompanied by a minimum of one member of the crew during  
the inspection referred to under subparagraph (a); and
(c) cause to be entered in the official log book of the ship —
(i) the time and date of the inspection;
(ii) the  names  and  ranks  of  the  persons  conducting  the  
inspection; and
(iii) the particulars of the area inspected that is not compliant with 
these Regulations as specified in a Marine Notice issued by  
the Authority.
Page - 25
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
PART VI – HEALTH PROTECTION, MEDICAL CARE, 
WELFARE AND SOCIAL PROTECTION
29. Medical care on board ship and ashore.
(1) A owner shall provide medical care, including essential dental care, and  
health protective measures for seafarers working on board the ship. 
(2) A seafarer shall have access to prompt medical care at no cost to that  
seafarer while working on board the ship.
(3) A owner shall permit a seafarer to visit a medical practitioner or dentist in  
ports  of  call,  where  practicable,  without  delay and  at  no  cost  to  the  
seafarer.
(4) All seafarers on board registered ships and ships visiting ports in The  
Bahamas  shall  have  prompt  disembarkation  of  seafarers  in  need  of  
immediate medical care from ships and access to medical facilities ashore  
for the provision of appropriate treatment.
(5) Where a seafarer has died in the territorial waters of The Bahamas or  
during a ship's voyage from the high seas to the territorial waters of The  
Bahamas,  the  Authority shall  facilitate the  repatriation of  the body or  
ashes by the owner, in accordance with the wishes of the seafarer or their  
next of kin, as appropriate.
(6) All deaths of seafarers employed, engaged, or working on board a ship  
registered with The Authority are adequately investigated and recorded,  
and  reported  on  an  annual  basis  to  the  Director-General  of  the  
International Labour Office.
(7) A standard  medical  report  form  shall  be  adopted  by  the  Minister  of  
Health, and that form shall be used by the ships’ master and on board by 
the onshore medical personnel.
(8) The form referred to under paragraph (7) and its contents shall be kept  
confidential and only be used to facilitate the treatment of seafarers.
(9) A medicine  chest,  its  contents,  as  well  as  medical  equipment  and  a  
medical guide shall be carried and maintained on board a ship and shall be 
inspected at intervals not exceeding twelve months.
(10) A  ship  carrying  100  or  more  persons  and  ordinarily  engaged  on  
international  voyages of  more  than  three  days  duration,  shall  have  a  
qualified medical practitioner  on board  an d t he Director may grant an  
exemption in respect of a ship as specified in a Marine Notice issued by  
the Authority.
(11) Where  a  medical practitioner is  not  on board  a ship, the owner shall  
ensure that a seafarer, who has satisfactorily completed training in medical 
Page - 26
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
care in accordance with regulations governing the training, certification,  
manning and watchkeeping of seafarers, is in charge of medical care and  
administering medicine, and competent to provide medical first aid.
(12) The responsible government agency shall ensure that medical advice —
(a) by  radio  or  satellite  communication  to  ships  at  sea,  including  
specialist advice, is available 24 hours a day; 
(b) including the onward transmission of medical messages by radio or  
satellite communication, between a ship and those ashore giving the 
advice, shall be available free of charge to all ships irrespective of  
the flag that they fly.
(13) A Marine  Notice  may be  issued  by the  Authority in  respect  to  these  
Regulations.
30. Liability of owner.
(1) A owner shall be liable to —
(a) defray the expense of medical care,  including medical treatment  
and  the  supply  of  the  necessary  medicines  and  therapeutic  
appliances, and board and lodging away from home until the sick or 
injured seafarer has recovered, or until the sickness or incapacity  
has been declared of a permanent character; 
(b) pay the cost of burial expenses in the  case of death occurring on  
board or ashore during the period of engagement;  and
(c) ensure that a seafarer is covered under an insurance scheme or any  
other financial security scheme regarding sickness, injury or death  
occurring while they are serving under a  seafarers’ employment  
agreement or arising from their employment under such agreement. 
(2) Where the sickness or injury results in incapacity for work the owner shall 
be liable to pay full wages as long as the sick or injured seafarer remains  
on board or until the seafarer has been repatriated.
(3) The liability of an owner in respect of a seafarer —
(a) to defray the expense of medical care, board and lodging; and
(b) to pay wages in whole or in part where the seafarer is no longer on  
board,
shall not be less than sixteen weeks from the date of an injury or the  
commencement of any sickness of that seafarer.
(4) A owner shall take measures for safeguarding property left on board the  
ship by a sick, injured or deceased seafarer and for returning the property  
to the seafarer or the seafarer’s next of kin.
Page - 27
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(5) Notwithstanding the insurance scheme or other fin ancial security scheme  
referred to under paragraph (1)(c), a owner shall not be liable for —
(a) injury incurred to the seafarer other than in the service of the ship;
(b) injury or sickness due to the wilful misconduct of the sick, injured  
or deceased seafarer;
(c) sickness or infirmity intentionally concealed by the seafarer at the  
time of signing a seafarers’ employment agreement.
(6) The owner's financial security shall remain in full force and effect until  
the expiry of its validity period, and shall not be terminated or withdrawn  
prior  thereto  unless  the  financial  security  provider  has  provided  the  
Authority with no less than thirty days’ prior written notice.
(7) Where a owner determines to cancel or terminate its financial security, the  
owner shall —
(a) give prior notification of its intention to seafarers;
(b) notify the financial security provider of its intention. 
31. Health and safety protection and accident prevention.
(1) A owner shall ensure that a seafarer is provided with occ upational health 
protection consistent with their right to live, work and train on board the 
ship in a safe and hygienic environment.
(2) The Authority may adopt and review at intervals the guidelines for the  
management of the seafarer ’s occupational safety and health on board the 
ship.
(3) The Authority may issue information in a Marine Notice with respect to  
this regulation.
32. Social security scheme.
(1) A seafarer who is —
(a) a citizen of The Bahamas; or 
(b) ordinarily resident in The Bahamas,
shall be covered under the social security scheme provided for under the  
National Insurance Act ( Ch. 350) and the owner shall make the requisite  
contributions in respect of that seafarer as required thereunder. 
(2) A owner, who employs seafarers from a country or territory that is not a  
party to the Convention, shall ensure that the seafarers are provided with  
access to social security protection as set out in a Marine Notice.
Page - 28
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
 (3) A seafarers’ employment agreement or a collective bargaining agreement  
shall  provide  details  of  the  agreed  social  security  arrangements  in  
accordance with the relevant laws.
PART VII - MISCELLANEOUS
33. Inspection and detention of Bahamian ships.
(1) An authorised officer may inspect any Bahamian ship and if the ship does  
not in comply with these Regulations the authorised officer may detain the 
ship in accordance with the provisions of the Act until the the ship has  
complied.
(2) An authorised officer shall not unreasonably detain or delay a ship.
34. Inspection and detention of foreign ships.
(1) An authorised officer may inspect any ship other than a Bahamian ship  
when  the  ship is  in a  Bahamian  port  and if  the  authorised officer  is  
satisfied that the ship is not in compliance with these Regulations, the  
authorised officer may —
(a) send a report to the government of the country in which the ship is  
registered, and a copy of the report to the Director-General of the  
International Labour Office; and 
(b) where conditions  on board  are clearly hazardous to the safety or  
health of the seafarers — 
(i) take the necessary measures to rectify those conditions; or
(ii) detain the ship:
Provided that the measures specified may be taken only when 
the ship has called at a Bahamian port in the normal course of  
business or for operational reasons. 
(2) Where the authorised officer underta kes either of the measures specified  
in paragraph (1)(b), the  authorised officer s hall immediately notify the  
nearest maritime, consular or diplomatic representative of the State whose  
flag the ship is entitled to fly. 
(3) An authorised officer shall not in the exercise of his powers unreasonably  
detain or delay a ship.
35. Electronic or paper communication.
(1) In the context of formation of contracts, unless otherwise agreed by the  
parties, an offer and acceptance may be expressed by means of electronic  
Page - 29
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
communication  in accordance with the Electronic Communications and  
Transactions Act (Ch. 337A).
(2) An electronic communication is attributable to a person if the electronic  
communication resulted from the action of the person, acting in person, by 
his agent, or by his electronic agent device.
(3) Clear information as to the issuance of documents electronically shall be  
in  the  format  complying  with  the  Electronic  Communications  and  
Transactions Act (Ch. 337A) and specified in a Marine Notice issued by  
the Authority.
36. On-board complaint procedures for Bahamian ships.
(1) On board complaints procedures shall be maintained by the owner, for  
fair, effective, and expeditious handling of seafarer’s complaints alleging  
breaches of the requirements of the Convention.
(2) A owner shall ensure that on-board complaint procedures, that may be  
used by seafarers to lodge complaints relating to any matter that is alleged  
to constitute a breach of the requirements of the Convention, is kept, at all  
times, on board the ship.
(3) The seafarer shall be made aware of the on board complaint procedures  
and the procedures shall be kept in a conspicuous place on board the  
vessel informing seafarers, of the —
(a) right to representation;
(b) safeguards against victimization; 
(c) contact information for the Director of Labour in The Bahamas and, 
where different, in the seafarers’ country of residence; and
(d) name of a person on board the ship who may provide confidential  
and impartial advice and assist with on board complaint procedures.
(4) A seafarer may report a complaint to the master and, where they consider  
it necessary, to the Authority.
37. Onshore seafarer complaint-handling procedures.
(1) A seafarer on-board a ship registered with The Bahamas or a ship calling  
at a port in The Bahamas who alleges a breach of the requirements of the  
Convention, may report such breach in the manner contained in a Marine  
Notice issued by the Authority.
(2) A seafarer who alleges a breach of the requirements of the Convention,  
may report the breach to an authorised officer or inspector in the port at  
which the ship has called.
Page - 30
MERCHANT SHIPPING (MARITIME LABOUR
CONVENTION) REGULATIONS, 2026
(3) An authorised officer or inspector investigating a complaint made  under 
paragraphs (1) and (2) shall give the master, the owner, and any other  
person involved in the complaint, an opportunity to be heard.
(4) An authorised officer or inspector investigating the complaint shall ensure 
that the complaint and identity of the seafarers is kept confidential.
(5) All complaints made to external authorities, the Authority shall undertake  
to cooperate and coordinate with The Department of Labour as specified  
in a Marine Notice issued by the Authority.
38. Marine casualties.
Pursuant to section 192 of the Act, the Authority shall investigate casualties in  
accordance with regulations for Marine Safety Investigations.
39. Guidance on Convention.
The Authority may provide guidance on the Convention in a Marine Notice.
40. Penalty.
A person  who  contravenes  the  provisions  of  these  Regulations  commits  an  
offence and is liable on summary conviction to a fine of five hundred dollars.
41. Revocation of Sub. Leg. Vol. IV, Ch. 268 p. 155.
The Merchant Shipping (Maritime Labour Convention) Regulations 2 are hereby 
revoked. 
Dated this               day of                                      , 2026.
MINISTER RESPONSIBLE FOR MARITIME AFFAIRS
2S.I. No. 117 of 2012
Page - 31
                    Dated this 1st day of April, 2026.
Signed
JOBETH COLEBY-DA VIS
MINISTER RESPONSIBLE FOR MARITIME AFFAIRS