ClinicalTrials.gov record NCT03667690
Record version 2, submitted 2018-10-01

Brief title: Study of Rezafungin Compared to Caspofungin in Subjects With Candidemia and/or Invasive Candidiasis
Official title: A Phase 3, Multicenter, Randomized, Double-blind Study of the Efficacy and Safety of Rezafungin for Injection vs. Intravenous Caspofungin Followed by Oral Fluconazole Step Down in the Treatment of Subjects With Candidemia and/or Invasive Candidiasis
Lead sponsor: Cidara Therapeutics Inc., a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc. (Rahway, New Jersey USA)

Status and dates
  Overall status: RECRUITING
  Study start: 2018-10 (ESTIMATED)
  Primary completion: 2020-09 (ESTIMATED)
  Study completion: 2020-09 (ESTIMATED)

Design
  Study type: INTERVENTIONAL
  Phase: PHASE3
  allocation: RANDOMIZED
  interventionModel: PARALLEL
  primaryPurpose: TREATMENT
  maskingInfo:
    masking: QUADRUPLE
    whoMasked: PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR, OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR
  Enrollment: 218 (ESTIMATED)

Brief summary
  The purpose of this pivotal study is to determine if intravenous Rezafungin is efficacious and safe in the treatment of candidemia and/or invasive candidiasis when compared to caspofungin (followed by optional oral fluconazole).

Detailed description
  A Phase 3, multicenter, prospective, randomized, double-blind, efficacy and safety study of Rezafungin for Injection versus an active comparator regimen of caspofungin followed by optional oral fluconazole step-down therapy in subjects with candidemia and/or invasive candidiasis.

Arms and interventions
  Arm: Group 1: Rezafungin for Injection (EXPERIMENTAL)
    Subjects in Rezafungin treatment group will receive a 400 mg loading dose in Week 1, followed by 200 mg once weekly, for a total of 2 to 4 doses of rezafungin.
  Arm: Group 2: Caspofungin (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
    Subjects in caspofungin arm will receive a total treatment of >=14 days beginning with a single caspofungin 70 mg IV loading dose on Day 1 followed by 50 mg IV once daily up to 28 days.
    After >=3 days of caspofungin treatment, subjects may be switched to oral fluconazole if specific parameters are met.
    
    If the subject qualifies, then oral step-down therapy of fluconazole (6 mg/kg to the nearest 200 mg) is administered.
    After switch to oral step down before Day 8, subjects in the caspofungin group will receive IV placebo on Day 8 to preserve the study blind.
  Intervention: DRUG Rezafungin for Injection
  Intervention: DRUG Caspofungin
  Intervention: DRUG Fluconazole
  Intervention: DRUG intravenous placebo
  Intervention: DRUG oral placebo

Outcome measures
  [Primary outcome] All cause mortality (US FDA only)
    Description: The number of subjects in each treatment group who are alive and deceased (or with missing data) in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 30 (-2 days)
  [Primary outcome] All cause mortality (US FDA only)
    Description: The percentage of subjects in each treatment group who are alive and deceased (or with missing data) in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 30 (-2 days)
  [Primary outcome] Global Cure (EU only)
    Description: The number of subjects in each treatment group who have a global response of cure (clinical cure as assessed by the Investigator plus mycological eradication, as confirmed by the DRC), failure and indeterminate in the modified Intent to Treat (mITT) population.
    Time frame: Day 14 (+/-1 day)
  [Primary outcome] Global Cure (EU only)
    Description: The percentage of subjects in each treatment group who have a global response of cure (clinical cure as assessed by the Investigator plus mycological eradication, as confirmed by the DRC), failure and indeterminate in the modified Intent to Treat (mITT) population.
    Time frame: Day 14 (+/-1 day)
  [Secondary outcome] Global Cure (US FDA only)
    Description: The number of subjects in each treatment group who have a global response of cure (clinical cure as assessed by the Investigator plus mycological eradication, as confirmed by the DRC), failure and indeterminate in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 14 (+/-1 day)
  [Secondary outcome] Global Cure (US FDA only)
    Description: The percentage of subjects in each treatment group who have a global response of cure (clinical cure as assessed by the Investigator plus mycological eradication, as confirmed by the DRC), failure and indeterminate in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 14 (+/-1 day)
  [Secondary outcome] All cause mortality (EU only)
    Description: The number of subjects in each treatment group who are alive and deceased (or with missing data) in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 30 (-2 days)
  [Secondary outcome] All cause mortality (EU only)
    Description: The percentage of subjects in each treatment group who are alive and deceased (or with missing data) in the mITT population.
    Time frame: Day 30 (-2 days)
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Global Response (as confirmed by the DRC)
    Description: The number of subjects with a global response of cure, failure, or indeterminate will be presented by treatment group in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose) and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Global Response (as confirmed by the DRC)
    Description: The percentage of subjects with a global response of cure, failure, or indeterminate will be presented by treatment group in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose) and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Mycological Response
    Description: The number of subjects with a mycological response of eradication, failure, or indeterminate, by treatment group, in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 14 (+/-1 day), Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose), and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Mycological Response
    Description: The percentage of subjects with a mycological response of eradication, failure, or indeterminate, by treatment group, in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 14 (+/-1 day), Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose), and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Clinical Cure
    Description: The number of subjects with a clinical response of cure, failure, or indeterminate, presented by treatment group, in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 14 (+/-1 day), Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose), and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Comparison of Clinical Cure
    Description: The percentage of subjects with a clinical response of cure, failure, or indeterminate, presented by treatment group, in the mITT population
    Time frame: Day 5, Day 14 (+/-1 day), Day 30 (-2 days), End Of Treatment (<=2 days of last dose), and Follow-up (Days 52-59).
  [Secondary outcome] Incidence of treatment emergent adverse events [Safety and Tolerability]
    Description: Number of Subjects with Incidence of Treatment Emergent Adverse Events based on clinical chemistry, hematology and urine analysis laboratory test, vital sign, physical exams and ECG abnormalities.
    Time frame: Day 1 through Follow-up visit (Days 52-59)
  [Secondary outcome] Evaluate Pharmacokinetics (Cmax)
    Description: Evaluate maximum plasma concentration (Cmax)
    Time frame: Day 1; Days 2, 3, 4, or 5 (one sample on one day only); Day 8; Day 14 (for subjects not receiving a Day 15 dose); Day 15 (if applicable) and Day 22 (if applicable)
  [Secondary outcome] Evaluate Pharmacokinetics (Time to Cmax [Tmax])
    Description: Evaluate Tmax (time to Cmax)
    Time frame: Day 1; Days 2, 3, 4, or 5 (one sample on one day only); Day 8; Day 14 (for subjects not receiving a Day 15 dose); Day 15 (if applicable) and Day 22 (if applicable)
  [Secondary outcome] Evaluate Pharmacokinetics (AUC)
    Description: Evaluate area under the curve (AUC)
    Time frame: Day 1; Days 2, 3, 4, or 5 (one sample on one day only); Day 8; Day 14 (for subjects not receiving a Day 15 dose); Day 15 (if applicable) and Day 22 (if applicable)

Eligibility
  Sex: ALL  Minimum age: 18 Years
  Inclusion Criteria:
  
  
  - Willing and able to provide written informed consent.
  If the subject is unable to consent for himself/herself, a legally acceptable representative must provide informed consent on their behalf. 
  - Males or females >=18 years of age. 
  - 
  Established mycological diagnosis of candidemia and/or invasive candidiasis from a sample taken <=4 days (96 hours) before randomization defined as
  
  
  - >=1 blood culture positive for yeast or Candida OR 
  - Positive test for Candida from a Sponsor-approved rapid IVD OR 
  - Positive gram stain (or other method of direct microscopy) for yeast or positive culture for Candida spp.
  from a specimen obtained from a normally sterile site. 
   
  - Presence of one or more systemic signs attributable to candidemia or invasive candidiasis appearing from <=12 hours prior to the qualifying positive culture through time of enrollment. 
  - Willing to initiate or continue medical treatment to cure infections, including receipt of antibiotics and surgical procedures, if required. 
  - Female subjects of childbearing potential <2 years post-menopausal must agree to and comply with using one barrier method (e.g., female condom with spermicide) plus one other highly effective method of birth control, or sexual abstinence while participating in this study.
  Male subjects must be vasectomized, abstain from sexual intercourse, or agree to use barrier contraception, and also agree not to donate sperm while participating in the study. 
  
  Exclusion Criteria:
  
  
  - 
  Any of the following forms of invasive candidiasis at baseline:
  
  
  - Septic arthritis in a prosthetic joint (septic arthritis in a native joint is allowed) 
  - Osteomyelitis 
  - Endocarditis or myocarditis 
  - Meningitis, endophthalmitis, chorioretinitis, or any central nervous system infection 
   
  - 
  Received systemic treatment with an antifungal agent at approved doses for treatment of candidemia for >48 hours (e.g., >2 doses of a once daily antifungal agent or >4 doses of a twice daily antifungal agent) <=4 days (96 hours) before randomization
  
  a. Exception: Receipt of antifungal therapy to which any Candida spp.
  isolated in culture is not susceptible
   
  - Alanine aminotransferase or aspartate aminotransferase levels >10-fold the upper limit of normal 
  - Severe hepatic impairment in subjects with a history of chronic cirrhosis (Child-Pugh score >9) 
  - Presence of an indwelling vascular catheter or device that cannot be removed or an abscess that cannot be drained and is likely to be the source of candidemia or invasive candidiasis 
  - Known hypersensitivity to Rezafungin for Injection, caspofungin, any echinocandin, or to any of their excipients 
  - Meets National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 5, criteria for ataxia, tremor, motor neuropathy, or sensory neuropathy of Grade 2 or higher 
  - History of severe ataxia, tremor, or neuropathy or a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis or a movement disorder (including Parkinson's Disease or Huntington's Disease) 
  - Planned or ongoing therapy at screening with a known neurotoxic medication 
  - Previous participation in this or any previous rezafungin study 
  - Current participation in another interventional treatment trial with an investigational agent 
  - Recent use of an investigational medicinal product within 28 days of the first dose of study drug or presence of an investigational device at the time of screening. 
  - Pregnant or lactating females 
  - The Principal Investigator (PI) is of the opinion the subject should not participate in the study 
  - Severe renal impairment during Screening (Creatinine Clearance < 30 mL/min by Cockcroft-Gaul.
