CLINICALTRIALS.GOV STUDY RECORD
NCT Number: NCT07049679
Sponsor/Org Study ID: 298932

Brief Title: A Lifestyle Change Program for Managing Diabetes
Official Title: A Lifestyle Change Program for Managing Diabetes Among the Marshallese in Northwest Arkansas: A Pilot Trial

Lead Sponsor: University of Arkansas (Sponsor class: Other)
Conditions: Type 2 Diabetes

Overall Recruitment Status: Withdrawn
Study Type: Interventional
Study Phase: Not Applicable
Enrollment: 0 participants (Actual)
Primary Completion Date: 2025-08-06 (Actual)
Record Last Update Posted: 2025-08-19

Brief Summary:
The proposed study aims to fill the gap by adapting an evidence-based intervention and conducting a pilot trial to determine the new program's estimated effect sizes on occupational resilience, A1c, and diabetes-related quality of life. Developing and adapting Lifestyle Redesign (LR) for Marshallese diabetes management is significant because it would reduce health disparities in a community that is disproportionately affected by the disease, and a large number of Marshallese (currently approximately 15,000) have resided in the northwest Arkansas region since the 1980s.

Detailed Description:
To pilot-test AHD Program, a lifestyle change intervention for diabetes management, and obtain estimates of effect sizes on occupational resilience, A1C, and diabetes-related quality of life. It is hypothesized that occupational resilience, diabetes-related quality of life, and A1C will be improved by the end of the program.

Study Arms / Groups:
  - Standard of Care - Group B (No Intervention): This group will not participate in the AHD Program. The group participants will continue their routine care but will be invited to all 6 sessions on managing a healthy diet run by the EFNEP team.
  - ActiveHeal Diabetes (AHD) Program - Group A (Experimental): This group will continue routine care and participate in the AHD Program. AHD Program.

Interventions:
  - Behavioral: ActiveHeal Diabetes (AHD) Program -- Biweekly phone/Zoom calls to support physical activity and dietary behavior change, focused on history, experience, benefits and adaptation

Eligibility:
  Sex: All | Minimum Age: 18 Years | Accepts Healthy Volunteers: No
Inclusion Criteria:

* Marshallese Adults
* type 2 diabetes and test results (within 30 days) showing A1C greater than 6.4% or Estimated Average Glucose greater than 137 mg/dL.
* Able (and willing) to participate in exercise, diet management, and group dancing.

Exclusion Criteria:

* Marshallese who otherwise meet inclusion criteria but are not willing to commit to active participation in a lifestyle change intervention.
* Comorbidities that limit participation in the specified activities (i.e., stepper exercises, dieting, and dancing).

Facility Locations: none listed in the record.
