CLINICALTRIALS.GOV STUDY RECORD
NCT Number: NCT06897618
Sponsor/Org Study ID: Pro2025-0124

Brief Title: Culturally Tailored Diabetes Education on Self-Management of Adult Hispanic Males With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Official Title: Effect of Culturally Tailored Diabetes Education on Self-Management Behaviors of Adult Hispanic Males With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus

Lead Sponsor: Hackensack Meridian Health (Sponsor class: Other)
Conditions: Diabetes Mellitus; Diabete Type 2

Overall Recruitment Status: Terminated
Study Type: Interventional
Study Phase: Not Applicable
Enrollment: 40 participants (Actual)
Primary Completion Date: 2025-12-19 (Actual)
Record Last Update Posted: 2026-05-22

Brief Summary:
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a global public health concern. In the United States, adult Hispanic males are particularly vulnerable to type 2 diabetes mellitus and are more likely to develop complications and subsequently die from it, compared to non-Hispanic White males. Evidence suggests good self-management behaviors can potentially prevent disease-related complications and improve clinical outcomes. The American Diabetes Association and Association of Diabetes Care and Education Specialists have endorsed diabetes self-management education as a necessary component of care for all individuals living with the disease. However, adult Hispanic males with type 2 diabetes mellitus living in the Middle Atlantic Region of the U.S., especially those who are underserved, typically lack access to formal diabetes self-management education (DSME). Further, the majority have never participated in such educational activities. A large body of evidence suggests DSME can effectively improve self-management behaviors in diverse populations around the globe. The purpose of the proposed study is to examine the effect of culturally tailored diabetes education on self-management behaviors of adult Hispanic males, aged 18-64 years, with type 2 diabetes mellitus living in the Middle Atlantic Region of the U.S. This study can shed more light on the effectiveness of community-based, culturally tailored diabetes educational activities in this vulnerable population and guide future efforts towards enhancing self-management.

Study Arms / Groups:
  - Culturally Tailored Diabetes Education (Experimental): Five weeks of culturally tailored diabetes self-management education modeled after Association of Diabetes Care and Education Seven-item Framework (ADCES7).

Interventions:
  - Behavioral: Culturally tailored diabetes self-management education -- Five weeks of culturally tailored diabetes self-management education modeled after Association of Diabetes Care and Education Seven-item Framework (ADCES7).

Eligibility:
  Sex: Male | Minimum Age: 18 Years | Accepts Healthy Volunteers: No
Inclusion Criteria:

* Age: Adult Hispanic males 18-64 at time of study intervention.
* Diagnosis Codes: Patients with self-reported diagnosis of T2DM without complex, co-morbid conditions such as severe kidney disease and terminal illnesses such as cancer.
* English or Spanish speaking

Exclusion Criteria:

* Outside the age range listed above
* Without a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes

Number of Facilities: 1
  - Hackensack Meridian Health, JFK University Medical, Plainfield, New Jersey, United States
