FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Modernization of the Nation's Alerting Systems; Protecting the Nation's Communications Systems From Cybersecurity Threats
Document number: 2026-15601
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 48289
Publication date: 2026-07-31

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 146 (Friday, July 31, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 146 (Friday, July 31, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 48289-48300]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-15601]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 11

[PS Docket Nos. 22-329, 25-224; FCC 26-38; FR ID 359234]


Modernization of the Nation's Alerting Systems; Protecting the
Nation's Communications Systems From Cybersecurity Threats

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In the Report and Order, the Federal Communications Commission
(the FCC or the Commission) seeks to preserve the public's trust in the
Emergency Alert System (EAS) by requiring targeted cybersecurity
improvements that will help protect against hijacking by cybercriminals
and our nation's adversaries.

DATES: This rule is effective September 29, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information concerning the
information contained in this document, please contact David Kirschner,
Attorney Advisor, Cybersecurity and Communications Reliability
Division, Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau, at 202-418-0695,
or by email to [email protected] , or George Donato, Associate
Division Chief, Cybersecurity and Communications Reliability Division,
Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau at 202-418-0729, or by email
to [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order (Order) in PS Docket Nos. 22-329 and 25-224, FCC 26-38,
adopted on June 25, 2026, and released on June 29, 2026. A summary of
the accompanying proposed rule in PS Docket Nos. 25-224, 15-94, and 15-
91, FCC 26-38, adopted on June 25, 2026 and released on June 29, 2026
is published elsewhere in this issue of the Federal Register. The full
text of this document is available at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-38A1.pdf .

Procedural Matters

 Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,
as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a regulatory
flexibility analysis for notice-and-comment rulemakings, unless the
agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.''

[[Page 48290]]

Accordingly, the Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis (FRFA) concerning the possible impact of the rule changes
contained in this Report and Order on small entities.
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is non-major
under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission
will send a copy of this Report and Order to Congress and the
Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
 Paperwork Reduction Act Analysis. This Report and Order does not
contain proposed information collections subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), 44 U.S.C. 3501-3521. In addition,
therefore, it does not contain any new or modified information
collection burden for small business concerns with fewer than 25
employees, pursuant to the Small Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002,
44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4).

Synopsis

Goals of the Nation's Alerting Systems

 In the Alerting Modernization NPRM, we sought comment on the
objectives that effective alert and warning systems should serve.
Specifically, we sought comment on three possible core goals: (1)
alerting systems should provide authorities with the ability to rapidly
notify the public of emergencies that may put the public at risk; (2)
alerting systems should be capable of delivering instructions that
facilitate the protection of life and property; and (3) alerting
systems should provide a mechanism for government officials to provide
additional authoritative communications with the public before, during,
and after an emergency. Commenters generally agree that these should be
the overarching goals of the nation's alert and warning systems. The
Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) ``fully
supports these three goals and notes that the industry has continuously
evolved WEA to meet these objectives.'' The Competitive Carriers
Association (CCA) believes that these ``broad but simple goals proposed
for the nation's alerting systems . . . seem appropriate . . . [as
they] are worthwhile, important to public safety, and consistent with
statutory instructions and intent.'' North Carolina Emergency
Management et al., the Harris County Office of Homeland Security &
Emergency Management (Harris County), APCO International (APCO), and
the National Weather Service (NWS) also agree with the three stated
objectives, with the NWS noting that, ``[w]hile a perfect alerting
system is not possible, it should have the main goal of being easy to
use and available to anyone.''
 The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) supports the three core goals the
Commission proposed for alerting systems, but contends that they ``are
focused on the capabilities of the system rather than on the public
safety outcomes they are intended to achieve.'' Sonoma County
Department of Emergency Management, Snohomish County Department of
Emergency Management, former California Office of Emergency Services
Director Art Botterrell, and Washington State Emergency Management
Division likewise emphasize that public safety outcomes are of utmost
importance. iHeartMedia, Inc. supports the three objectives that we
identified, but believes we should consider a fourth: ``(4) alerting
systems should include resilient and reliable delivery systems proven
capable of functioning during emergencies, including when other
emergency alerting technologies may be unavailable.'' The New York City
Emergency Management Department (NYCEM) agrees with us that ``the speed
of notification is a critical component of any alerting system'' but
proposes the following alternative to our third objective focused on
ensuring the ability for authorities to send authoritative alerts to
the public: ``Alerting systems should be designed and utilized to
ensure that all members of the public receive an alert and are aware of
actions that they may take to protect life and property. . . .
[A]lerting systems should be available in a wide array of languages,
able to be displayed on various devices, and include considerations for
members of the public with various accessibility needs.'' Although we
understand and appreciate the proposals for additional goals of
alerting, we conclude that the three goals we proposed already
encompass these important public safety-, resiliency-, and
accessibility-focused concerns within the objectives that effective
alert and warning systems should serve. For example, while we agree
with iHeartMedia, Inc. that alerting systems must be resilient and
reliable, and capable of functioning when other emergency alerting
technologies may be unavailable, that objective is subsumed within our
goal of providing authorities with the ability to rapidly notify the
public of emergencies that may put them at risk. NYCEM's view that
alerting systems should be available in a wide array of languages and
on a variety of devices falls within the core goal of notifying the
public of emergencies, as that notification can only occur if
recipients can receive and understand the message.
 Commenters recognize that the Commission should continue to
evaluate ways to improve these systems, and we agree. As Sinclair
comments: ``Ultimately, the nation's alerting systems are critical to
the preservation of public health and safety, and examining ways to
enhance or improve these systems can save lives.'' We also find that
commenters generally recommend that, while alerting systems can be
improved, we should refrain from making fundamental changes to EAS and
WEA. We agree with commenters that these systems generally meet today's
alerting objectives, and determine that incremental improvements
advance the core goals of the nation's alerting systems. At this time,
we therefore decline to overhaul or phase out the legacy EAS
architecture. Legacy EAS continues to effectively support public safety
by creating alerting pathway redundancy, making alerting more
resilient, and by warning the public and informing them about
protective actions to take during emergencies. Eliminating it would
create a gap in alert delivery that would threaten the achievement of
our three goals. Consistent with the record, we take steps to improve
EAS and WEA as they exist today.

Cybersecurity Requirements Targeting Specific EAS Attack Vectors

 Central to our effort to modernize the nation's alerting systems is
ensuring those systems are secure. Commenters to both the Alerting
Modernization NPRM and the Alerting Security NPRM broadly agree that it
is vital to ensure the security of EAS and WEA. Foreign adversaries,
criminals, and other bad actors can wreak havoc if they gain access to
alerting systems, by sending a false alert that causes public panic or
delivers false information about a disaster or crisis, or by preventing
a real alert from being transmitted to the public. As one former
broadcaster who submitted comments points out, the dissemination of
false alerts can also undermine public trust in alerting capabilities,
which depends on ``ensuring that every message originates from an
authorized and verifiable source.'' Because of these risks, keeping
these systems ``secure against cyberattacks from our nation's
adversaries'' and ``[m]aintaining trust in

[[Page 48291]]

these systems is vital for both national security and achieving the
nation's alerting goals.''
 Today, we adopt three targeted measures that aim to ensure that EAS
Participants secure their equipment to prevent cyberattacks that could
result in the transmission of false EAS alerts or disrupt the
transmission of legitimate alerts. Specifically, we require EAS
Participants to do the following with respect to EAS equipment, studio
transmitter link equipment, and any remotely managed equipment that
routes, processes, or inserts content into the EAS Participant's
programming stream: (1) prior to operation, change any default
password, use strong passwords, and change any password if the EAS
Participant has reason to believe that the password has been
compromised; (2) test and install security patches and security-related
software and firmware upgrades issued by equipment manufacturers
promptly after those patches or upgrades become available; and (3) use
a network firewall or comparable network segmentation practice to limit
remote management access to authorized devices and authorized users.
 These three requirements represent a subset of the six basic
cybersecurity hygiene requirements that the Commission proposed to
require EAS Participants to implement as part of their cybersecurity
risk management plans in the Alerting Security NPRM. In the Alerting
Security NPRM, the Commission proposed to require EAS Participants to
implement these cybersecurity measures in the context of their
implementation of broader cybersecurity risk management plans. The
Commission sought comment on whether that approach ``strik[es] the
appropriate balance between improving EAS security, complementing EAS
Participants' existing cybersecurity activities, and reducing burdens
on small EAS Participants?'' In response, commenters express concern
that compliance with precise cybersecurity risk management requirements
would be costly, could hinder their ability to adapt to changing
cybersecurity needs, and could subject them to strict liability
enforcement in the event an EAS Participant is victimized by a
cyberattack. The approach we adopt today responds to those concerns by
eliminating the broader cybersecurity risk management and threat
assessment components of the proposed requirement, as well as the
proposed requirements that EAS Participants employ ``sufficient
security controls to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of the EAS.''
 The Alerting Security NPRM asked whether, ``[i]nstead of requiring
the use of a risk management plan, should [the Commission] require EAS
Participants to take specific steps to secure their EAS equipment?'' In
addition, the Alerting Modernization NPRM asked if there are ``specific
authentication, validation, and security measures that EAS and WEA
should be designed to incorporate?'' In response to the Alerting
Modernization NPRM, APCO and other commenters agree that the Commission
should adopt specific security requirements for EAS Participants. As
with other commenters to the Alerting Security NPRM, National Public
Radio (NPR) is concerned about the costs of cybersecurity risk
management plan requirements and asks that EAS Participants be required
to, instead, only implement the basic security measures that the
Commission proposed without requiring the creation of broader risk
management plans. REC Networks agrees that ``security of EAS equipment
is of paramount importance'' but asks that smaller EAS Participants be
required to ``implement a simpler plan of good network operating
practices, which involve network configuration, password management and
protection, periodic password changes[,] and other `common sense'
methods to assure that EAS equipment is not compromised.'' The approach
we adopt today is consistent with NPR's view that we should require EAS
Participants to implement minimum security controls, rather than
comprehensive risk management plans, while also respecting REC
Networks' view that some of the specific security measures we proposed
to require, such as addressing the replacement of end-of-life equipment
and wiping, clearing, or encrypting user information before disposing
of old devices, may be more complicated than is appropriate to require
of some EAS Participants. Other commenters, such as NCTA, express
concern that requiring EAS Participants to implement a specific
cybersecurity framework would ``freeze cybersecurity practices in time
and hamper an EAS Participant's ability to develop and implement
cybersecurity measures in response to its specific cybersecurity risk
profile, to the detriment of public safety.'' The requirements we adopt
today will not hamper an EAS Participant's ability to respond to
evolving cybersecurity threats. Rather, they represent a minimum
acceptable baseline that will harden critical communications
infrastructure against today's threats, while being flexible enough to
adapt to changes in the threat environment.
 The cybersecurity requirements we adopt today are narrowly tailored
to address vulnerabilities that have been repeatedly exploited through
a series of cyberattacks on EAS Participants in recent months. In these
attacks, bad actors gained control of radio broadcasters' systems by
exploiting improperly secured, remotely accessible equipment in the
broadcast signal processing system to transmit unauthorized audio that
included EAS alert tones, an offensive song that included racial slurs,
and promotional content. In response to the attacks, the Public Safety
and Homeland Security Bureau (Bureau) released a Public Notice on
November 23, 2025, urging broadcasters to immediately implement basic
cybersecurity hygiene best practices to secure their systems and
protect EAS, including installing software security patches for
broadcast equipment issued by the manufacturer as soon as they become
available; upgrading equipment firmware and software to the most recent
versions recommended by the manufacturer; changing devices' default
passwords and replacing them with robust alternatives; regularly
changing passwords to promote continued security; and, where reasonably
feasible, installing EAS, studio-transmitter link equipment, and other
equipment interconnected to the broadcast signal processing system
behind network firewalls. Similar attacks on broadcasters going back
more than a decade have included hoax radio broadcasts about a zombie
attack and false alerts about a ``radiological hazard'' sent to cable
subscribers through the infiltration of EAS equipment connected to the
internet. The Bureau recently convened a cybersecurity workshop for
broadcasters that brought together public and private sector
representatives to raise awareness of emerging cybersecurity risks,
share and promote the adoption of best practices, and highlight
opportunities for public-private partnerships on cybersecurity issues
facing broadcasters. Despite our repeated efforts urging EAS
Participants to take basic steps to secure their networks, including
the November 2025 Public Notice, an August 2022 Public Notice
recommending similar steps to those we recommended last year, and an
April 2020 email to EAS Participants encouraging them to secure their
EAS equipment by installing current security patches, successful
attacks have continued into 2026.
 Because some EAS Participants have not taken adequate steps to
remediate these vulnerabilities and address the

[[Page 48292]]

significant risk posed by a false alert or non-transmission of a real
alert, we find that each of the three requirements we adopt today are
necessary to protect the security and integrity of EAS.
 Password requirements. Strong password security is essential to
protecting EAS equipment, studio-transmitter link equipment, and
remotely accessible equipment from unauthorized access that exploits
weak or default credentials. Digital Alert Systems, Inc. (DAS) and
former broadcaster, Jonah Kibin, caution against using default
passwords and recommend changing required credentials upon setup as
default passwords, particularly on encoders, ``are widely available on
the internet and have led to high-profile intrusions of the EAS in the
last couple of decades.'' We require that default passwords for EAS
equipment, studio transmitter link equipment, and any remotely managed
equipment that routes, processes, or inserts content into the EAS
Participant's programming stream be changed prior to any use to
broadcast to the public. Passwords used for this equipment must employ
a minimum of 15 characters, not use dictionary words (because they can
be cracked through brute force), and not be reused for other accounts,
equipment, applications, and services that the EAS Participant uses.
 As an alternative to a strong password, we permit EAS Participants
to use alternative authentication measures that are reasonably
sufficient to mitigate the risk of unauthorized access. We believe that
there are numerous authentication methods available to EAS Participants
that would be reasonably sufficient, including methods that have been
highlighted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) as meeting one of three authentication assurance levels. For
example, NIST's guidance provides that authentication properly
implemented at Authentication Assurance Level 1 can include, in
addition to passwords, look-up secrets, which are ``[a] secret
determined by the claimant by looking up a prompted value in a list
held by the subscriber''; out-of-band devices, consisting of ``[a]
secret sent or received through a separate communication channel with
the subscriber''; single- or multi-factor one-time password devices, in
which a one-time secret is obtained from a device or application held
by the subscriber, which may or may not require activation by a second
authentication factor; and single- or multi-factor cryptographic
authentication, which entails ``[p]roof of possession and control via
an authentication protocol of a cryptographic key held by the
subscriber,'' which may or may not require activation by a second
authentication factor. We recognize that, were we to simply require use
of specifically structured passwords, our rule could preclude the use
of other authentication methods offering equal or better security. To
ensure our requirements do not result in reducing the security of
currently secure systems, the rule we adopt today continues to allow
EAS Participants to secure their equipment through means that are
equally or more secure than the password requirements we adopt today.
 As DAS observes, ``systemic risks'' are created when EAS
Participants use ``[w]eak passwords [and] shared accounts.'' These
risks are present throughout the industry. As the National Television
Association concedes, many EAS Participants ``had never changed the
default password on their EAS device(s).'' A former broadcaster further
emphasizes that the use of default passwords to widely owned broadcast
equipment--many of which are publicly available--has contributed to
multiple high-profile intrusions over the past decade, demonstrating
that these risks are neither hypothetical nor isolated. NPR
characterizes requirements to change default passwords and secure
equipment as reasonable and sound. Prometheus Radio Project supports
Low Power FM stations ``maintaining a firewall, following password
management best practices, and implementing multi-factor
authentication.'' REC Networks supports the immediate changing of
default passwords, and includes this as one of the recommendations in
its Practice of Good Network Security for Small Stations. This
requirement aligns with authoritative, industry-recognized
cybersecurity standards, including the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure
Security Agency's (CISA) Cross-Sector Cybersecurity Performance Goals
(CPGs), which are designed for operators of critical infrastructure
such as communications networks. We have elsewhere pointed to the CISA
CPGs as an instructive suite of cybersecurity best practices for
communications service providers. The Submarine Cable Second Report and
Order adopts certain national security standards that, if met, will
presumptively exempt a submarine cable application from referral to the
Executive Branch agencies, including that the applicant must affirm, as
part of its required cybersecurity and physical security risk
management plan certification, that the plan meets a set of established
cybersecurity best practices such as the standards and controls set
forth in the CISA CPGs. Specifically, CISA CPG 3.A, ``Changing Default
Passwords,'' encourages companies to address the risk that
``[a]dversaries might acquire and exploit default account credentials
to gain initial access, maintain persistence, escalate privileges, or
evade defenses'' by ``[i]mplement[ing] an organization-wide policy that
requires changing default manufacturer passwords for all hardware,
software, and firmware before connecting them to any internal or
external network.'' We disagree with NCTA's suggestion that
cybersecurity protections should be limited to EAS equipment alone, as
this would be insufficient to protect EAS when unprotected studio
transmitter link equipment and remotely managed equipment that routes,
processes, or inserts content into the EAS Participant's programming
stream create similar opportunities to transmit false alerts or disrupt
the transmission of real alerts. The password characteristics that we
require reflect the CISA and NIST guidance on minimum password strength
and unique credentials. We expect compliance with the requirement to be
straightforward for EAS Participants, which need only log into each
relevant piece of equipment, locate the account-management or security
settings, and replace the factory-set default password or existing weak
password with a strong, unique password--a process that should be
repeated whenever the EAS Participant has reason to believe that the
password has been compromised.
 Firmware and Software Patching. Prompt firmware and software
patching are key to reducing the risk that bad actors will exploit
known vulnerabilities to infiltrate broadcast and cable systems to
insert false EAS tones or alerts. The record includes support for
requiring EAS Participants to promptly install security patches and
firmware and software updates. DAS also points to the failure to apply
software updates as a ``systemic risk[]'' to EAS. One comment submitted
by a radio broadcast engineer recommends that the Commission require
EAS equipment to automatically query a centralized database to confirm
EAS codec firmware and certificate updates. APCO opines that ``[t]he
Commission should consider rules requiring EAS and WEA participants to
maintain current software and replace outdated equipment in a timely
manner,'' citing

[[Page 48293]]

findings from the Commission's 2023 Nationwide Emergency Alert Test
showing that ``approximately 23 percent of the EAS equipment units were
either using outdated software or operating equipment that was no
longer supported with regular software updates.'' The fact that nearly
a quarter of EAS devices may potentially be exposed to known, readily
addressed vulnerabilities because they are operating obsolete or out-
of-date equipment represents a significant gap in the security of the
nation's alerting capacity that poses national security risks. Promptly
testing and installing security patches and software and firmware
upgrades will also address DAS's concern that ``[g]ray-market EAS
encoders/decoders (i.e., used equipment sold on auction websites) can
ship with outdated firmware and unremoved configurations or
credentials, allowing attackers to exploit known vulnerabilities or use
retained settings to impersonate sources and inject false alerts.''
Going forward, EAS Participants will be responsible for ensuring that
their EAS devices are properly patched and updated, regardless of the
devices' provenance. The requirement to install patches and update
software promptly also aligns with CISA's CPGs. Specifically, CISA CPG
2.B encourages companies to ``Mitigate Known Vulnerabilities'' by
``[i]mplement[ing] a vulnerability management program to patch and
mitigate misconfigured software in a timely manner'' to protect against
the risk that ``[a]dversaries frequently target unpatched and
misconfigured systems, particularly those exposed to the internet,''
and ``often leverage software vulnerabilities, temporary malfunctions,
or configuration errors to gain initial access to a network.'' Here,
too, we expect implementation to be simple. Once a security patch, or
security-related software or firmware upgrade, becomes available for
EAS equipment, studio transmitter link equipment, or any other remotely
managed equipment that routes, processes, or inserts content into the
EAS Participant's programming, EAS Participants must promptly download
and install the patch or upgrade. EAS Participants are permitted to
test that patch or upgrade to ensure that it does not introduce
performance issues, provided that the testing begins promptly and is
completed in a timeframe that is consistent with industry best
practices. No commenter specifically opposes prompt patching as a
security requirement.
 Use of a Firewall or Comparable Network Segmentation. We require
EAS Participants to use a network firewall or comparable network
segmentation practices to limit remote management access to authorized
devices and authorized users, which will secure EAS and other
vulnerable equipment on a private network inaccessible to the public
internet. This requirement addresses a widespread EAS vulnerability. In
response to the Alerting Security NPRM, REC Networks identified 730 EAS
Participant servers through which the password screen for Sage Alerting
Systems' ENDEC EAS device was directly exposed. Of those servers, 288
operated on port 80, which is the default port for HTTP web services.
In contrast with the servers operating on port 80, web services that
use the more secure transport layer security (HTTPS) use port 443. It
is thus easy and cheap for even low-capability malicious actors to
locate EAS Participant equipment. To comply with the requirement we
adopt today, EAS Participants must ensure that their EAS equipment is
secured behind a firewall or other segmentation mechanism--such as a
dedicated Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN), demilitarized zone, or
physically isolated management network--with access restricted to only
those internal systems and ports necessary for EAS operations. EAS
Participants must either deploy a hardware or software firewall with
appropriate filters, reconfigure existing routers to block inbound
public internet connectivity to EAS devices, or otherwise isolate EAS
equipment from general-purpose business networks so that unauthorized
external access is not possible. These measures constitute essential,
straightforward safeguards that EAS Participants of all sizes can
realistically implement. As with the other two requirements we impose,
this network segmentation requirement is consistent with established
cybersecurity best practices. For example, CISA CPG 3.S calls on
companies to ``Secure Internet Facing Devices'' by ``[m]inimiz[ing]
internet-facing assets whenever possible'' to address the risk that
``[a]dversaries might exploit weaknesses in internet-facing hosts or
systems to gain initial network access, targeting software bugs,
temporary glitches, or misconfigurations,'' and CISA CPG 3.I recommends
that networks should be logically segmented. No commenter specifically
opposes network segmentation as a security requirement.
 Based on commenters' assertions that EAS Participants already
implement cybersecurity risk management plans, we suspect that many EAS
Participants already implement the baseline cybersecurity requirements
we adopt today. But EAS is only as secure as its weakest link. Not only
does the hack of even a single EAS Participant's systems potentially
expose that entity's audience to false information about an emergency,
but also the architecture of legacy EAS means that certain types of EAS
Participants could pass a false alert along to other EAS Participants.
As DAS explains, ``Commission rules can help ensure consistent
implementation [of security requirements] across thousands of EAS
Participants, preventing weakest-link vulnerabilities.'' As REC
Networks notes, small broadcasters are especially likely not to have
implemented basic cybersecurity practices, and would benefit from
straightforward and easily implemented rules rather than ``an extensive
and elaborate cybersecurity plan'' requirement, as proposed in the
Alerting Security NPRM. We accordingly find that the requirements we
adopt today are particularly important to protect EAS Participants that
are small- and medium-sized businesses. We therefore reject comments
that suggest smaller EAS Participants should be exempt from
cybersecurity requirements. Native Public Media and other commenters
state that small stations typically lack the budget, resources, and
expertise to manage IT security responsibilities, noting that many EAS
Participants are very small, and are often nonprofit or municipal
operations with minimal funding. But that concern cuts both ways.
Smaller broadcasters with fewer security protections in place are often
a more attractive target for bad actors, as the recent attacks on small
radio broadcasters demonstrate. Moreover, while having limited
resources might have made it burdensome to adopt the far-reaching
cybersecurity risk management requirements imposed in the Alerting
Security NPRM, the minimal requirements we adopt today will be far
easier and less resource-intensive to implement. We further disagree
with Cox Media Group and NAB that the Commission should focus on
education of EAS Participants to secure the nation's public alert and
warning capability. While we recognize the value of education, we find
that it is not sufficient, on its own, to effectively reduce the
dynamic and evolving risks posed by cybersecurity threats to emergency
alert systems. We conclude that all EAS Participants can and must
implement the cybersecurity safeguards we adopt today.
 While we appreciate DAS's view that EAS equipment manufacturers
should be expected to implement security

[[Page 48294]]

practices in their equipment, including by following secure coding
practices, providing digitally signed software and firmware updates,
shipping devices with hardened default settings, and supporting role-
based access controls, we find that the primary responsibility for
securing vulnerable equipment rests with EAS Participants themselves.
The vulnerabilities identified in the record stem mainly from insecure
password practices, unpatched EAS participant-managed systems,
inadequate network segmentation, or exposure of devices to the open
internet--not from defects in underlying equipment design and
development. This approach to responsibility for EAS security
delineates clear roles. Manufacturers develop, validate, and make
available security patches. EAS Participants, in turn, are responsible
for applying patches to their equipment, and ensuring their systems are
updated.
 We disagree with NAB that, rather than imposing uniform
requirements for EAS Participants to secure their systems, the
Commission should engage in targeted outreach to those EAS Participants
found to be using outdated software or unsupported equipment. We
similarly disagree with security researcher Shawn Merdinger, who
suggests that ``[w]hat is needed is direct outreach . . . . Someone at
the FCC who identifies the EAS device . . . , finds out who the asset
owner is, and reaches out to the person running, or in charge of
running, that EAS device.'' We recognize the value of outreach to EAS
Participants to identify ways to better secure their systems, and take
a variety of actions to promote public-private partnership and
voluntary efforts to protect networks and EAS from cybersecurity
threats. These include releasing Public Notices warning about recent
threat vectors and providing guidance about how EAS Participants can
better secure their equipment against such threats; hosting workshops
that raise situational awareness of the threat landscape and share best
practices for protecting communications networks and incident response;
and investigating reports about false EAS alerts that suggest the
breach of an EAS device or willful misuse of the EAS tones or Attention
Signal. Despite these efforts, cyberattacks on EAS Participant
facilities continue to occur with disturbing frequency. It is neither
practical, administratively efficient, nor a reasonable use of public
funds, for the Commission to respond to these threats by assessing the
security status of equipment operated by thousands of EAS Participants
across the United States and working with each such participant
individually to implement the cybersecurity practices that we have been
urging them to adopt for years. Moreover, there is no guarantee that
the Commission will be able to identify every EAS Participant whose
systems may be vulnerable because of flawed passwords, patching, or
network segmentation practices. The far more efficient approach is to
impose a minimally burdensome requirement on each EAS Participant to
implement the basic security requirements we adopt today for its own
equipment.
 We also disagree with commenters like NCTA that recommend the
Commission first focus on modernizing EAS technology prior to
considering any additional or updated cybersecurity or resiliency
requirements. Maintaining strong passwords, routinely installing
security upgrades, and segmenting sensitive equipment from the public
internet are vital to preventing unauthorized access to EAS encoding
and decoding functions and unauthorized transmission of EAS header
tones and audio messages, irrespective of where in the EAS
Participant's signal processing system those functions and transmission
may be activated. We decline to wait additional months to secure these
systems against cybersecurity vulnerabilities that are actively being
exploited.
 We do not apply the targeted cybersecurity requirements we adopt
today to WEA at this time. As discussed above, there is a long history
of attackers exploiting vulnerabilities in EAS Participants that have
resulted in false EAS alerts reaching the public. While a 2016 report
on WEA's security found risks of blocking valid WEA messages, changing
the content of a valid WEA message, injecting false WEA alerts into
operator equipment, and sending false alerts from false base stations,
there have been no reported instances of those kinds of attacks on WEA
being successful. We find this to be evidence, as CTIA and ATIS assert,
that additional security requirements are not needed at this time.
Consistent with the overarching recommendation of CSRIC V, we find that
that best practices, rather than requirements, are currently suitable
for addressing cybersecurity threats to WEA. Three alerting authorities
and two individuals generally support improvements to WEA's
cybersecurity posture, but focus on end-to-end cryptographic
authentication, auditing, and other more burdensome security measures.
None of these commenters adequately explain how the security benefits
of additional WEA requirements would outweigh the costs, particularly
when the lack of successful attacks on WEA suggests that the benefits
of adding security measures for WEA may currently be limited.

Compliance Timeframe

 We adopt a compliance timeframe for the rule changes adopted in
this Order of 60 days after the rule's publication in the Federal
Register, balancing the need to quickly secure vulnerable equipment
against known vulnerabilities with the time EAS Participants require to
implement the security controls. We find that sixty days provides
sufficient time for compliance with these changes. Many EAS
Participants and their representative organizations state that EAS
Participants have already implemented cybersecurity risk management
plans that include these specific security measures, and the Commission
and FEMA have repeatedly raised the security of EAS as an urgent
priority. EAS Participants that have not already implemented these
basic cybersecurity hygiene measures will need only make a handful of
straightforward changes to certain equipment to comply with these
requirements. Minimal time is required, for instance, to log into the
equipment subject to these requirements--which, for many EAS
Participants is likely to comprise only a few devices--and change the
passwords. Indeed, most Americans routinely manage passwords to a
variety of devices and applications as a matter of course, which
consumes no more than a few minutes each week. Similarly, it will take
little time for most EAS Participants to test and install any currently
available patches and updates for equipment subject to the requirement.
As DAS explains, installing patches and updating equipment to the
latest software version is minimally burdensome, because over-the-air
software updates and software patching are both feasible and supported
by modern, internet-connected EAS equipment. Here, too, the burden is
no greater than that experienced by many Americans who routinely
install security-related updates to their device operating systems and
applications on a regular basis. While installing a firewall may
require some EAS Participants to identify a vendor who can configure
their systems appropriately, we do not expect that this will be
burdensome or time-consuming for EAS Participants to identify because
firewalls are widely recognized as a basic and cost-effective
cybersecurity safeguard appropriate even for organizations with limited
resources.

[[Page 48295]]

 Further, there is an urgency to protect against threats from
malicious actors by implementing these security measures as soon as
practicable. Cyber threats that we warned EAS Participants about
several years ago continue today. At the same time, cyber threat
activities are becoming more sophisticated. For example, CISA recently
issued an advisory that warned of ``China-nexus cyber actors . . .
using large scale networks of compromised devices (covert networks) to
route their cyber activity.'' Given the apparent inadequacy of
voluntary approaches to implementing basic security safeguards to
remediate these threats--and the significant risk posed by a false
alert or non-transmission of a real alert--we find that each of the
three requirements we adopt today are reasonable and necessary to
protect the security and integrity of EAS.

Benefits and Costs

 We find that the targeted rules adopted today will promote EAS
security without imposing substantial costs on EAS Participants. These
measures are necessary to protect EAS from future false alerts that are
damaging to public safety. Improved EAS security will also provide
benefits to EAS Participants in the form of avoided reputational harm
that may arise from cyberattacks and false alerts being transmitted
from their stations. While the new rules may require hiring outside
contractors in some cases, EAS Participants will have the flexibility
to satisfy this requirement in a manner tailored to their particular
business needs.
 Costs. While commenters, including FEMA, Altice, Gray Television,
and Sage, raise concerns about the increased costs and burdens that the
proposals in the Alerting Security NPRM would place on EAS
Participants, the basic cybersecurity hygiene practices we adopt today
represent a narrow subset of those proposals, which EAS Participants
should be able to implement without significant expenditure. For
instance, the American Militia Association states that the Commission's
estimated total cost of $11,600 per year is ``grossly understated [as
applied to] legal fees to review new rules and reporting requirements,
payments to networking professionals and other costs . . . to ensure
compliance.'' However, the requirements in this Report and Order are
less burdensome than what was proposed in the Alerting Security NPRM as
they do not include reporting of unauthorized access incidents, nor do
they include creating, updating, or annually certifying to having a
sufficient cybersecurity risk management plan that covers a broader
range of established best practices.
 We estimate that the costs of changing and regularly updating
default passwords, installing security patches as available, and
implementing firewalls or other network segmentation practices will not
exceed $26 million. We estimate the total cost of implementing the EAS
security measures as follows: 25,800 entities x (10 hours per entity
per year) x ($65 mean hourly wage) x (1 + 7% inflation adjustment) x (1
+ 46% benefit mark-up) = $26,198,094 total cost per year, rounded to
$26 million. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of
December 2025, civilian wages and salaries averaged $33.45/hour and
benefits averaged $15.33/hour. Total compensation therefore averaged
$33.45 + $15.33 = 48.78. Using these figures, benefits constitute a
markup of $15.33/$33.45 = 46%. We therefore mark up wages by 46% to
account for benefits. The figure 25,797 includes 21,658 broadcaster
stations and 4,139 headends. With two direct broadcast satellite (DBS)
providers and one satellite digital audio radio service (SDARS)
provider, the total number of providers is 25,800. Based on Commission
staff review of the S&P Global Market Intelligence, S&P Capital IQ Pro,
U.S. MediaCensus, Operator Subscribers by Geography, there were 4,139
cable headends in the United States. This methodology likely
overestimates the number of radio and television broadcasters that
participate in the EAS, as some are exempted from the Commission's
rules that govern EAS. For example, if a hub station satisfies the EAS
requirements, an analog or digital broadcast satellite station that
rebroadcasts 100% of the hub station's programming would not be
required to comply with the proposed rules. This estimate is adjusted
to reflect the requirements adopted today in light of the record. In
the Alerting Security NPRM, we estimated that EAS Participants would
require, on average, 10 hours annually to draft a cybersecurity risk
management plan, update the plan, and submit their certification to the
Commission, at an overall cost of $21 million. We instead find that 10
hours is a reasonable average burden estimate across all EAS
Participants for the three limited requirements that we adopt today. As
DAS states, changing default passwords and installing certain security
patches can be accomplished in the normal course of business and at
little or no additional cost to EAS Participants. Further, NAB points
out that many EAS Participants are already taking some or all of the
actions adopted in this Report and Order, recommending that ``the FCC
should target its efforts at the fairly small number of entities that
may lag in updating their equipment or software.'' To the extent that
these entities already engage in password security and regular software
update practices, we expect that the amount of additional time required
to comply with the rules we adopt today would be low. Some EAS
Participants may incur costs, however, to implement firewalls or other
comparable network segmentation practices to limit remote management
access, if they do not already do so. Therefore, we find that the cost
estimate we adopt today is very conservative, due to the relatively
narrow scope of requirements in this Report and Order, but the benefits
will outweigh even this overestimated cost.
 Benefits. We find, as suggested in the Alerting Security NPRM, that
while it is impossible to quantify the precise dollar value of
improvements to the public's safety, life, and health, as a general
matter, substantial public safety benefits will result from the
adoption of robust security requirements for EAS providers, such as the
rules adopted today. We agree with the D.C. Homeland Security and
Emergency Management Agency that ``[o]ne of the most damaging and
dangerous impacts we have [of a cybersecurity incident] is that we
don't have the ability to launch Wireless Emergency Alerts or push to
EAS.'' The rules we adopt today will help to ensure the security and
operability of EAS Participants. Additionally, as the Commission
previously found, ``a foreign adversary's access to American
communications networks could result in hostile actions to disrupt and
surveil our communications networks, impacting our nation's economy
generally and online commerce specifically, and result in the breach of
confidential data.'' Consistent with the Commission's past analysis,
our national gross domestic product (GDP) was over $30 trillion in
2025. As the requirements we adopt today apply narrowly to EAS
Participants and their EAS equipment, studio transmitter link
equipment, and any other remotely managed equipment that routes,
processes, or inserts content into the EAS Participant's programming,
rather than the more broad proposals we sought comment on in the
Alerting Security NPRM, if these requirements prevent even a 0.00009%
disruption of our economy, that would offset the costs. Likewise, local
radio and television broadcasting, a subset of EAS

[[Page 48296]]

Participants, supported $1.19 trillion of our GDP in 2025, so
preventing the disruption of even 0.0022% would outweigh the costs. As
the Commission also noted in the Alerting Security NPRM, the cost of
malicious cyber activity on the U.S. economy in 2016 was between $57
billion and $109 billion, so reducing this activity (or preventing an
expansion of such damage) by even 0.046% (significantly less than the
1% considered in the Alerting Security NPRM) would produce benefits
that outweigh the costs. We find that our reasoning in the Alerting
Security NPRM remains applicable to the rules we adopt today,
notwithstanding their narrowed scope, because the security measures we
adopt today will significantly harden EAS Participants' systems against
these types of attack and mitigate the risk of occurrence. Thus, we
conclude that the minor costs associated with implementing the targeted
security requirements in this Report and Order will be more than offset
by its public safety and economic benefits.

Terminating the 2022 Alerting Security NPRM

 We believe that the most effective and proportionate path to
mitigating threats against EAS Participants and Participating CMS
Providers is to address specific, repeatedly exploited cybersecurity
vulnerabilities rather than adopting the broader cybersecurity risk
management framework proposed in the Alerting Security NPRM. We agree
with Nexstar Media that the cyber incidents this Report and Order is
intended to prevent could have been easily avoided by undertaking basic
network security measures such as those we require today. After further
consideration, we conclude that adopting wide-ranging cybersecurity
risk management requirements that apply to all of an EAS Participant or
Participating CMS Provider's systems and services would impose
extremely high costs that outweigh the security benefits.
 NPR highlights the high costs of the Commission's proposals by
pointing out that the Alerting Security NPRM's estimate is ``off by a
factor of 10 or more--it would take a local General Manager or
Operations Manager many hours just to understand the baseline framework
involved, not to mention developing and implementing a cybersecurity
risk plan.'' On further consideration, we conclude that costs to EAS
Participants and Participating CMS Providers would include not only the
creation of a cybersecurity risk management plan, but also the
implementation of that plan, which the Commission failed to take into
account in designing its proposal. Based on additional evidence and
additional consideration, we agree with the view that ``compliance with
the FCC's proposals in the Notice could easily run into the thousands
of dollars, directly impacting a station's bottom line.'' These costs
would be particularly high for small broadcasters. In light of these
costs, we disagree with the Center for Internet Security's view that
requiring alerting participants to implement a cybersecurity framework,
such as their Critical Security Controls, is appropriate because those
requirements would be ``narrowly tailored'' or ``minimally intrusive.''
On balance, we find that addressing the most immediate threats to EAS
Participants by adopting narrowly targeted security requirements to be
more cost-effective than adopting the Commission's broad and burdensome
proposal.
 We decline to adopt a rule at this time that would require
Participating CMS Providers to take further action to prevent false
alerts from fake base stations. No commenter to the Alerting Security
NPRM supported the Commission's adoption of rules to address this risk.
To the contrary, AT&T and CTIA state that the ongoing international
standard process is best positioned to address this issue, and ATIS
questions whether such an attack on WEA would have a realistic chance
of success. We acknowledge that the 3GPP SA3 (Security) working group
published a study in 2023 on 5G security enhancements against false
base stations, which identifies key issues and multiple candidate
solutions. We encourage the 3GPP security working group to continue
this work to move from candidate solutions to implementable best
practice recommendations.
 We decline at this time to make changes to the rules that allow for
continued operations for a period of 60 days despite having defective
equipment that precludes their participation in EAS. The Commission did
not receive a sufficient record on this issue in response to the
Alerting Security NPRM and several commenters were opposed to
elimination of the 60-day rule arguing that the 60-day timeframe is
necessary to complete repairs on EAS equipment. We note that our
proposal in the accompanying Further Notice to allow EAS Participants
to use software to fulfill their EAS obligations could have
implications for the ability to receive timely repair and replacement
of defective EAS equipment, and we seek comment on this issue below.
 We also decline to adopt the Commission's proposal that EAS
Participants and Participating CMS Providers report any substantial
incident of unauthorized access of their systems to the Commission. We
agree with commenters that adopting additional cybersecurity incident
reporting requirements for alerting participants would be premature in
light of CISA's pending rulemaking implementing the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA). Rather than
adopting potentially duplicative incident requirements, we will
continue to monitor CISA's work.
 We decline to remove language from Sections 10.330 and 10.500 of
the Commission's rules that provide that WEA functionality, both in
Participating CMS Providers' networks and in mobile devices, ``are
dependent upon the capabilities of the delivery technologies
implemented by a Participating CMS Provider'' and certain WEA protocols
``are defined and controlled by each Participating CMS Provider.'' The
Commission proposed these changes because it was concerned that the
rules might ``create the mistaken impression that Participating CMS
Providers' compliance with the rules . . . , would be conditioned on
the Participating CMS Providers' delivery technology.'' CTIA opposes
changing Section 10.330 because ``it provides CMSPs the necessary
flexibility to develop and deploy network technologies driven by
consumer demand'' and FEMA opposes changing it because they wanted to
preserve Participating CMS Providers' flexibility to use technologies
other than cell broadcast to support WEA. No commenter supported the
elimination of this language, nor have we observed any non-compliance
with the WEA rules attributable to the flexibility this rule provides.
For these reasons, we decline to remove the language in question at
this time.
 The actions we take today are consistent with the approach to
cybersecurity that we described in the 2025 CALEA Order on
Reconsideration. The Commission continues to pursue targeted, legally
robust regulatory and enforcement measures alongside a collaborative
approach that emphasizes public-private partnerships that protect and
secure communications networks. For instance, the Commission hosted
cybersecurity workshops for broadcasters and telecommunications
companies in May 2026 that brought together public- and private-sector
representatives to raise awareness of emerging cybersecurity risks,
share and promote adoption of best practices, and
