FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Review of Submarine Cable Landing License Rules and Procedures To Assess Evolving National Security, Law Enforcement, Foreign Policy, and Trade Policy Risks
Document number: 2026-15123
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 46844
Publication date: 2026-07-27

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 142 (Monday, July 27, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 142 (Monday, July 27, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 46844-46866]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-15123]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 0 and 1

[OI Docket No. 24-523, MD Docket No. 24-524; FCC 26-42, FR ID 357114]


Review of Submarine Cable Landing License Rules and Procedures To
Assess Evolving National Security, Law Enforcement, Foreign Policy, and
Trade Policy Risks

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) adopted a Second Report and Order that promotes the
deployment of submarine cables while strengthening national security
interests in connection with their modern capabilities. The Second
Report and Order establishes a regulatory regime for licensing owners
and/or operators of submarine line terminal equipment (SLTE), including
granting a blanket license to certain current and future SLTE owners
and/or operators that are not currently a licensee. The Second Report
and Order adopts certain routine conditions and outlines reporting
requirements for SLTE owners and operators. The Second Report and Order
also adopts further national security-related routine conditions and
certification requirements. Finally, the Second Report and Order adopts
an approach to expedite submarine cable deployment by presumptively
exempting applications that meet ten national security standards from
Commission referral to the Executive Branch agencies.

DATES: Effective date: These rules are effective September 25, 2026,
except for

[[Page 46845]]

amendatory instructions 4 (Sec. 1.40001), 5 (Sec. 1.40001), 8 (Sec.
1.70003), 9 (Sec. 1.70006), 11 (Sec. 1.70007(u), (w)(2), (y) through
(ii)), 12 (Sec. 1.70011), 13 (Sec. 1.70012), 14 (Sec. 1.70014), 15
(Sec. 1.70017), 16 (Sec. 1.70018), 17 (Sec. 1.70020), 18 (Sec.
1.70025), 19 (Sec. 1.70026), 20 (Sec. 1.70027), 21 (Sec. 1.70028),
and 22 (Sec. 1.70029), which are delayed indefinitely. The Commission
will publish a document in the Federal Register announcing the
effective date of these rule sections.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Svantje Swider, Office of
International Affairs, Telecommunications and Analysis Division, at
 [email protected] or at (202) 418-0772. For additional information
concerning the Paperwork Reduction Act information collection
requirements contained in this document, contact Cathy Williams at 202-
418-2918 or [email protected] , or send an email to [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Second
Report and Order, in OI Docket No. 24-523, MD Docket No. 24-524, FCC
26-42, adopted on June 25, 2026, and released on June 30, 2026. The
full text of this document is available online at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-42A1.pdf . To request materials in accessible
formats for people with disabilities, send an email to [email protected]
or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau at 202-418-0530
(voice), 202-418-0432 (TTY).

Synopsis

Introduction

 In this Second Report and Order, we adopt rules that promote the
deployment of submarine cables while strengthening national security
interests in connection with their modern capabilities. Our actions
recognize that a significant gap exists in our rules concerning the
submarine line terminal equipment (SLTE). We find it imperative to
adopt a licensing requirement concerning SLTE owners and/or operators.
In today's Second Report and Order, we establish a regulatory regime
for licensing owners and/or operators of SLTE, including granting a
blanket license to any current and future SLTE owners and/or operators
that are not currently a licensee and are not otherwise subject to the
exceptions discussed below. In this Second Report and Order, we use the
term ``SLTE owners and operators'' to refer to any entity that owns
and/or operates SLTE on a submarine cable landing in the United States
and is not a licensee under our current submarine cable licensing
requirement in Sec. 1.767(h) or Sec. 1.70003(a) and/or (b) as
amended. 47 CFR 1.767(h); 2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order
and FNPRM, 40 FCC Rcd at 6637, Appx. A (Sec. 1.70003(a) and (b)), 90
FR 48648, 48694-95 (Oct. 27, 2025). In adopting a regulatory regime, we
adopt certain routine conditions and outline reporting requirements for
SLTE owners and operators. We then build on our security efforts made
in the 2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order by adopting further
national security-related routine conditions and certification
requirements. Finally, we adopt an approach to expedite submarine cable
deployment by presumptively exempting applications that meet ten
national security standards from Commission referral to the Executive
Branch agencies, in order to unleash investment in submarine cable
infrastructure. These national security standards in combination will
ensure continued oversight by the Committee and ensure that our fast-
track approach does not undermine national security, law enforcement,
foreign policy, and/or trade policy objectives. These immediate steps
reaffirm our commitment to accelerating the deployment of submarine
cable infrastructure, without jeopardizing national security. At this
time, we defer consideration or decline adoption of additional
proposals made in the 2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order and
Further Notice, as discussed below, and we expect to conduct the one-
time information collection adopted in that Report and Order in the
near future to gain further information into the SLTE landscape.

Discussion

A. SLTE Licensing Framework

 We adopt a regulatory framework for SLTE owners and operators to
execute our duties to protect national security under the Cable Landing
License Act and Executive Order 10530. Cable Landing License Act of May
27, 1921, Public Law 8, 67th Cong., ch. 12, Sec. 1, 42 Stat. 8 (1921)
(codified as amended at 47 U.S.C. 34-39) (Cable Landing License Act);
Executive Order 10530, sec. 5(a). We find it critical to include SLTE
owners and operators as licensed entities on submarine cables landing
in the United States. First, we find that the Cable Landing License Act
and Executive Order 10530 authorize the Commission to regulate entities
that own and/or operate SLTE on a submarine cable connecting to the
United States. Second, we adopt a blanket license for SLTE owners and
operators not otherwise currently licensed under our submarine cable
rules. This blanket license approach combined with tailored routine
conditions avoids imposing requirements comparable to current cable
landing licensee rule requirements prior to the one-time information
collection. Third, to protect national security and law enforcement
interests, we exclude from the grant of this blanket license any entity
that would not be qualified to hold a cable landing license under our
presumptive disqualifying conditions. Fourth, we require SLTE owners
and operators to adhere to a subset of routine conditions for cable
landing licensees, among other requirements, to comply with Commission
rules and regulations, file annual Section 43.82 circuit capacity
reports, and create, implement, and update cybersecurity and physical
security risk management plans. Finally, for situations where submarine
cables contain SLTEs that are owned and/or operated by foreign
adversary-controlled entities and/or Covered List entities at the time
the rules become effective, SLTE owners and operators must file an SLTE
Foreign Adversary Annual Report. This annual reporting requirement will
structure transparency tools to help the Commission maintain consistent
oversight over submarine cable operations, including those SLTEs
associated with foreign adversary interests. Our actions today are the
initial steps in our application of the submarine cable licensing
regime to SLTE owners and operators given the technological
advancements in today's modern submarine cable systems. We anticipate
conducting the one-time information collection adopted in the 2025
Submarine Cable First Report and Order in the future to further inform
any future regulatory changes regarding SLTE.

B. New Certifications and Routine Conditions

 We build on the Commission's submarine cable modernization effort
started in the 2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order, by adopting
updated certifications and routine conditions for applicants and
existing licensees on a cable landing license subject to Section
1.70003(a)(1) or (a)(2). These targeted updates continue to improve
upon the Commission's ability to safeguard national security. We adopt
the proposals from the 2025 Submarine Cable Further Notice and add new
certification requirements for submarine cable applicants and existing
licensees, adopt new routine conditions for licensees that hold a cable
landing

[[Page 46846]]

license under Section 1.70003(a)(1) and (a)(2), with exceptions, and
facilitate information sharing with other federal agencies to protect
national security. In this Second Report and Order, we use the term
``existing licensees'' to refer to a cable landing licensee whose
license was or is granted prior to the effective date of the Second
Report and Order or the new rules, as applicable and discussed herein.
 We adopt certifications and routine conditions that will prohibit
the following: (1) the use of principal equipment that is produced
(including any major stage of the process through which the device is
made, including manufacturing, assembly, design, and development) by
foreign adversary-controlled entities in a submarine cable system; (2)
the use of third-party service providers that are foreign adversary-
controlled entities, entities identified on the Covered List, or
entities that can access the submarine cable from a foreign adversary
country, and (3) licensees, their customers, and further downstream
customers from entering into IRUs and capacity lease arrangements with
entities identified on the Covered List, where such arrangement would
give such entity (i.e., the IRU holder or lessee) the ability to
install, own, or manage SLTE on a submarine cable landing in the United
States. We also adopt certifications and routine conditions that will
require licensees to notify the Commission when there are ownership
changes or changes to the Commission's Covered List. Our action today
will also protect national security by requiring licensees to notify
the Commission of changes to the address or geographic coordinates,
intention to not renew the license for the submarine cable system, and
the retirement of submarine cables. Lastly, we adopt a rule that allows
the Commission to share with the Committee and relevant federal
government agencies information that is filed with the Commission
pursuant to Section 1.40001 and subpart FF, as amended, on a
confidential basis, without the pre-notification requirements of
Section 0.442(d) of the Commission's rules.

C. Streamlining and Expediting Submarine Cable Applications

 We take action to streamline and expedite the processing of
submarine cable applications while still ensuring the security and
integrity of submarine cable systems in partnership with the Committee
Members. First, we establish a set of ten national security standards
that, if met, will qualify a submarine cable application to be
presumptively exempt from referral to the Executive Branch agencies.
These national security standards in combination will ensure an
applicant adheres to the highest level of protective measures to
mitigate national security, law enforcement, foreign policy, and/or
trade policy concerns. Second, we exclude from referral to the
Executive Branch agencies certain renewal or extension applications
where the Commission referred and the Executive Branch agencies
reviewed an application previously filed by the applicant within three
(3) years of the filing of the renewal or extension application. We
find that reducing the number of applications that are referred to the
Committee will provide regulatory certainty and reduce delays for
applicants while decreasing administrative burdens on the U.S.
government by prioritizing the review of applications that present
significant national security and law enforcement concerns. Overall,
our actions will promote faster submarine cable deployment, reduce
administrative and regulatory burden on both the U.S. government and
licensees, and yield greater resilience in U.S. submarine cable
connectivity.

Regulatory Impact Analysis

A. Need for Regulatory Action

 The rules adopted today are necessary to enhance our national
security and to ensure that the United States maintains its leadership
position in advanced technology, including artificial intelligence
(AI). Carrying the vast majority of transcontinental digital
communications, submarine cables serve as the foundational backbone of
the global internet. The SLTE is the equipment on both ends of the
submarine cable system that converts optical signals to electrical
signals and vice versa, thereby connecting undersea transmission with
terrestrial transmission of telecommunications traffic. Thus, an entity
that owns or operates SLTE is able to affect the operation of the
submarine cable system, whether or not it holds an ownership interest
in the overall cable system. Therefore, an entity affiliated with a
foreign adversary that owns or operates SLTE in the United States
introduces a similar risk to national security as if the entity owned
the submarine cable itself. Potential vulnerabilities in this type of
situation include threats of physical disruption, manipulation of
service, overt attacks, as well as interception of unencrypted traffic.
See Anthropic Ex Parte at 3 (``Adversarial SLTE or fiber owners could
selectively deny service, degrade performance, or power down
infrastructure supporting AI workloads.''). The rules adopted today
will improve the Commission's oversight of this critical
infrastructure.
 In addition to addressing vulnerabilities associated with SLTE, the
Second Report and Order addresses remaining gaps--discussed in detail
in section III.B--in our regulatory framework that pertain to both
existing and new licensees. For example, cable landing licensees can
enter into agreements with customers for dark fiber IRUs or other
leases for capacity, which is another vulnerability because IRU holders
and lessees can control capacity connecting the United States with a
foreign country or another location in the United States, without
needing to build the underlying infrastructure. The growth in
investment in submarine cables potentially magnifies vulnerabilities in
the submarine cable system, making it more important to address
remaining gaps.

B. Benefits

 The rules adopted in the Second Report and Order build upon the
concrete efforts and harmonized approach adopted in the 2025 Submarine
Cable First Report and Order by establishing a regulatory framework for
SLTEs. The Commission's increased oversight of SLTEs should improve the
security and resilience of submarine cable systems and mitigate threats
from foreign adversaries, while minimizing undue administrative burden
on trusted providers and entities. By establishing blanket licensing of
current SLTE owners and operators, as well as adopting a presumptive
exclusion from referral to the Executive Branch agencies for entities
that meet the national security standards, the rule actions we adopt
today should minimize administrative burdens on industry, while
encouraging deployment of a more secure submarine cable infrastructure.
Importantly, the rules should limit the ability of untrustworthy
submarine cable licensees including SLTE owners and operators to
undermine our nation's defense, public safety, and homeland security
options, our military readiness, and our critical infrastructure. The
rules should also ensure that the United States continues to lead the
world in the development of AI, data centers, cloud computing,
streaming, financial transactions, and the e-commerce sector.
 The Second Report and Order requires SLTE owners and operators to
be licensees under the Cable Landing

[[Page 46847]]

License Act, and those entities that qualify, including all current
SLTE owners and operators, will be given a blanket license. This
blanket licensing of SLTE owners and operators should greatly increase
the Commission's ability to oversee and protect this critical
infrastructure, while minimizing administrative burdens associated with
licensing SLTE owners and operators.
 As noted above, SLTE plays a critical role in the overall
functioning of a cable system as it converts optical signals from
submarine cables into electric signals that can be carried by
terrestrial networks. The mandatory licensing of all SLTE owners and
operators should increase the Commission's ability to monitor the
strategic chokepoints where a large volume of traffic passes through,
ensuring that foreign adversaries cannot achieve significant access and
control of the United States submarine cable network. As the Commission
noted in the 2024 Submarine Cable NPRM, a foreign adversary that is not
a licensee but owns or controls an SLTE on a submarine cable landing in
the United States would have connectivity comparable to operating their
own submarine cable to the U. S., which could present a significant
threat to national security.
 The routine conditions adopted in the Second Report and Order
should help ensure that SLTE owners and operators do not become a weak
point in the nation's submarine cable infrastructure by, among other
things, providing the Commission with detailed information critical for
assessing national security vulnerabilities. At the same time, the
presumptive exclusion of qualified applicants from referral to the
Executive Branch agencies should reduce the administrative burden on
these entities.
 The Second Report and Order requires entities that meet the foreign
adversary and/or character disqualifying presumptions adopted in the
2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order to apply for a license to
become an SLTE owner or operator rather than blanket licensing such
entities. The exclusion from blanket licensing will ensure that
entities subject to disqualifying presumptions undergo the scrutiny of
the application process, giving the Commission the ability to screen
for potential threats. These entities may continue to own and operate
any current SLTEs that they have at the time these rules go into effect
in order to avoid any regulatory uncertainty or disruption to submarine
cable system operations that may be ultimately found eligible to hold a
submarine cable landing licensee.
 The requirement that all SLTE owners and operators develop
cybersecurity and physical security risk management plans should help
to ensure that SLTE owners and operators follow best practices to
mitigate risk. We note, however, that to balance our goal of
safeguarding critical infrastructure with the goal of reducing
administrative burdens, in the Second Report and Order, we do not
require licensees to certify the risk management plans that they must
develop with the Commission.
 Submarine cables are estimated to carry as much as 99% of
intercontinental internet traffic and serve as the backbone to global
communications. The international submarine cable network facilitates
more than $10 trillion financial transactions globally each day and the
volume of data carried by submarine cables is dramatically increasing,
including an increasing amount of confidential and sensitive data. Even
a temporary, localized disruption to data passing through submarine
cables would likely result in very substantial economic losses.
Although both the risk of such losses and the quantitative harms of
such losses are difficult to measure, on an annual basis, we find that
they are likely well in excess of the annual costs that we estimate
would be associated with our rules.

C. Costs

 We estimate that the actions adopted today will impose costs
totaling approximately $39.2 million in the first year and $10.7
million in subsequent years. These costs include one-time and recurring
costs that SLTE owners and operators are expected to incur as a result
of becoming licensees as well as additional recurring costs that
existing and new licensees would incur.
 We estimate that there are approximately 3,136 SLTE owners and
operators that will be subject to blanket licensing. We conservatively
estimate this number by estimating that each of the 98 U.S. licensed
cables has 16 fiber pairs, which each require 2 SLTEs (98 x 16 x 2 =
3,136). New SLTE owners and operators that do not qualify for blanket
licensing will be required to file as applicants for a cable landing
license under the Cable Landing License Act. We estimate that
approximately 320 SLTE owners and operators will require a new license
each year, and that at most, one-fifth of new SLTE owners and operators
would be subject to the character and/or foreign adversary presumptions
that would require them to incur the cost of applying for an individual
license because they would not qualify for a blanket license. We
conservatively estimate the number of new licensees under the blanket
license as 320 = 16 fiber pairs per cable x 2 SLTEs per fiber pair x 10
submarine cables, where the number of submarine cables is based on the
average annual number of applications during 2022-2024. In the 2025
Submarine Cable First Report and Order, the Commission estimated that
an application cost approximately $54,400, which means that the
aggregate application cost for new SLTE owners and operators that do
not qualify for a blanket license would be at most $3.5 million per
year. We estimate this number by multiplying $54,400 times 320 and
dividing by 5, which equals $3,481,600, and rounding up to $3.5 million
per year.
 In addition, all SLTE owners and operators will be subject to
routine conditions designed to enhance transparency and security. These
include the requirement to file annual circuit capacity reports, which
we estimate will cost up to $3 million per year, and the requirement to
create, update, and implement a cybersecurity and physical security
risk management plan consistent with Section 1.70006(c) of our rules,
for a one-time cost of approximately $28.5 million. We estimate a per
applicant cost of $972 based on the Commission's estimates of circuit
capacity report costs as represented in previous PRA statements. Thus,
the $3 million annual cost is based on $972 x 3,136 SLTE owners and
operators = $3,048,192, which we round to $3 million. Note that we do
not add the 320 new SLTE owners and operators to this estimate because
of likely overlap between this and the initial 3,136 figure as well as
due to our expectation that other owners and operators may leave the
market. International Section 214 Authorizations--47 CFR 63.10-63.25,
1.40001, and 1.40003, OMB Control No. 3060-0686 Paperwork Reduction Act
(PRA) Supporting Statement at 10 (Apr. 01, 2024), In the 2025 Submarine
Cable First Report and Order and FNPRM, we estimated that creating a
cybersecurity and physical security risk management plan costs
approximately $9,100. 2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order and
FNPRM, 40 FCC Rcd 6481, para. 236. We multiply this by 3,136 to obtain
our one time cost of $28.5 million, but note that this is likely too
high not only because the 3,136 figure is likely an overestimate, but
also because various SLTE owners and operators may already have a
cybersecurity and physical security risk management plan. New
licensees, whether blanket licensed or not, will likewise encounter
these costs

[[Page 46848]]

for a conservative annual cost estimate of $2.9 million for
cybersecurity and physical security risk management plan. Finally, SLTE
owners and operators that meet certain criteria will be required to
file an annual Foreign Adversary Annual Report, which we estimate will
cost approximately $1.3 million per year. Filing an annual Foreign
Adversary Annual Report will cost approximately $4,100. Id. We
conservatively estimate that approximately 1/10th of the estimated
3,136 SLTE owners and operators would need to file to obtain our annual
cost of $1.3 million (= $4,100 x 3,136 SLTE owners and operators/10).
 We estimate a cost of approximately $51,000 per year across all
licensees associated with new applicant certifications and
notifications required under the adopted rules--such as changes in
address or coordinates, intent not to renew, system retirement, and
certifications related to foreign adversary ownership or Covered List
changes. We estimate that preparation of the notification of intent of
non-renewal of license, notification of submarine cable system
retirement, certification of change in foreign adversary ownership,
certification of change to the Department of Commerce's list of foreign
adversaries, and certification of change to the Commission's Covered
List will each require 2 hours of work by an attorney and 2 hours of
work by support staff. We estimate that the cost of outside legal
assistance is $300 per hour and the cost of in-house staff is $40 per
hour, making the cost of preparing one notification or certification
approximately $680 (($300 x 2 hours) + ($40 x 2 hours) = $680).
Assuming 15 filings per type per year (for a total of 75 filings), the
annual cost is approximately $51,000 ($680 x 75 filings = $51,000). Our
cost data on wages for attorneys are based on the Commission's
estimates of labor costs as represented in previous PRA statements. We
do not anticipate substantial costs associated with the remaining
routine conditions. With respect to the prohibition on cable landing
licensees using any equipment in the operation of the submarine cable
system that is produced by any entity owned by, controlled by, or
subject to the jurisdiction or direction of a foreign adversary, we
note that the Second Report and Order does not require licensees to
remove covered equipment and services from existing submarine cable
systems. Moreover, we anticipate that moving forward, licensees that
need to procure new equipment will be able to do so from vendors that
are not owned by, controlled by, or subject to the jurisdiction or
direction of a foreign adversary, because the vast majority of
submarine cable equipment is already supplied by other entities.
Similarly, prohibiting arrangements such as IRUs and leases for
capacity with entities on the Covered List is unlikely to result in
significant foregone revenue, as the majority of all submarine cable
capacity is leased by entities without such ties.
 Finally, the Commission has taken steps to significantly reduce
compliance costs for licensees while advancing national security
objectives. For example, the Second Report and Order adopts an
exemption for wet-segment repair and maintenance, addressing the
primary operational concern and preventing significant cost increases.
It also adopts a presumptive exemption framework that will generate
cost savings for qualifying applicants by avoiding the expense and
delay of Executive Branch referral. Applications meeting the exemption
criteria will not undergo Executive Branch review, resulting in
estimated annual cost savings of approximately $98,000. Based on data
from January 1, 2023, to December 31, 2025, there were 36 applications
referred to Executive Branch agencies, yielding an average of 12
referrals annually. If we assume that half of these applicants will be
exempt from Executive Branch referral as a result of meeting our
national security standard, and that being exempt will save 30% of
their application costs, with each application costing $54,400, the
annual savings would be approximately $98,000 (6 applications x $54,400
x 30% = $97,920, rounded to $98,000).
 In sum, we estimate that the actions adopted in this Second Report
and Order will result in a one-time cost of approximately $28.5 million
and recurring annual costs of approximately $10.7 million. One-time
costs consists of the $28.5 million necessary to implement a
cybersecurity and physical security risk management plan. Recurring
annual costs are calculated as $3.5 million + $3 million + $1.3 million
+ $52,000 + $2.9 million-$98,000 = $10,654,000, rounded to $10.7
million. As a result, we estimate costs of approximately $39.2 million
in the first year and $10.7 million in subsequent years.

D. Alternative Policies

1. Alternative A--Limited or No Action
 Under this alternative, the Commission would either decline to
adopt any new rules governing Submarine Line Terminal Equipment (SLTE)
owners and operators and would maintain the existing submarine cable
licensing framework without modification or only take limited actions
that would not entail licensing of SLTE owners and operators. First, we
note that, as discussed in section III.A.1 and III.A.3, the Second
Report and Order takes actions to streamline and expedite submarine
cable applications. Second, as documented in the record, the current
framework contains significant gaps--particularly the absence of direct
oversight of SLTE owners and operators and the lack of uniform
requirements related to the use of equipment produced by covered-list
or foreign adversary entities. Maintaining the status quo would leave
these gaps unaddressed, despite the rapid evolution of the submarine
cable ecosystem, the increasing complexity of SLTE technology, and
emerging national security risks associated with advanced undersea
communications infrastructure.
 Failure to modernize the regulatory approach would leave the
submarine cable network vulnerable to otherwise avoidable security
threats, reduce the Commission's visibility into entities with
operational control of critical infrastructure, and allow continued use
of foreign-adversary-produced equipment without adequate oversight.
Moreover, the limited-or-no-action option would fail to realize
potential gains in transparency, national security, and supply-chain
integrity. For these reasons, we find that taking no action is not a
recommended option and would be inferior to the adopted rules, which
meaningfully reduce vulnerabilities while minimizing compliance
burdens.
2. Alternative B--Adopt Rules Requiring SLTE Licensing and Targeted
National Security Safeguards
 Under this alternative, which we adopt, the Commission sets up a
comprehensive framework requiring all SLTE owners and operators to be
licensees, subject to a blanket license with exclusions for entities
meeting foreign adversary or character disqualifying conditions. These
rules subject SLTE owners and operators to a variety of routine
conditions, which among other things, include obtaining Section 214
authority to handle telecommunications to or from the United States;
the filing of annual circuit capacity reports per Section 43.82;
creating, implementing, and updating cybersecurity and physical
security risk management plans; and for entities subject to certain
foreign adversary criteria, filing SLTE Foreign Adversary Annual
Reports.

[[Page 46849]]

 New and existing licensees will also be subject to certain
prohibitions, including on use of ``principal equipment'' or third
party services when, for instance, these are provided by any entity
owned by, controlled by, or subject to the jurisdiction or direction of
a foreign adversary. We note that the use of third party services is
subject to a narrow exemption for wet-segment repair and maintenance to
address a relative dearth of specialized cable repair ships available
and the reality that problems on the submarine cable systems may occur
outside the territorial waters of the United States. New and existing
licensees will also be subject to various other routine conditions
described in section IV of this Appendix. The adopted rules also
streamline application review for lower-risk applicants by establishing
ten national security standards that, if met, will qualify a submarine
cable application to be presumptively exempt from referral to the
Executive Branch agencies.
3. Alternative C--Adopt Rules Requiring (1) SLTE Licensing and Targeted
National Security Safeguards, (2) the Removal and Replacement Covered
List Equipment, and (3) the Elimination of the Wet Segment Exemption
for Third-Party Service Providers
 This alternative would differ from Alternative B, which we adopt,
in two respects: (1) by requiring the removal and replacement of
covered list equipment, (2) by foregoing the wet segment exemption for
third-party service providers.
 First, as discussed in section VI of this Appendix, while the
Second Report and Order prohibits the use of principal equipment, it
declined to require existing licensees to remove from their submarine
cable system any and all covered equipment or services, within a
specified timeframe. Although the alternative, of requiring licensees
to remove and replace all existing Covered List equipment from
submarine cable systems, including both dry and wet segments, might
further bolster national security, doing so would likely increase
compliance costs above and beyond the incremental benefit to national
security. Mandatory removal of covered equipment, especially from the
wet segment, would entail significant capital outlays, operational
disruptions, and technical challenges. Various commenters agree, and
claim that sudden, costly rip and replace mandates could deter future
private investment and threatening to cede U.S. leadership in cable
deployment to other nations at a critical time. Instead, we expect that
equipment obsolescence, coupled with the prohibition on new equipment,
will lead licensees to gradually rely less on principal equipment
provided by entities owned by, controlled by, or subject to the
jurisdiction or direction of a foreign adversary, bolstering national
security without overly burdensome costs to comply with our rules.
 As we note above, the Second Report and Order's prohibition on the
use of third party services is subject to a narrow exemption for wet-
segment repair and maintenance. Specifically, the Second Report and
Order provides an exemption to the use of third party services where a
third-party foreign adversary, covered list, or entity that can access
the cable from a foreign adversary country provides repair and
maintenance to the wet segment of submarine cables. In considering
whether to allow this exemption, the Commission considered the relative
dearth of specialized cable repair ships and the reality that problems
on the submarine cable systems may occur outside the territorial waters
of the United States. As the Second Report and Order discusses, many
commenters recommended this exception. In particular, DHS and others
contend that imposing additional restrictions on the use of available
repair ships would be detrimental to the timely restoration of critical
communications infrastructure. As such, we find that prohibiting the
use of specialized foreign-affiliated repair ships owned by a foreign
adversary, Covered List entity, or entity that can access the cable
from a foreign adversary country would not be in the public interest
and do not recommend doing so as an alternative to the rules that we
adopt.

E. Justification Determination

1. Benefits Exceed Costs
 We find that the changes being adopted in the Second Report and
Order should generate substantial benefits to national security and the
resiliency of critical communications infrastructure, and that these
benefits far outweigh the moderate compliance costs. By adopting a
comprehensive regulatory framework for SLTEs, implementing targeted
routine conditions and certifications, and presumptively exempting
qualifying applications from Executive Branch referral, the order
strengthens oversight and mitigate foreign adversary risks while
promoting faster deployment of submarine cables. The benefits of
enhanced protection of U.S. communications networks, improved
cybersecurity and physical security standards, and expedited approval
of low-risk applications are substantial, but are difficult to
quantify. In contrast, we estimate one-time costs of $28.5 million and
annual costs of $10.7 million, which reflect measures to comply with
licensing requirements, including costs associated with cybersecurity
and compliance with routine conditions. The adopted actions are
expected to have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or
more in benefits. Therefore, we find that the benefits of strengthening
oversight and protecting critical communications networks significantly
outweigh the costs.

 Table of Benefits and Costs
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Present value Present value
 Year over 5 years over 5 years
 (3% discount) (7% discount)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Benefits:
 Quantitative................................................ N/A N/A N/A
 -----------------------------------------------
 Qualitative................................................. The Commission views this item as economically
 significant based on the benefits, i.e.,
 having benefits exceeding $100 million
 -----------------------------------------------
Costs ($millions)............................................... 2026 $39.2 $39.2
 2027 10.4 10.0
 2028 10.1 9.3
 2029 9.8 8.7

[[Page 46850]]


 2030 9.5 8.2
 -----------------------------------------------
 Total 79.0 75.4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Highest Net-Benefit Alternative
 Based on the record and economic analysis, Staff find that
Alternative B--SLTE Licensing and Targeted National Security
Safeguards--offers the greatest net benefit among the three
alternatives considered. This combination of rules to bolster national
security with respect to our nation's submarine cable systems, coupled
with targeted exemptions to limit burdens on licensees recognizes the
need to take action to safeguard national security while foregoing
actions where the incremental cost may outweigh the incremental
benefit.

Severability

 The rules adopted in this Second Report and Order promote the
Commission's goal of expediting submarine cable deployment while
protecting submarine cable infrastructure. Though complementary, each
of the separate rules serves their own distinct and specific purpose to
promote that goal. It is our intent that each of these rules adopted in
this Second Report and Order shall be severable. If any of the rules
are declared invalid or unenforceable for any reason, we find that the
remaining portions of the regulatory framework continue to fulfill our
goal of promoting faster and more efficient deployment of submarine
cables while simultaneously protecting submarine cable infrastructure,
and that any remaining rules not deemed invalid or unenforceable shall
remain in effect and be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by
law.

Procedural Matters

 Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,
as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a regulatory
flexibility analysis for notice and comment rulemakings, unless the
agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory
Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the possible impact of the rule
changes contained in this Second Report and Order on small entities.
The FRFA is set forth in Appendix B.
 Paperwork Reduction Act. This Second Report and Order may contain
new or modified information collections subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), 44 U.S.C. 3501-3521. All such new or
modified information collections will be submitted to the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) for review under Section 3507(d) of the
PRA. OMB, the general public, and other Federal agencies will be
invited to comment on any new or modified information collections
contained in this proceeding. In addition, we note that pursuant to the
Small Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4), we
previously sought specific comment on how the Commission might further
reduce the information collection burden for small business concerns
with fewer than 25 employees. In this present document, we have
assessed obtaining information from applicants and licensees about
their submarine cable systems, and other related information important
for, and find that the impact to small entities and businesses is
difficult to ascertain but will not be disproportionate to the impact
on larger businesses and entities.
 OPEN Government Data Act. The OPEN Government Data Act requires
agencies to make ``public data assets'' available under an open license
and as ``open Government data assets,'' i.e., in machine-readable, open
format, unencumbered by use restrictions other than intellectual
property rights, and based on an open standard that is maintained by a
standards organization. This requirement is to be implemented ``in
accordance with guidance by the Director'' of the OMB. The term
``public data asset'' means ``a data asset, or part thereof, maintained
by the Federal Government that has been, or may be, released to the
public, including any data asset, or part thereof, subject to
disclosure under [the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)].'' A ``data
asset'' is ``a collection of data elements or data sets that may be
grouped together,'' and ``data'' is ``recorded information, regardless
of form or the media on which the data is recorded.''
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is major under
the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will sent
a copy of this Report and Order to Congress and the Government
Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
 Availability of Documents. Comments, reply comments, and ex parte
submissions will be available for public inspection during regular
business hours in the FCC Reference Center, Federal Communications
Commission, 45 L Street NE, Washington, DC 20554. These documents will
also be available via ECFS. Documents will be available electronically
in ASCII, Microsoft Word, and/or Adobe Acrobat.

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended
(RFA), the Federal Communications Commission (Commission) incorporated
an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) in the 2025 Submarine
Cable Further Notice, released in August 2025. The Commission sought
written public comment on the proposals in the 2025 Submarine Cable
Further Notice, including comment on the IFRA. No comments were filed
addressing the IRFA. This Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA)
conforms to the RFA and it (or summaries thereof) will be published in
the Federal Register.

A. Need for, and Objectives of, the Rules

 The Second Report and Order builds upon the rules adopted in the
2025 Submarine Cable First Report and Order and represents another
milestone in the Commission's ongoing effort to facilitate faster and
more efficient deployment of submarine cables, while at the same time
ensuring the security and integrity of this critical infrastructure. As
we note in this Second Report and Order, submarine cables are the most
consequential and critical communications infrastructure serving the
United States. Submarine cables

[[Page 46851]]

have been called ``invisible highways'' under the ocean and carry the
vast majority of global internet and communications traffic. According
to one report, the global surge in artificial intelligence (AI) is
fueling ``an unprecedented wave of investment'' in submarine cables,
and investment in new submarine cables is projected to reach $13
billion between 2025 and 2027, which is ``nearly double the amount
spent in the previous three years. However, this growth in global
connections comes with risks that motivate us to recalibrate our
national security approach for submarine cable systems. The rules we
adopt today will ensure that the United States remains the unrivaled
world leader in critical and emerging technologies such as AI. This
Second Report and Order adopts enhanced requirements for purposes of
streamlining our licensing process while improving the Commission's
oversight and protecting national security. These key objectives are
aligned with Executive Order 14365, as ``United States leadership in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) will promote United States national and
economic security and dominance across many domains.''
 In this Second Report and Order, we adopt rules that streamline our
submarine cable licensing process while strengthening national security
protections. First, we reaffirm our commitment to the security,
integrity, and resilience of submarine cables by adopting a licensing
requirement for entities that own and/or operate submarine line
terminal equipment (SLTE). The Commission reinforces that ``[t]he SLTE
is among the most important equipment associated with the submarine
cable system.'' Second, we grant a blanket license to current and
future SLTE owners and operators, with the exception of any entities
seeking to own or operate new SLTE that would be subject to our foreign
adversary and/or character presumptive disqualifying conditions. Third,
we adopt a routine condition requiring licensees that own or operate
SLTE and meet certain foreign adversary criteria to submit SLTE Foreign
Adversary Annual Reports to the Commission. Fourth, we make targeted
improvements to the submarine cable licensing rules by adopting
national security-related routine conditions and certification
requirements. Finally, we adopt an approach to expedite the deployment
of submarine cables by presumptively excluding applications that meet
certain national security standards from Commission referral to the
Executive Branch agencies.

B. Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Public Comments in Response
to the IRFA

 No specific comments on the IRFA were made on the record; however,
commenters addressed the potential impact of the Commission's proposed
rules in the 2025 Submarine Cable Further Notice on small businesses or
smaller players in specific industries. We summarize these comments
here and analyze the impact of the Commission's adopted rules in
section F of this FRFA.
 A commenter raised concerns about small business impacts in
response to potential Commission requirements to remove and replace
certain equipment in the submarine cable system, and shared
observations from previous ``rip and replace'' requirements in other
settings. The commenter also raised concerns about potential impacts to
small and medium-sized licensees that would need to determine the
entities in their global supply chain that would be prohibited from
being used in the ``submarine cable infrastructure.'' Other commenters
raised concerns about the burden on SLTE owners and operators to become
licensees or to submit reports; submarine cable licensees to submit
certifications and reports; and of customized existing mitigation
agreements instead of standardized mitigation.
 The Commission responded to the concerns of commenters by not
adopting some of the proposals from the 2025 Submarine Cable Further
Notice and implementing others in a modified, narrowed fashion. The
Commission has considered the above-mentioned comments and has adopted
alternatives, discussed in Section F below, to address some of the
concerns raised.

C. Response to Comments by the Chief Counsel for the Small Business
Administration Office of Advocacy

 Pursuant to the Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, which amended the
RFA, the Commission is required to respond to any comments filed by the
Chief Counsel for the Small Business Administration (SBA) Office of
Advocacy, and also provide a detailed statement of any change made to
the proposed rules as a result of those comments. The Chief Counsel did
not file any comments in response to the proposed rules in this
proceeding.

D. Description and Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to Which
the Rules Will Apply

 The RFA directs agencies to provide a description of, and where
feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities that may be
affected by the adopted rules. The RFA generally defines the term
``small entity'' as having the same meaning as the terms ``small
business,'' ``small organization,'' and ``small governmental
jurisdiction.'' In addition, the term ``small business'' has the same
meaning as the term ``small business concern'' under the Small Business
Act. A ``small business concern'' is one which: (1) is independently
owned and operated; (2) is not dominant in its field of operation; and
(3) satisfies any additional criteria established by the SBA. The SBA
establishes small business size standards that agencies are required to
use when promulgating regulations relating to small businesses;
agencies may establish alternative size standards for use in such
programs, but must consult and obtain approval from SBA before doing
so.
 Our actions, over time, may affect small entities that are not
easily categorized at present. We therefore describe three broad groups
of small entities that could be directly affected by our actions. In
general, a small business is an independent business having fewer than
500 employees. These types of small businesses represent 99.9% of all
businesses in the United States, which translates to 34.75 million
businesses. Next, ``small organizations'' are not-for-profit
enterprises that are independently owned and operated and are not
dominant in their field. While we do not have data regarding the number
of non-profits that meet that criteria, over 99 percent of nonprofits
have fewer than 500 employees. Finally, ``small governmental
jurisdictions'' are defined as cities, counties, towns, townships,
villages, school districts, or special districts with populations of
less than fifty thousand. Based on the 2022 U.S. Census of Governments
data, we estimate that at least 48,724 out of 90,835 local government
jurisdictions have a population of less than 50,000.
 The rules adopted in the Second Report and Order will apply to
small entities in the industries identified in the chart below by their
six-digit North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes
and corresponding SBA size standard. Based on currently available U.S.
Census data regarding the estimated number of small firms in each
identified industry, we conclude that the adopted rules will impact a
substantial number of small entities. Where available, we also provide
additional information regarding the number of potentially affected
entities in the identified industries below.

[[Page 46852]]


 Table 1--2022 U.S. Census Bureau Data by NAICS Code
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Regulated industry (footnotes
 specify potentially affected SBA size Total small Percent small
 entities within a regulated NAICS code standard Total firms firms firms
 industry where applicable)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wired Telecommunications 517111 1,500 employees. 3,403 3,027 88.95
 Carriers.
Wireless Telecommunications 517112 1,500 employees. 1,184 1,081 91.30
 Carriers (except Satellite).
All Other Telecommunications.. 517810 $40 million..... 1,673 1,007 60.19
Computer Infrastructure 518210 $40 million..... 12,054 8,895 73.79
 Providers, Data Processing,
 Web Hosting, and Related
 Services.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
