FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Review of the Commission's Assessment and Collection of Regulatory Fees for Fiscal Year 2025
Document number: 2026-14673
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Space Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 45649
Publication date: 2026-07-21

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 138 (Tuesday, July 21, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 138 (Tuesday, July 21, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 45649-45653]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-14673]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 1

[MD Docket Nos. 25-190, 24-85; FCC 26-43; FR ID 356762]


Review of the Commission's Assessment and Collection of
Regulatory Fees for Fiscal Year 2025

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Denial of petition for reconsideration.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission denies
the petition for partial reconsideration filed by Kin[eacute]is
challenging the FY 2025 Regulatory Fees Report and Order.

DATES: Effective July 21, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Patrick Brogan, Office of Economics
and Analytics, [email protected] or 202-418-7378

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Order
on Reconsideration in MD Docket Nos. 25-190, 24-85, FCC 26-43, adopted
on June 23, 2026, and released on June 24, 2026. The full text of this
document is available at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-43A1.pdf . To request materials in accessible formats for people with
disabilities (braille, large print, electronic files, audio format),
send an email to [email protected] or call the Consumer and Governmental
Affairs Bureau at 202-418-0530 (voice).
 Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis. The Regulatory Flexibility
Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a
regulatory flexibility analysis for notice and comment rulemakings,
unless the agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if promulgated,
have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.'' Accordingly, in the FY 2025 Regulatory Fees Report and
Order, the Commission prepared a final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis
(FRFA) concerning the potential impact of rule and policy changes
contained in the FY 2025 Regulatory Fees Report and Order. We received
no petitions for reconsideration of that Final Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis. In this present Order on Reconsideration, the Commission
promulgates no additional final rules. Our present action is,
therefore, not an RFA matter.
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission will not send a copy of
this Order on Reconsideration to Congress and the Government
Accountability Office pursuant to the Congressional Review Act, see 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A), because no rule was adopted or amended.
 Final Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 Analysis. This document does
not contain any proposed new or substantively modified information
collections subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA),
Public Law 104-13. In addition, therefore, it does not contain any new
or modified information collection burden for small business concerns
with fewer than 25 employees, pursuant to the Small Business Paperwork
Relief Act of 2002, Public Law 107-198, see 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4).

Synopsis

I. Introduction

 1. In this Order on Reconsideration, we deny the petition for
partial reconsideration filed by Kin[eacute]is challenging the FY 2025
Regulatory Fees Report and Order, 90 FR 43284 (September 8, 2025). For
the reasons presented below, we deny the petition for reconsideration
and reject Kin[eacute]is's request to modify the Commission's
determination to assess regulatory fees on all holders of space station
authorizations as of the start of the fiscal year rather than only the
holders of space station authorizations that have been certified to be
operational as of the start of the fiscal year.

II. Background

A. Space and Earth Station Regulatory Fee Rulemaking Proceeding

 2. In 2024, the Commission initiated a rulemaking proceeding to
seek comment on possible changes to the then existing methodology for
assessing regulatory fees on space and earth stations. Among other
proposals, the Commission proposed to assess regulatory fees on all
authorized earth or space stations as of the start of the fiscal year,
which commences on October 1 and ends on September 30th. At the time,
regulatory fees for earth and space stations were only assessed for
stations that were certified as operational as of the start of the
relevant fiscal year.
 3. In the FY 2024 Space and Earth Station Regulatory Fees NPRM, 89
FR 20582 (March 25, 2024), the Commission set forth numerous reasons

[[Page 45650]]

why such a change in methodology would be reasonable. First, the
Commission tentatively concluded that there was no statutory bar to
assessing regulatory fees on authorized, but not yet operational, space
and earth stations. The Commission observed that section 9(d) of the
Act, 47 U.S.C. 159(d), explicitly gives the Commission authority to
adjust its regulatory fees by rule if it determines that the schedule
of fees requires amendment, and that Congress deleted the original
textual language of section 9 that provided the basis for assessing
space station regulatory fees on operational stations. Second, it
observed that both license holders and station operators granted
authority to access the market in the United States benefit from
substantial full time equivalent (FTE) resources. The Commission
explained that one FTE, a ``Full Time Equivalent'' or ``Full Time
Employee,'' is a unit of measure equal to the work performed annually
by a full-time person (working a 40-hour workweek for a full year)
assigned to the particular job, and subject to agency personnel
staffing limitations established by the U.S. Office of Management and
Budget. Specifically, FTE resources were used to review and grant the
respective application or petition for market access as well as to
protect the benefits conferred by the authorization, such as use of
spectrum and orbital resources and protection from interference. In
addition, the Commission observed that if regulatory fees were assessed
only when space stations become operational, rather than when they are
authorized, then some authorization holders would not be assessed
regulatory fees associated with FTE work for potentially many years or
perhaps never. As a result, space stations that become operational
earlier than other licensed stations would bear the entire burden of
regulatory work done on behalf of all similarly situated entities. The
Commission noted that regulatory fees are a zero-sum situation, so any
decrease to the fees paid by one category of regulatees necessitates an
increase in fees paid by other fee payors.
 4. In proposing the change to its methodology, the Commission noted
that it should not present a challenge to administer because the date a
license or market access is issued is a matter of public record and
contained in its licensing database. The FY 2024 Space and Earth
Station Regulatory Fees NPRM acknowledged that the proposal could
increase the costs to the satellite operator at the initial funding
phases and sought comment on this and other potential collateral
effects of the proposal and how the Commission should consider them.
 5. In February 2025, the Commission released the FY 2024 Space and
Earth Station Regulatory Fees FNPRM, 90 FR 11918 (March 13, 2025),
seeking additional comment on the proposal to assess regulatory fees on
all holders of space station authorizations as of the start of the
fiscal year, along with other matters. The Commission tentatively
concluded that the concerns raised regarding costs, financial risks,
and the impact on innovation did not outweigh the need to assess
regulatory fees on the same class who benefit from the Commission's FTE
efforts. The Commission stated that while it understood the desire of
interested parties to delay assessing regulatory fees on a satellite
operator until the system becomes operational and generates revenues,
it did not believe that this continuing with such an approach best
comported with the requirements of section 9 of the Communications Act,
47 U.S.C. 159, nor was it fair to other fee payors in the same
regulatory fee category. The Commission further noted that fairness is
one of the overarching goals in implementing regulatory fee system.
 6. In June 2025, the Commission adopted the Space and Earth Station
Regulatory Fees Third Report and Order, 90 FR 29760 (July 7, 2025),
which, among other changes, adopted the proposal to assess regulatory
fees on all authorized earth or space stations as of the start of the
fiscal year, rather than only on those certified as operational as of
the start of the fiscal year. That is, the Commission changed the
existing methodology from assessing fees only after notification that
the station is operational to assessing fees on all stations authorized
by license or grant of market access as of the start of the fiscal
year. In doing so, the Commission observed that significant Commission
resources, expressed in Space Bureau FTEs, are involved with the review
and grant of space and earth station licenses. The Commission noted
that under the prior methodology, fee payors with systems that become
operational earlier than other licensed systems bear the entire fee
burden of regulatory work done on behalf of all regulated systems.
Moreover, even if a system never becomes operational, the licensee or
market access grant recipient nonetheless benefited from the FTE
burdens. The Commission also noted that, although the term of a license
does not commence until the space station or system of space stations
is operational, the benefits and protections provided by a license or
market access grant, such as the ability to use spectrum and orbital
resources and to preclude others from using those same resources,
accrue upon authorization or grant. In such an instance, the Commission
would not be able to recover the FTE burdens associated with regulating
the licensed space or earth station, and other licensees with
operational space or earth stations would have to bear all the costs of
such regulation. The Commission also observed that, given the bespoke
nature of many satellite systems, FTE resources are used by the
industry before, during, and after an application is filed. Finally,
the Commission concluded that assessing regulatory fees on authorized,
not just operational stations, broadens the base of regulatory fee
payors, creating a more fair methodology. The Commission also observed
that broadening the base to include authorized, but not operational,
stations more accurately allocates FTE burdens.
 7. In August 2025, the Commission adopted a schedule to assess and
collect regulatory fees for FY 2025 by September 30, 2025. In doing so,
the Commission implemented the amendments to the fee methodology that
were adopted in the Space and Earth Station Regulatory Fees Third
Report and Order, including the change to assessing regulatory fees on
all authorized space stations as of the start of the fiscal year,
rather than only on stations that had become operational as of the
start of the fiscal year. The Commission specifically declined a
request by petitioner Kin[eacute]is to interpret ``authorized
stations'' solely as stations ``that have received unconditional
permission to provide service without the need for further agency
action.'' The Commission found that this request effectively was an
attempt to revisit whether operational status should be the basis for
assessing regulatory fees on a space station, although the Commission
had just decided in June 2025 that the operational status of a space or
earth station should no longer be the deciding factor of whether
regulatory fees should be assessed. The Commission reiterated that
significant FTE burdens are involved with the licensing of space and
earth stations, even before a station becomes operational, and that if
an authorized space station never becomes operational, then the FTE
burdens associated with oversight and regulating such space stations
would never be recovered and would have to be borne by stations that
are operational. The Commission found that these considerations equally
apply to space

[[Page 45651]]

stations that are authorized, but subject to a condition that needs to
be fulfilled by the licensee or grantee prior to becoming operational,
or prior to accessing the U.S. market in the case of a non-U.S.
licensed space station. The Commission also noted that assessment of
regulatory fees could provide an incentive for licensees to resolve any
aspects of their application that are within their control prior to
action on the application, or as quickly as possible if the application
is granted with conditions subject to the licensee's control.
 8. The Commission also pointed to the prior finding in the Space
and Earth Station Regulatory Fees Third Report and Order that assessing
regulatory fees on authorized stations broadens the base of regulatory
fee payors, spreading the recovery of regulatory fees from all
licensees and grantees that benefit from the Space Bureau FTE's
licensing and regulatory activities, and potentially lowering the per
unit regulatory fee burden by increasing the number of units on which
fees are assessed. The Commission found that this rationale for
adopting regulatory fees on authorized stations would be undermined by
not assessing regulatory fees on space stations that are authorized,
but are subject to conditions that need to be fulfilled prior to
commencing operations. Not assessing regulatory fees until all aspects
of an application are fully resolved could effectively remove a
significant number of current fee payors from regulatory fee
assessments. The Commission noted that all the NGSO large constellation
fee payors have not received unconditional authorization for all
aspects of their applied-for systems. If they are not assessed
regulatory fees, their share of NGSO space station regulatory fees
would need to be paid by other NGSO space station fee payors. Finally,
the Commission found that requiring Commission staff to determine
whether the conditions placed on every space and earth station grant
prevent the licensee from commencing operations risks being subjective
and administratively burdensome.

B. Kin[eacute]is Petition for Reconsideration

 9. Kin[eacute]is sought partial reconsideration of the FY 2025
Report and Order. Since no party sought reconsideration of the
Commission's determination in the Space and Earth Station Regulatory
Fees Third Report and Order to assess regulatory fees on all authorized
earth stations, rather than on earth stations certified as operational
at the start of the relevant fiscal year, this reconsideration focuses
solely on the Commission's determination to assess regulatory fees on
authorized, rather than operational, space stations. No other party has
sought reconsideration on the Commission's determinations regarding the
assessment of regulatory fees for FY 2025. The Commission released a
public notice inviting comment on the Kin[eacute]is Petition, which was
also published in the Federal Register. No parties filed oppositions in
response to Kin[eacute]is's petition.

III. Discussion

 10. Standard of Review. Under Sec. 1.429 of the Commission's
rules, any interested person may petition for reconsideration of a
final action in a rulemaking proceeding. Our rules require that a
petition for reconsideration must state with particularity the respects
in which the action taken should be changed, and must be filed within
30 days from the date of public notice of such action. In addition, a
petition for reconsideration cannot rely on facts or arguments that
were not previously presented to the Commission, except under
enumerated conditions.

A. The Commission Sufficiently Considered the Concerns of Kin[eacute]is

 11. Kin[eacute]is argues that the Commission did not adequately
address all aspects of the concerns raised regarding the assessment of
regulatory fees on space stations that are ``provisionally
authorized,'' but that remain subject to a ``critical'' condition on
their authorization that would preclude the licensee from initiating
service without further agency action. Kin[eacute]is asserts that the
Commission failed to consider fully all aspects of the financial
burdens that its definition of ``authorized'' places upon small, start-
up operators. It states that the Commission failed to acknowledge that
a license or grant of market access, without certainty that the
licensee or grantee will be able to satisfy all conditions of the grant
and be able to access the market, is likely to have a significant
detrimental effect on the licensee or grantee. Instead, Kin[eacute]is
broadly argues that the Commission's decision to assess fees on space
stations authorized as of the start of the fiscal year, but not yet
operational, reflected a bias towards maximizing fee collections and
avoiding the need for administrative decisions, while discounting the
significant financial impact on licensees whose authorizations ``remain
in regulatory limbo'' absent grant of unconditional authority and who
may lack the resources to pay regulatory fees without an unrestricted
license. Kin[eacute]is claims that the Commission focused solely on the
administrative burden of having to determine whether the conditions
placed on every earth or space station grant prevent the licensee (or
grantee) from commencing operations, which it alleges is not a valid
concern.
 12. We disagree that the Commission failed to consider sufficiently
Kin[eacute]is's concerns. In the FY 2025 Report and Order, the
Commission explained its reasoning for declining to interpret
``authorized stations'' solely as stations ``that have received
unconditional permission to provide service without the need for
further agency action'' as requested by Kin[eacute]is. We disagree that
the Commission failed to acknowledge the ``significant detrimental
effect'' that assessing regulatory fees on authorized stations would
have on fee payors that are conditionally licensed or granted market
access, without certainty the licensee or grantee will be able to
satisfy all the conditions. To the contrary, the Commission recognized
that assessing a regulatory fee on any station--including those
authorized but subject to conditions--involves a financial burden for a
regulatory fee payor. However, as the Commission correctly observed,
the Commission changed the methodology used to assess regulatory fees
from one based on the operational status of the space station to
whether the space station was authorized, since significant FTE burdens
are involved with the licensing of space stations, even before a
station becomes operational. That is, the Commission decided to assess
regulatory fees once an applicant becomes a licensee or grantee and
receives the benefits of regulation (that is, benefits from the FTE
burdens that went into reviewing and granting the license and that go
into oversight and regulation of the licensee after the license is
granted). Congress has prescribed a method for the Commission to
collect the full annual salaries and expenses (S&E) appropriation by
keying our regulatory fee assessment to the relevant FTE burden. The
methodology for assessing regulatory fees must ``reflect the full-time
equivalent number of employees within the bureaus and offices of the
Commission, adjusted to take into account factors that are reasonably
related to the benefits provided to the payor of the fee by the
Commission's activities.'' FTEs within a bureau are not assigned to
specific fee categories ``by rote or at random, but rather in a manner
that reflects the time spent by FTEs on a regulatory fee category,
which is in itself a reflection of `benefit' to the fee category.'' As
the

[[Page 45652]]

Commission has explained before, section 9, 47 U.S.C. 159, is clear
that regulatory fee assessments are based on the burden imposed on the
Commission, not benefits realized by regulatees. Thus, the fee assigned
to each regulatory fee category relates to the FTE burden associated
with oversight and regulation of each regulatory fee category by the
relevant core bureaus.
 13. Because the annual assessment of regulatory fees is a zero-sum
game, the FY 2025 Report and Order explained that adopting
Kin[eacute]is's proposal would result in an increased financial burden
on other regulatory fee payors. As the Commission has previously found,
``assessing regulatory fees on authorized stations broadens the base of
regulatory fee payors, spreading the recovery of fees from all
licensees and grantees that benefit from the Space Bureau's licensing
and regulatory activities, and potentially lowering the per unit
regulatory fee burden by increasing the number of units on which fees
are assessed.'' We are unpersuaded by Kin[eacute]is's argument that
such entities should be excluded from the base of regulatory fee
payors. Moreover, to the extent Kin[eacute]is argues that it does not
have an ability to pay regulatory fees, we remind Kin[eacute]is of
existing processes to seek a waiver, reduction, or deferral of
regulatory fees to mitigate the impact of regulatory fees on operators
when paying such fees would cause a hardship. Section 9A(d) permits the
Commission to waive, reduce, or defer payment of a regulatory fee and
associated interest charges and penalties for good cause. As the
Commission has repeatedly noted, however, it interprets this provision
narrowly to permit only those waivers ``unambiguously articulating
`extraordinary circumstances' outweighing the public interest in
recouping the cost of the Commission's regulatory services for a
particular regulatee.''
 14. Furthermore, under Kin[eacute]is's proposal, it is more than an
``inconvenience'' to require the Commission to assess whether license
conditions provide certainty that a licensee or grantee can operate or
enter the U.S. market under the license or grant. Virtually every space
station license or market access grant is subject to conditions. In
proposing regulatory fees, the Commission must determine the number of
units in a category over which regulatory fees are to be assessed. The
fewer units, the greater the regulatory fee per unit. As the Commission
stated, requiring Commission staff to determine whether conditions
placed on every space (and earth) station license or market access
grant would prevent the licensee from commencing operations risks being
subjective and administratively burdensome. The Commission also noted
that all regulatory fee payors in the large constellation non-
geostationary orbit (NGSO) fee category have not received unconditional
authorizations for all aspects of their applied-for systems, so other
NGSO space station fee payors would have to pay more regulatory fees if
those large constellation fee payers were no longer assessed regulatory
fees under Kin[eacute]is's proposal. The fact that it might be
theoretically possible to analyze what constitutes a ``critical''
condition on an authorization that would preclude the licensee from
initiating service without further agency action to avoid this
administrative burden, does not change the fact that change would still
be more difficult to administer than the proposal adopted. Moreover,
such a proposal does not appear to best comport with the statute
because it fails to ensure that regulatory fees be paid by all entities
holding authorizations that benefit from the Space Bureau's licensing
and regulatory activities. Furthermore, it undermines efforts to
potentially lower the per unit regulatory fee burden by increasing the
number of units on which fees are assessed. As such, we affirm that the
concerns stated by the Commission were valid.
 15. Kin[eacute]is also seeks reconsideration based on the alleged
failure of the Commission to address potential alternatives that
Kin[eacute]is suggests would allow regulatees to have a license or
grant of market access but not pay regulatory fees. We note that the
alternatives proposed by Kin[eacute]is originate from a fundamental
misunderstanding of the basis for assessing regulatory fees.
Kin[eacute]is's alternatives seek to address whether a license is final
or subject to additional action by the licensee and the Commission, and
whether it is fair to assess regulatory fees while these additional
actions are yet to be taken. This misses the point entirely. As
discussed above, regulatory fees are keyed to the FTE burden. Even if a
license is conditional and additional steps must be taken, by the
licensee or the Commission, before the licensee can operate a space
station under the license, there is still a license, and the licensee
or authorization holder has benefitted, and continues to benefit from
Space Bureau FTE resources used to review and grant licenses in the
category of the fee payor and continue to have regulatory oversight
over licenses in the payor's fee category.
 16. In sum, we reject the alternatives proposed by Kin[eacute]is as
fundamentally incorrect in both fact and law when Kin[eacute]is
contends that the benefits of the regulatory process are manifested
only once unconditional approval is received, and the Commission should
not assess regulatory fees premised on these benefits absent
``unfettered'' authorization. Not only does this ignore the
longstanding regulatory fee framework required by Congress in keying
our regulatory fee assessment to the relevant FTE burden, but it also
improperly focuses on the fee assessment of a particular regulatee,
rather than the category of fee payors as a whole. Accordingly, we
reject the alternatives posed by Kin[eacute]is.

B. Recent Statements in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking Do Not Support
Reconsideration

 17. Kin[eacute]is argues that its position that an authorization is
not final when conditioned on the future submission of an orbital
debris mitigation plan is supported by language in the Space
Modernization NPRM adopted by the Commission in October 2025. In the
Space Modernization NPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether to
allow the grant of a conditional space station authorization where an
applicant did not provide an orbital debris mitigation plan, but
instead certified its intent to comply with the Commission's orbital
debris mitigation rules in a subsequent filing. The conditionally
authorized applicant would then be required to submit a compliant
orbital debris mitigation plan or a modification application no later
than six months prior to integration of satellites into a launch
vehicle. If the applicant files for a modification or seeks a waiver of
Commission rules instead of submitting a fully compliant proposal, the
conditional grant would be rescinded. Kin[eacute]is argues that the
proposal in the NPRM supports its position that a ``conditionally
approved applicant'' has not yet been authorized.
 18. As an initial matter, we considered this argument even though
it was not previously presented to the Commission because the Space
Modernization NPRM was released after the August FY 2025 Report and
Order. Even so, we do not find that the statements in the Space
Modernization NPRM support reconsideration. The Commission's statements
in the Space Modernization NPRM about the creation of new types of
grants and processes reflect things that may or may not come to pass.
Should the Commission adopt changes to its regulation of space and
earth stations that impact the FTE

[[Page 45653]]

resources allocated to the relevant regulatory fee categories and
methodology used for such fee categories, those changes would be
appropriately addressed in a future regulatory fees rulemaking rather
than at this time in a reconsideration of a past regulatory fee
rulemaking. As the Commission has repeatedly explained, apportionment
of amounts to be collected from each fee category within a Bureau or
Office based on FTE resources allocated is not required to be
calculated with scientific precision. In plain terms, whether any of
the proposed changes, if adopted, will materially alter FTE resources
devoted to the oversight and regulation of space stations sufficient to
merit the Commission proposing changes to fee categories or
methodologies is premature at this time. As such, we do not find that
the statements in the Space Modernization NPRM support reconsideration
of the Commission's decision.

IV. Ordering Clauses

 19. Accordingly, it is ordered that pursuant to sections 1, 4(i),
4(j), and 405 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C.
151, 154(i) 154(j), 155(c), and 405, and Sec. 1.429(b) of the
Commission's rules, 47 CFR 1.429(b), the Petition for Reconsideration
filed on November 14, 2025 by Kin[eacute]is is denied.

Federal Communications Commission.
Marlene Dortch,
Secretary.
[FR Doc. 2026-14673 Filed 7-20-26; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 6712-01-P
