FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Resilient Networks; Concerning Disruptions to Communications
Document number: 2026-13155
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 39516
Publication date: 2026-06-30

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 124 (Tuesday, June 30, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 124 (Tuesday, June 30, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 39516-39528]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-13155]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 4

[PS Docket Nos. 21-346 and 15-80; ET Docket No. 04-35 FR ID 351629]


Resilient Networks; Concerning Disruptions to Communications

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission

[[Page 39517]]

(Commission) modernizes the Disaster Information Reporting System
(DIRS) to reduce reporting burdens on stakeholders and ensure that the
information being collected is useful for disaster response. Our
modernization allows manual filers to submit a single, dynamic form
instead of multiple worksheets, and enables them to use a ``one-click''
option to easily indicate there is no change from the previous day's
report. Further, unnecessary fields and worksheets will be eliminated
to ensure that DIRS is collecting the information that is most
important for emergency response. This modernization also eliminates
the requirement for service providers to file a DIRS final report
within 24 hours of DIRS' deactivation, and exempts non-facilities-based
providers from DIRS reporting. This document also recognizes the
emergence of public safety voice and broadband networks and the
critical connectivity they provide to public safety stakeholders by
requiring providers of these services to submit DIRS reports on the
status of their public safety network infrastructure. Finally, we
augment providers' ability to voluntarily submit geospatial information
on infrastructure affected by disasters. Together, these changes
provide public safety officials with the additional information they
need, while also making it easier for service providers to satisfy
their reporting obligations.

DATES: Effective June 30, 2026, except for amendatory instruction 3 (47
CFR 4.18), which is delayed indefinitely. The Commission will publish a
document in the Federal Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jeanne Stockman, Attorney Advisor,
Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau at (202) 418-7830 or
 [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Third
Report and Order (Third Report and Order), FCC 26-34, adopted May 20,
2026, and released May 21, 2026. The full text of this document is
available by downloading the text from the Commission's website at:
 https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-modernizes-disaster-information-reporting-system-0 . The full text of this document is available for
public inspection and copying during regular business hours in the FCC
Reference Center, 45 L Street NE, Washington, DC 20554. To request
materials in accessible formats for people with disabilities (Braille,
large print, electronic files, audio format), send an email to
 [email protected] or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau at
202-418-0530 (voice).

Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires
that an agency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice-
and-comment rulemaking proceedings, unless the agency certifies that
``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact
on a substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the
Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA)
concerning possible impact of the rule and policy changes contained in
the Third Report and Order on small entities concerning possible impact
of the rule and policy changes contained in the Third Report and Order
on small entities. The FRFA is set forth in Appendix B.

Congressional Review Act

 The Commission has determined, and the Administrator of the Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget,
concurs, that this rule is ``non-major'' under the Congressional Review
Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a copy of this Third
Report and Order to Congress and the Government Accountability Office
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Paperwork Reduction Act

 This Third Report and Order may contain new or substantively
modified information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-13. All such requirements
will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for
review under Section 3507(d) of the PRA. OMB, the general public, and
other federal agencies will be invited to comment on any new or
modified information collection requirements contained in this
proceeding. In addition, we note that pursuant to the Small Business
Paperwork Relief Act of 2002, Public Law 107-198, see 44 U.S.C.
3506(c)(4), we previously sought specific comment on how the Commission
might further reduce the information collection burden for small
business concerns with fewer than 25 employees.

Synopsis

A. Simplifying the DIRS User Interface

 To simplify DIRS for manual filers and make DIRS information more
useful to emergency managers, we adopt our proposal to redesign the
DIRS interface to replace the ten separate DIRS worksheets with a
single, dynamic form as proposed in the FNPRM. Instead of completing a
series of worksheets that collect overlapping information, manual DIRS
filers will respond to initial questions about the services they
provide in the DIRS activation area and the impacts to equipment and
facilities caused by the disaster. Based upon these responses, manual
filers will be presented with questions seeking information applicable
only to the services the filer provides. Information that currently
appears on multiple worksheets would only need to be entered once.
While, as we noted, manual filers comprise a minority of providers that
submit DIRS reports, many providers that manually file DIRS reports are
small- or medium-sized businesses, and so this change will have an
outsized effect in reducing burdens for providers whose resources may
be most thinly stretched during a disaster.
 The record supports our view that this step will simplify and
reduce the time burden associated with manual data entry in DIRS. The
National Rural Electric Cooperative Association observes that the
current DIRS reporting framework is cumbersome and inefficient with
many overlapping data fields. Accordingly, CTIA and others describe
this, along with other measures we adopt today, as ``common sense
changes that would reduce burdens on providers, allowing them to direct
resources towards recovery efforts without impacting the actionable
information provided to public safety stakeholders through DIRS
reports.'' The National Association of Broadcasters (NAB) agrees that
this redesign ``will facilitate filing in DIRS during a disaster[,]''
and NTCA adds that it will ``benefit public safety agencies by allowing
them to more quickly identify the status of communications in their
area.'' The Competitive Carriers Association (CCA) observes that these
changes address a concern that is ``particularly acute for small and
rural carriers. Such providers often operate with limited engineering
and operations teams, many of whom are simultaneously engaged in damage
assessment, power restoration, and physical repairs.'' No commenters
oppose this proposal or express concern that its adoption would
diminish DIRS's utility.

B. Establishing a ``One-Click'' Filing Option

 In the interest of reducing the burdens of required DIRS reporting
and encouraging participation for voluntary DIRS filers, we adopt our
proposal to establish a ``one-click'' option on the consolidated
worksheet for providers to

[[Page 39518]]

indicate there is no change in infrastructure status from the previous
day's report. Commenters agree that this would reduce time spent on
manual DIRS entry while preserving the value of DIRS for emergency
management officials. USTelecom states that a one-click option will
``improve the efficiency'' of disaster-related data collection, and an
individual commenter describes this change as ``monumental.'' In
addition to saving time and streamlining DIRS report preparation, NAB
believes this change ``would facilitate broadcasters' voluntary
participation in DIRS, especially smaller stations.'' As reflected in
these comments, we believe this step will simplify manual DIRS report
submission during DIRS activations, while also enabling providers to
have more time to focus on the important task of restoring service to
their customers.
 We decline to extend the availability of a one-click-like option to
batch filers, in addition to manual filers, as recommended by WISPA--
The Association for Broadband Without Boundaries (WISPA). To satisfy
their DIRS reporting obligations, batch filers already enjoy a
streamlined filing process whereby they upload a provider-created
spreadsheet to the Commission, the production of which may be automated
by network administration systems. We disagree with WISPA that
implementing the equivalent of one-click filing will enable batch
filers to complete their DIRS filing obligation more easily than simply
resubmitting the previous day's spreadsheet. We believe that a one-
click (or near one-click) option would require substantially similar
effort and time for DIRS batch filers as using the existing spreadsheet
upload process, particularly for those users that leverage the DIRS
Upload Application Programming Interface (API). Further, in our
experience, batch filers are more likely to be larger entities
providing service through many facilities in a broader geographic area
than manual filers. As a result of the number of facilities on which
batch filers report and the dynamic nature of service restoration
during and after disasters, DIRS information for batch filers is very
likely to change day-over-day, making a one-click option less useful
for these types of filers.
 While no commenter opposes the Commission's proposal, one commenter
requests that the Commission have ``a way to ensure that [] providers
aren't actually skipping the daily report and are in fact checking
their data to see it hasn't changed.'' We recognize this valid concern.
As an initial matter, we note that providers are under an obligation to
report information truthfully to the Commission. To remind providers of
the requirement to submit accurate information, we will also add the
following language to DIRS, which the user will be required to
acknowledge when clicking ``submit'': ``By submitting this Form, you
certify that the information you have provided on this Form and the
attachments is true and accurate. Filers are responsible for the
accuracy of the information they file with the Commission, including
any data automatically populated into this Form or its attachments from
other Commission databases. Failure to ensure the accuracy of
information filed with the Commission may result in enforcement
action.'' We believe this language puts providers further on notice
that it is their responsibility to verify the accuracy of the
information in their reports. We expect that this language will prompt
providers to review any existing data before submitting their DIRS
report.

C. Eliminating Unnecessary DIRS Fields and Worksheets

 To further streamline DIRS reporting for both manual and batch
filers, we eliminate many DIRS reporting fields and worksheets, as
proposed in the FNPRM. The record affirms our view that the worksheets
and fields we eliminate today are unnecessary because they are
duplicative and/or provide little of actionable value for disaster
response. We summarize the remaining DIRS fields that will be mandatory
or voluntary to complete in Appendix C.
 Eliminate the Inter-exchange Carrier (IXC) Blocking Worksheet. We
eliminate the inter-exchange carrier worksheet, agreeing with ACA
Connects which observes that the worksheet ``has not proven useful for
disaster response.'' No commenters oppose this action.
 Eliminate the ``Percent of Historical Capacity Available'' Field
from the Wireless Cell Site by County Worksheet. We eliminate the
``percent of historical capacity available'' field from the Wireless
Cell Site by County worksheet because this field is redundant as the
information it contains can be derived from other reported data. As
explained by CTIA, ``[t]he Commission has access to the relevant
information provided in [this field] through other means, such as by
measuring capacity based on the number of sites reported in operation
or out of service.'' We agree, and find that since the Commission has
the ability to calculate this percentage from other data reporting in
DIRS, it is appropriate to eliminate this field from the worksheet. No
commenters disagree with this conclusion.
 Consolidate Cable Telephone Subscriber Data Fields. Rather than
eliminate DIRS' reporting fields for cable telephony, as proposed, we
consolidate the fields for cable communications providers that request
(1) the number of cable telephone subscribers served and (2) the number
of VoIP subscribers served with (3) the number of cable telephony
subscribers down and (4) the number of VoIP subscribers whose service
is down. As a result of this action, cable communications service
providers will be required to respond to only two prompts: how many
cable telephony and/or VoIP subscribers do you serve, and how many of
them are without service? Based on data reported in NORS and DIRS over
the past year, cable communications service providers themselves often
appear to be unsure whether to report voice outages as VoIP or cable
telephony, resulting in inconsistent and unreliable reporting for
outages of each type. Moreover, the difference between cable telephony
provided via a circuit-switched network and cable telephony provided
via VoIP is often not material from an emergency management standpoint.
We agree with ACA Connects that eliminating the need for providers to
discern between these two types of service in their DIRS reports
``would substantially reduce the time burdens associated with DIRS data
entry without compromising DIRS's mission.'' This action is also
consistent with CTIA's advocacy that we eliminate duplicative fields in
DIRS. We take this action to improve DIRS reporting efficiency and to
save service providers precious time in DIRS reporting when their
primary focus is on disaster recovery and restoring service to
customers. No commenters oppose this action.
 Eliminate Video Subscriber Data Fields from the Cable System and
Major Equipment Worksheets. We remove the fields currently in the cable
system and major equipment worksheet that request the number of video
subscribers served and the number whose service is down to, consistent
with NCTA's comments, ``facilitate more efficient reporting by
providers and [to] help maximize the time and resources that are
available for network restoration.'' NAB and ACA Connects support our
taking this step because this information is less critical for disaster
response, and no commenters oppose this action.
 Eliminate the ``Number of Access Lines'' field from the Major
Equipment Worksheet. We eliminate the ``number of access lines'' field
from the existing

[[Page 39519]]

major equipment worksheet because, as noted in the FNPRM, this
information is addressed by other questions on the same worksheet that
are better targeted to gathering useful information. Specifically, the
major equipment worksheet requests the ``number of working numbers''
and the ``number of working numbers down.'' While there can be multiple
working telephone numbers on a single access line, we do not believe it
is necessary for disaster response to collect both types of data. We
believe it reasonable to use ``working numbers down'' as a proxy for
affected customers. Moreover, this field, in combination with the
``number of working numbers'' field, yields important information about
how much of a provider's customer base is without service. ACA Connects
supports our eliminating this field step because this information is
covered elsewhere on the existing major equipment worksheet, and no
commenters oppose our taking this step.
 Harmonize Fields on the Interoffice Facilities--TSP worksheet with
NORS. We update the fields on the existing interoffice facilities--TSP
worksheet by collecting information about the number of Optical Carrier
circuits (or their functional equivalent) affected and eliminating the
requirement to report the ``number of DS3s affected (down).'' For the
avoidance of doubt, we emphasize that we are not eliminating required
reporting for circuits that are smaller than an OC3. Required reporting
on OC3s or functional equivalents will include DS3s, for example, that
are transporting volumes of traffic that are the functional equivalent
of an OC3. We find this important to keep pace with marketplace changes
that have added capacity to today's high-speed networks. USTelecom--The
Broadband Association (USTelecom) supports harmonizing fields that
currently exist on this worksheet as we proposed in the FNPRM, and no
commenters disagreed with this modification.
 Make Reporting the Number of Remote Aggregation Devices Voluntary.
We make it voluntary, rather than mandatory, for providers to report
the number of remote aggregation devices that are down as provided on
the existing remote aggregation devices worksheet. We find that other
fields on the current worksheet, specifically the ``number of working
numbers served'' and ``number of working numbers down,'' collect more
useful information about customer impact and pace of service
restoration than the ``number of [remote aggregation devices] . . .
down'' field. We believe we can further our goal of simplifying DIRS
without sacrificing useful information for public safety stakeholders
by making this field voluntary. While this will provide an incremental
time savings to those providers that elect not to complete this field
in DIRS, it will enable providers to continue to share this
information. ACA Connects supports our rationale for this conclusion
and no commenters object to proceeding in this manner.
 Make Broadband Data User Fields Voluntary. We make the collection
of broadband access user information voluntary, rather than mandatory,
for all DIRS filers except fixed and mobile broadband providers that
are stage 2 recipients of the Uniendo a Puerto Rico Fund and Connect
USVI Fund, as we proposed and as supported by NCTA, CCA, and ACA
Connects. This step preserves the collection, on a voluntary basis, of
information that is important to public safety stakeholders, as
broadband access is a critical lifeline enabling the public to stay
informed during disasters and emergencies, while still reducing burdens
on providers. As CCA notes, adopting streamlining measures like this
``ensure[s] providers can maximize their recovery efforts [while]
critical information is shared with relevant emergency management
entities.'' The record supports this modification and no commenters
disagree with this step.
 Retain Voluntary DIRS Reporting for Satellite Providers. As a means
of maintaining visibility into critical infrastructure during
disasters, we decline to adopt our proposal in the FNPRM to eliminate
the fields on satellite services. CTIA stated it ``[did] not have any
specific concerns about eliminating the satellite worksheet.''
Notwithstanding the fact that Verizon ``does not oppose'' exempting
satellite providers from DIRS reporting, Verizon observes that
``wireless and wireline providers' customers may rely in part on
satellite capabilities during DIRS activations'' and wireless and
wireline providers have limited visibility into the status of satellite
providers' networks. While acknowledging that no satellite provider has
ever filed in DIRS, the National Rural Electric Cooperatives
Association notes that public safety officials, the Commission, and the
public deserve ``to have the best information available'' in the event
of a ``powerful solar storm, `Kessler Syndrome' ablation cascade, or a
disaster of a type yet unknown[ ]'' affects satellite service. We agree
that it is possible that a disaster that specifically affects satellite
services could create a need for the Commission to activate DIRS;
however, were we to eliminate the satellite worksheet fields as
proposed, we would be unprepared to receive daily infrastructure status
updates from satellite operators, even on a voluntary basis. In light
of the key role satellite service plays to enable other modes of
communications and to support national security interests, we are
persuaded to retain the worksheet.
 We decline, however to make satellite reporting in DIRS mandatory
at this time as recommended by the Foundation for Defense of
Democracies in consideration of the increasing threats from China and
the importance of these systems to the economy and military operations.
We believe retaining the worksheet on a voluntary basis strikes the
appropriate balance of enabling public safety officials to receive
satellite status information through DIRS in the event there is a
disaster that impacts satellite service, without burdening satellite
providers with mandatory reporting obligations for circumstances that
have not yet come to pass in the history of DIRS. The Commission
continues to retain visibility into satellite network status through
satellite providers' ongoing mandatory obligation to report outages in
NORS. Our approach ensures that the Commission will remain informed of
significant impairments to satellite connectivity, preserves the
ability for satellite providers to voluntarily report in DIRS should an
unforeseen event warrant such reporting, all while avoiding burdening
satellite providers with new mandatory reporting obligations.
 Allow Providers Flexibility in Providing Location Information. We
decline to adopt our proposal to improve the utility of DIRS data by
requiring providers to submit location information for their affected
equipment or facilities in a single format, either street address or
latitude and longitude. While ACA Connects notes submitting ``street
addresses would be significantly less burdensome than the submission of
latitude/longitude data[,]'' no other stakeholder or public safety
entity indicates that one format is preferable to the other for any
given type of facility or equipment. Instead, industry commenters ATIS,
CTIA, NTCA, and Verizon argue that providers should continue to be
allowed to select their preferred format for any type of facilities or
equipment. NTCA argues that maintaining our current approach would
minimize ``the time providers must spend completing DIRS reports.'' We
find that continuing to allow providers to choose which address format
to use for equipment and facilities location reporting is appropriate
because, as CTIA points out, equipment located in rural or remote

[[Page 39520]]

areas may not have a street address at all, and requiring providers to
convert information that they maintain as a street address into a
latitude and longitude would, as ATIS observes, result in ``significant
impacts on the industry.''
 We find that previous delegations of authority to the Bureau are
sufficiently broad to enable it to implement these modifications, as
well as future modifications to DIRS and its fields that may be needed
to ensure that the system continues to serve its crucial role in
disaster response and recovery. As noted in the FNPRM, the Commission
has delegated authority to the Bureau ``to administer the
communications disruption reporting requirements contained in part 4 of
this chapter and to revise the filing system and template used for the
submission of such communications disruption reports.'' While no
commenter challenges this delegation, some commenters seek to require
the Bureau to exercise its delegated authority ``subject to
consultation with wireless service providers'' or limited to ``what is
expressly authorized in the final rules.'' We find it unnecessary to
revise the authority delegated to the Bureau in this manner. The
revision to Sec. 4.18(a) that we adopt today will contain more
specificity for PSHSB to implement as it revises the DIRS filing system
and templates. We further find that it is necessary for the Bureau's
authority to be sufficiently broad to ensure that the Bureau has the
flexibility to timely implement lawful changes to DIRS and otherwise
maintain the system as necessary to ensure that it remains effective.
 We direct the Bureau to afford providers an opportunity to test the
above improvements to DIRS before they are officially released, as
recommended by Verizon. This process will also allow filers to provide
additional feedback on the new DIRS interface to ensure usability. We
decline, however, to require the Bureau to engage in a second round of
notice and comment on the look and feel of the new DIRS system, as
suggested by USTelecom, ATIS, AT&T, CTIA, and WISPA. While formal
notice and comment was appropriate to address the information that
providers are required to file in DIRS because those changes affect
their legal obligations, no such formality is needed to enable the
Bureau to consider feedback from industry on its implementation of the
changes contemplated herein.

D. Eliminating the DIRS Final Report

 As proposed in the FNPRM, we eliminate the requirement for
providers to file a final report in DIRS within 24 hours of DIRS'
deactivation. Many commenters argue that DIRS final reports are not
useful to emergency managers. ATIS, WISPA, and WTA submit that the
primary reason DIRS final reports have not been as useful in practice
as the Commission intended is the ``uncertainty and unknowns that will
still exist right after the end of the DIRS reporting period,'' which
prevent providers from offering reliable, actionable service
restoration estimates. We agree. In our experience, DIRS final reports
have not provided emergency managers with reliable service restoration
estimates, which must be made when DIRS is deactivated. Moreover, we
understand from experience that the timeline for service restoration
can depend on factors outside of the service provider's control, such
as the accessibility of the damaged area to service technicians or the
availability of replacement parts, so it is not sensible to refer to
estimates provided in the midst of an emergency as ``final.'' As such,
we disagree with the Foundation for Defense of Democracies that the
DIRS final report ``ensur[es] accountability and provid[es] a
definitive record for planning repairs and analyzing outages.'' As we
reasoned in the FNPRM, service restoration estimates that routinely
prove incorrect cause more harm than good because reliance on those
estimates leads to the misallocation of finite disaster response
resources. Taking more time to consider the potential utility of these
requirements, as Public Knowledge suggests we should, cannot change the
fundamental difficulty of presenting DIRS information to emergency
managers as ``final'' as if service providers can predict the future.
Further, we are not persuaded to retain the DIRS final report
requirement by Public Knowledge's vague assertion that, even if this
information is not valuable for immediate situational awareness, it has
value as ``historic information for analysis and planning.'' We also do
not believe it would be beneficial to retain a streamlined version of
the DIRS final report requirement that providers could satisfy with
``one-click.'' If the Bureau believes that an additional day of DIRS
reporting on infrastructure status was warranted before DIRS's
deactivation, it can obtain that information simply by keeping DIRS
active for an additional day.

E. Exempting Non-Facilities-Based Providers From DIRS Reporting

 To eliminate duplicative and potentially speculative DIRS reporting
about infrastructure neither owned nor operated by the reporting
entity, we revise our mandatory DIRS rules to apply only to facilities-
based providers, exempting providers that do not own or operate their
own facilities or infrastructure in the DIRS activation area. We agree
with CTIA that providers that do not own or operate their own
facilities or infrastructure should not report in DIRS because ``their
service offerings rely on the facilities of underlying service
providers that already report the status of those facilities'' in DIRS.
In our experience, information that non-facilities-based providers
submit in DIRS about the status of facilities or infrastructure that
they do not own or operate tends to be either be speculative, as ACA
Connects and NCTA observe, or derivative of information that the non-
facilities-based provider has imposed upon the facilities-based
provider to obtain, as WISPA observes. We agree with CTIA and T-Mobile
that receiving information about the status of the same communications
equipment from both the facilities-based provider that owns and
operates that equipment and from non-facilities-based providers that
rely upon that equipment to offer service introduces a risk of double
counting that threatens the quality of DIRS data. It will promote our
ability to quickly and reliably produce aggregated information about
the status of communications equipment during disasters to receive one
authoritative report about each relevant communications facility in a
DIRS activation area, and we agree with ACA Connects that the report we
receive should come from the party ``with direct visibility into the
outage and system restoration.'' That provider will be in the best
position to answer DIRS' prompts about the status of the facilities or
infrastructure. Eliminating reporting requirements for other providers
will result in more accurate data and remove unnecessary burdens from
industry.
 NCTA recommends that we extend the exemption for non-facilities-
based providers to NORS for the same reasons as we offer it in the
context of DIRS. We reject this recommendation and continue to require
mobile virtual network operators and wireless, wireline, and
interconnected VoIP resellers to report outages in NORS. As the
Commission has previously found, these providers are ``uniquely
positioned to provide information on

[[Page 39521]]

outages affecting their customers.'' Unlike DIRS reporting's focus on
``infrastructure status'' during and after disasters, non-facilities-
based providers are in the best position to report in NORS about the
effects of outages on their subscribers because they have visibility
into the status of their own subscribers, while the underlying
facilities-based providers on which they rely often do not. The
Commission also relies on NORS reporting as a source of information
about the root causes of all kinds of network outages and the impacts
of those outages on end users, which leads ``to the development of best
practices and has fostered a `data-driven, self-improvement model.' ''
By maintaining the requirement that non-facilities-based providers
report in NORS, the Commission preserves its insight into the impact of
outages on the millions of non-facilities-based provider subscribers
nationwide.
 We do not adopt the FNPRM's proposal to require facilities-based
wireless providers to report in DIRS which mobile virtual network
operators utilize their respective networks within the DIRS activation
area, nor do we adopt the alternative that mobile virtual network
operators identify their underlying network providers as part of a
limited DIRS filing. Public Knowledge observes that there is not
necessarily a simple, direct relationship between the operational
status of a facilities-based provider and a non-facilities-based
provider that relies upon it. As CTIA also recognizes, non-facilities-
based providers often utilize the networks of multiple facilities-based
providers in delivering their service. As a result, we are concerned
that a list of business relationships alone would be insufficient to
enable emergency managers to derive actionable insights about a
disaster's impacts on their community, irrespective of whether a
facilities-based or non-facilities-based provider submits it. While
there are undoubtedly examples of non-facilities-based providers that
rely exclusively on a single facilities-based provider to offer
service, significant risk would stem from inducing emergency managers
to believe that this is always the case by requiring the disclosure of
business relationships as a proxy for the availability of service to
communities. While Public Knowledge argues that this complexity is
grounds for the Commission to continue require non-facilities-based
providers to report in DIRS, we conclude that the burdens of filing
this information outweigh its public safety value.

F. Voluntarily Collecting More Information on Where Facilities Are Out
of Service

 We direct the Bureau to upgrade DIRS to improve the ability of
filers to voluntarily submit geographic information about service areas
and the locations of facilities that are out of service. As Public
Knowledge puts simply, collecting more granular information for
stakeholders ``can improve their disaster response.'' In the FNPRM, we
specifically sought comment on whether to collect more granular
information from wireless providers about the location of cell sites
that are out of service. Whereas DIRS requires providers to specify the
location of major equipment other than wireless cell sites, DIRS
currently only requires wireless providers to complete a worksheet to
specify the number of cell sites out by county. Wireless providers,
however, have voluntarily submitted more granular information than DIRS
requires about the location of their wireless cell sites. T-Mobile
voluntarily provides cell site location data in Keyhole Markup
Language. As ATIS observes, one major wireless provider has voluntarily
submitted shape files in response to DIRS activation since 2017, which
provide ``information about cell site impacts on a very conservative
measure of -98db.'' Accordingly, we agree with CTIA that collecting
mapping data from service providers during DIRS activation on a
voluntary basis is an approach that is working well, and we therefore
do not require providers to submit any additional mapping data at this
time. While providing this information in DIRS is voluntary, the Bureau
may still exercise its delegated authority to require providers to
provide this information in appropriate circumstances.
 However, we recognize that DIRS does not offer an easy way for
providers to voluntarily submit geographic information about service
coverage and infrastructure location and believe that expanding that
capability may induce more providers to submit that information and
make DIRS easier to use for providers that do submit that information.
We do not limit the submission of geographic information solely to cell
site locations, but allow it for any kind of geographic information
that filers believe would be useful to provide to emergency managers.
We believe this flexibility was warranted in light of Verizon, CCA, and
other commenters arguments that ``[c]overage, not site location, is
most relevant to where Wireless Emergency Alerts, 911 calls and public
safety-related communications are affected during disaster events.''
Upgrading DIRS to offer providers a clear way to submit a wider array
of geographic information in additional formats may also reduce burdens
on providers and other stakeholders.

G. Requiring DIRS Reporting for Public Safety Voice and Broadband
Network Operators

 To ensure that emergency managers and first responders have the
information they need to stay connected during disasters, we require
public safety voice and broadband network operators to submit DIRS
daily reports about their infrastructure status when the Commission
activates DIRS in geographic areas where they provide service. Public
safety voice and broadband networks now play a vital role in keeping
first responders connected during emergency response. AT&T manages and
operates a nationwide public safety voice and broadband network,
FirstNet, which plays a key role in enabling first responders using the
network to communicate with one another and with PSAPs during
emergencies. As the National Regional Planning Council states, public
safety officials increasingly use FirstNet to replace older Land Mobile
Radio systems for communication among first responders during
emergencies. First responders use FirstNet for voice-over LTE, rich
communication services and IP-based messaging to communicate with one
another from a variety of operational locations, including outdoors,
inside buildings, through drones and satellites, from airborne vehicles
like helicopters, and from onboard maritime vessels. First responders
also rely on FirstNet's network to access key technologies that affect
situational awareness, such as cameras that convey real-time or
historical data; internet-connected devices and sensors that monitor
weather, traffic, environmental issues, or access to secured locations;
and maps and Geographic Information Systems that may provide the
location of responders or assets, potential hazards, or relational
information between personnel and assets. According to Verizon, its
Frontline service prioritizes first responder communications on
Verizon's 5G network and provides high speed, low latency, large
capacity connectivity to over 45,000 agencies. T-Mobile USA, Inc.'s (T-
Mobile) T-Priority service prioritizes data-intensive communications
for public safety agencies by using 5G network slicing to enable law
enforcement, fire protection,

[[Page 39522]]

emergency medical services, and other first responders to respond to
emergencies. Disruptions to services like FirstNet, Verizon Frontline,
or T-Priority could be a matter of life and death for first responders
or members of the public who rely on police, fire, and emergency
medical services that subscribe to these services.
 The FNPRM sought comment on whether the Commission should revamp
DIRS to enable voluntary or mandatory reporting on the status of public
safety voice and broadband networks. The Commission also proposed to
require FirstNet to report in DIRS in 2024, and received significant
support. As Public Knowledge, Communications Workers of America, and
New America's Open Technology Institute observed, effective crisis
response ``can only happen if those responding to the crisis--and
managing the response--have clear knowledge of the communications
environment in as close to real time as possible.'' NASUCA and TURN
recognized that FirstNet's ``unique purpose [is] to provide robust
public safety communications and, by extension, carry some of the most
life-saving information across public safety stakeholders when
disasters strike.'' And Next Century Cities observed that, ``without
mandatory DIRS or NORS reporting the Commission and state and local
officials are left without critical information about how the
nation[']s emergency services are connected.'' We agree with these
views and find that DIRS reports are inadequate for providing
actionable infrastructure status information if they do not
specifically identify impacts to public safety voice and broadband
network customers and efforts to restore service for public safety
customers. Moreover, government stakeholders commonly request that the
FCC share DIRS reports about FirstNet, but no public safety voice and
broadband network operator has voluntarily provided information
specific to the status of those network functions in their DIRS reports
to date. Mandatory DIRS reporting will close this gap and provide
critical visibility and situational awareness into these vital public-
safety networks during disasters, consistent with the Commission's
reasoning for previously requiring other types of providers to file in
DIRS.
 AT&T and Verizon oppose making public safety voice and broadband
network reporting mandatory, asserting such additional reporting is
unnecessary, duplicative, and may be misleading. With respect to
FirstNet, AT&T's states that information about FirstNet's network
status, infrastructure, and assets is already included as part of
AT&T's DIRS reporting and is provided directly to FirstNet's public
safety customers via the FirstNet Central platform. Verizon
acknowledges the Commission's ``legitimate situational awareness
interest in a wireless outage's impact on public safety users[,]'' but
is concerned such reporting may double-count infrastructure impacts
since the same networks are used for commercial and public safety
purposes, be inaccurate as providers may have different designations
for what constitutes a public safety customer, and, as AT&T notes,
likely duplicates information being provided directly to customers. We
find that mandatory reporting for public safety voice and broadband
networks in DIRS is both necessary to ensure public safety officials
can respond during disasters, and, as Verizon observes, will provide
important situational awareness that does not exist today regarding the
status of all of these critical networks.
 We find that direct reporting to enterprise customers via
interfaces such as FirstNet Central is an inadequate substitute for the
visibility that DIRS reporting will yield. AT&T asserts that FirstNet
Central provides its users with ``near real-time network status[,]''
enabling FirstNet users access to more information [than DIRS], even
during emergency events that do not rise to the level of a DIRS
activation. We are unpersuaded by the argument that outage information
public safety voice and broadband network operators share with public-
safety subscribers obviates DIRS reporting. While a public safety voice
and broadband network operator may share information about its network
status relevant to its own customers, not all public safety customers
subscribe to the same public safety voice and broadband network. During
a disaster, those customers may need to communicate with public safety
entities that are customers of a different public safety voice and
broadband network. Thus, broader visibility to the public safety voice
and broadband network ecosystem is essential to identify outages that
may impede seamless communications among customers of all public safety
voice and broadband networks. Through mandatory DIRS reporting, the
Commission can aggregate public safety voice and broadband network
status information for all such networks and provide more comprehensive
visibility than any single, network-specific outage reporting platform
like FirstNet Central can provide. While AT&T describes how it and
``the FirstNet Authority actively engage in state emergency operations
centers during a disaster,'' state emergency operations centers lack
access to the aggregated network status available as a result of the
DIRS reporting requirements we adopt today.
 Other aspects of the outage notifications provided by public safety
voice and broadband network operators to their customers today further
demonstrate how those notifications fail to sufficiently accomplish our
goals. Information that public safety voice and broadband network
operators report directly to enterprise customers is not available to
state, Tribal, territorial, or Federal agencies that are not themselves
FirstNet users. Additionally, while FirstNet Central may provide some
outage-specific information, T-Mobile observes that FirstNet does not
provide information within any specific timeframe after an outage
begins, or update information at any specific interval thereafter. It
is also unclear whether FirstNet Central provides its customers with
outage information on a customer-specific basis, or on a larger scale
such as a region, state, or for its network as a whole. Moreover, it is
uncertain the extent to which FirstNet Central provides infrastructure
status in addition to the information it provides on ``operational
status[.]'' DIRS' inclusion of infrastructure status makes it more
robust and useful, providing visibility to the damaged equipment that
would need to be restored to reestablish critical connectivity. Aside
from FirstNet, the record is silent on whether or how Verizon and T-
Mobile notify Frontline and T-Priority users, respectively, of outages
on their public safety voice and broadband networks, but no information
about the operational status of these networks has been reported
directly to the Commission, nor are we aware of state, Tribal,
territorial, or Federal agencies that are not themselves Frontline or
T-Priority users receiving access to this information. Verizon states
that detailed service availability and restoration information is
likely already being provided in accordance with contractual terms and
conditions as part of the provider-enterprise customer relationship,
but neither definitively states that such communications are, in fact,
occurring, nor provides any specifics about those communications.
Accordingly, we find that customer-specific outage communications are
inadequate substitutes for the visibility and situational awareness
DIRS reporting will yield for emergency management agencies and the
Commission.

[[Page 39523]]

 We require public safety voice and broadband network operators to
file in DIRS irrespective of whether their service is integrated into
their network or standalone. T-Mobile asserts that only FirstNet and
other providers of standalone public safety networks should be required
to report in DIRS, and that T-Mobile, which offers its T-Priority
service through a dedicated 5G network slice, should be exempt. In our
view, this distinction is immaterial. Operators of public safety voice
and broadband networks can prioritize service restoration to those
networks irrespective of whether they are physically or logically
diverse. Network slicing allows network administrators to dynamically
prioritize access (and, potentially, post-outage service restoration)
to transport, backhaul, and core network functions for public safety
customers during emergency response and disaster recovery efforts when
network congestion is more likely to occur. Excluding such offerings
from the requirement we adopt today would limit our and public safety
agencies' visibility into the status of these important services based
on a network architecture distinction that is irrelevant to their
importance during disasters and emergencies.
 To eliminate the potential for both duplicative reporting burdens
and ``overstating the physical and user impact of an outage,'' we will
allow operators of public safety voice and broadband networks to
satisfy their DIRS reporting obligation by indicating whether the
status of their public safety voice and broadband network is the same
as the status of their other network infrastructure. In the event that
the status is not the same, then we require the fields in DIRS that are
applicable to that network to be completed to identify specific
impacts. This approach is consistent with Verizon's proposal for ``a
simple voluntary Yes/No checkbox field . . . that answers the question
`Public Safety Voice and Broadband Network Customers Affected?' '' At
the same time, we find it critical to require these providers to submit
additional information to help the Commission identify public safety
communications-specific impacts and restoration information, so we
require them to submit the information that is appropriate for their
type of network (e.g., the provider of a wireless public safety voice
and broadband network shall complete the wireless service provider
fields in DIRS). This approach strikes a balance that will ensure we
collect important information about public safety impacts that will
provide the Commission and our federal, state, Tribal, and territorial
partners with visibility into the operational status of these networks
while minimizing new burdens on providers. While Verizon expresses
concern about the potential for ``apples-to-oranges comparisons between
providers that have different designations for what constitutes a
`public safety' entity,'' this does not deter us from our conclusion.
We think it reasonable that each public safety voice and broadband
network operator will have eligibility criteria that requires customers
on their respective networks to have a legitimate public safety purpose
in order to subscribe. We acknowledge this criteria may not be
identical across all public safety voice and broadband networks, but
find this potential variance will not adversely affect our goal of
capturing impacts to public safety customers. As with the other changes
we implement today, we delegate authority to the Bureau to integrate
public safety voice and broadband networks' infrastructure status into
DIRS reporting.

H. Retaining NORS Reporting Requirements for DIRS-Lite Activations

 At this time, we decline to extend the suspension of NORS reporting
requirements during DIRS activations to DIRS-Lite activations, which we
believe is necessary to preserve our visibility into outages that
result from disasters for which we activate DIRS-Lite. By contrast to
DIRS activations, the Commission activates DIRS-Lite for disasters that
are less severe than those warranting a full DIRS activation. In
anticipation of disaster impacts on communications services that are
less severe, but that are nonetheless important for local emergency
managers to understand on a day-to-day basis, the Commission can choose
to collect infrastructure status information from providers by
activating DIRS-Lite. When the Commission activates DIRS-Lite, it
collects infrastructure status information informally, by e[hyphen]mail
or phone, rather than via DIRS's online interface. All information that
providers offer to the Commission during a DIRS-Lite activation is
submitted voluntarily; providers are not required to submit the
detailed infrastructure status information that DIRS elicits. The daily
cadence of infrastructure status information during DIRS-Lite
activations supplements more fulsome information that providers are
required to report in NORS for outages that meet the Commission's
reporting thresholds. The Commission has never waived NORS reporting
requirements during an activation of DIRS-Lite. Accordingly, we
disagree with ATIS, CTIA, USTelecom, and Verizon that we should waive
NORS requirements during DIRS-Lite activations.
 We agree with Public Knowledge that suspending NORS filing
obligations during DIRS-Lite activations could create a gap in the
Commission's information about network reliability by shifting the type
of information that the Commission collects from information about
outage root causes and subscriber impacts to information about
infrastructure status at the time that network outages are most likely
to occur. We also agree with Public Knowledge that extending the NORS
waiver to DIRS-Lite activations may make it necessary for the Bureau to
annually reconcile NORS filings, DIRS filings, and DIRS-Lite in order
to maintain a complete picture of network resilience. We believe that
this would pose significant administrative burdens for the Commission
that outweigh the benefits of waiving NORS filings. In addition, we are
not persuaded that DIRS-Lite activations present burdens to providers
that would meaningfully detract from their service restoration efforts.
For these reasons, we decline to extend the suspension of NORS
reporting requirements to DIRS-Lite activations.

I. Compliance Timeframe

 With respect to eliminating the DIRS final report and providing a
filing exemption for providers that do not own or operate their own
facilities, neither of these changes will necessitate technical changes
to DIRS before becoming effective as the providers to which these
changes apply can simply decline to file the reports in question.
Accordingly, both changes to our rules shall be effective immediately
upon publication of this Third Report and Order in the Federal
Register. In addition to these amendments, the FNPRM proposed
amendments to section 4.18(a) that specified the types of information
that providers are required to report in DIRS. See FNPRM and Order on
Reconsideration, 40 FCC Rcd at 6337. Because these amendments reflect
information that is currently required to be reported in DIRS and do
not impose any new obligations on providers, we also make those
amendments effective immediately upon publication of this Third Report
and Order in the Federal Register. However, we expect that many of the
steps that we take today to streamline DIRS, including the creation of
a dynamic form, the elimination of unnecessary fields, and the creation
of a field to collect more granular location information, will require
additional
