FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Promoting Fair and Open Competitive Bidding in the E-Rate Program; Schools and Libraries Universal Service Support Mechanism
Document number: 2026-10011
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireline Competition Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 29051
Publication date: 2026-05-19

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 96 (Tuesday, May 19, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 96 (Tuesday, May 19, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 29051-29071]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-10011]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 54

[WC Docket No. 21-455, CC Docket No. 02-6; FCC 26-30; FR ID 345648]


Promoting Fair and Open Competitive Bidding in the E-Rate
Program; Schools and Libraries Universal Service Support Mechanism

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) takes action to reinforce the success and integrity
of the E-Rate program by establishing a competitive bidding portal and
document repository to strengthen the E-Rate program's competitive
bidding rules as well as other actions to simplify and streamline
program processes and procedures for E-Rate participants. In addition,
the Commission adopts changes to streamline and simplify the E-Rate
program while maintaining the integrity of the program and grant an
Order on Reconsideration. These actions will provide greater
transparency into the applicants' competitive bidding and bid
evaluation and selection processes, and protect the program against
waste, fraud, and abuse.

DATES: Effective June 18, 2026, except for amendatory instructions 4
and 5 which are delayed indefinitely. The Commission will publish a
document in the Federal Register announcing the effective date for
those sections.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information, please
contact, Jennifer Mensah, Telecommunications Access Policy Division,
Wireline Competition Bureau, at [email protected] or (202) 418-
1387 or TTY: (202) 418-0484. Requests for accommodations should be made
as soon as possible in order to allow the agency to satisfy such
requests whenever possible. Send an email to [email protected] or call the
Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a synopsis of the Commission's
Report and Order (Report and Order) and Order on Reconsideration in WC
Docket No. 21-455, CC Docket No. 02-6; FCC 26-30, adopted on April 30,
2026 and released on May 1, 2026. The full text of this document is
available at the following internet address: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-30A1.pdf .

I. Introduction

 The Federal Communications Commission (Commission) is committed to
strengthening the integrity of the E-Rate program--formally known as
the schools and libraries universal service support mechanism--and
protecting limited E-Rate funds against waste, fraud, and abuse. We
take action to reinforce the success and integrity of the E-Rate
program by establishing a competitive bidding portal and document
repository to strengthen the E-Rate program's competitive bidding rules
as well as other actions to simplify and streamline program processes
and procedures for E-Rate participants.
 Beginning in funding year (FY) 2028, service providers will be
required to respond to applicants' FCC Form 470 requests for services
by submitting their bids into a Universal Service Administrative
Company (USAC)-managed bidding portal, and applicants will be required
to upload all bid evaluation and vendor selection documents, including
contracts, to the portal after they select their service providers. The
E-Rate program's competitive bidding requirements reflect the
Commission's determination that competition is the most efficient and
effective means to ensure that applicants can receive and select the
most cost-effective service offerings. The Commission has long held
that a fair and open competitive bidding process is a cornerstone of
and fundamental to the integrity of the E-Rate program. In addition, we
adopt changes to

[[Page 29052]]

streamline and simplify the E-Rate program while maintaining the
integrity of the program and grant an Order on Reconsideration. These
actions will provide greater transparency into the applicants'
competitive bidding and bid evaluation and selection processes, and
protect the program against waste, fraud, and abuse.

II. Report and Order

 In this Report and Order, we take steps to both strengthen the
integrity of the E-Rate program and simplify and improve program
administration. Recognizing the Commission's recent achievements in
addressing and managing fraud risks in the E-Rate program, and mindful
of the need to balance effective oversight of the program with
minimizing unnecessary administrative burdens, the measures we take are
aimed at refining and improving certain aspects of the program, while
tightening our oversight of the competitive bidding process. To that
end, we first adopt our proposal to establish a competitive bidding
portal, which will strengthen program integrity by increasing
transparency and reducing reliance on self-certifications and will be
effective for funding year 2028. Under the competitive bidding portal
rules adopted, we will require: (1) prospective service providers to
respond to applicants' FCC Forms 470 by submitting their bids into the
USAC-managed portal; and (2) applicants to upload their bid evaluation
and vendor selection documentation, including contract(s), after
selecting their service provider(s). In addition, we take steps to
simplify and streamline program rules and administration to improve how
applicants transition services during the funding year; clarify cost
allocation rules and procedures; provide competitive bidding guidance;
eliminate a program form; modify the invoice filing deadline rules; and
update E-Rate program definitions. Each of these issues have caused
challenges for applicants in applying for and receiving funding for
eligible services, and we anticipate that these changes will simplify
E-Rate procedures and processes.
 Based on the record and pursuant to our authority under section 254
of the Communications Act, we adopt the Commission's proposal to
require applicants and service providers to use a competitive bidding
portal and document repository during the E-Rate procurement process.
In the Promoting Competitive Bidding NPRM, 87 FR 4182, January 27,
2021, the Commission proposed to ``require prospective service
providers to respond to applicant requests for services and equipment
by uploading bids into a bidding portal managed by USAC, rather than
submitting bids directly to applicants.'' The Commission also sought
comment on whether the competitive bidding portal should be used as a
repository to store documentation associated with the FCC Form 470
requests and competitive bidding process. We discuss these new
requirements.
 Specifically, beginning with funding year 2028, we will require
service providers to submit their bids in response to applicants' FCC
Forms 470 into a USAC-managed competitive bidding portal. Applicants,
in turn, will be required to use the bidding portal for bidder
communications and updates during the competitive bidding process and
then must upload bid evaluation and vendor selection documentation with
their FCC Form 471 applications. Applicants will also be required to
upload contracts and award documentation, to the extent that they are
not already doing so. We direct USAC, under the direction and oversight
of the Wireline Competition Bureau (Bureau) and the Commission's Office
of the Managing Director (OMD), to develop and implement the
competitive bidding portal and leverage USAC's existing web-based
account and application management portal, known as the E-Rate
Productivity Center (EPC), for this purpose. We also direct the Bureau,
working with OMD and other Commission staff, to provide clarification
and guidance in the case of any ambiguity that may arise during the
implementation of the competitive bidding portal. Additionally, we
direct USAC to enhance training and outreach materials, under the
oversight of the Bureau, to better assist participants with complying
with the Commission's E-Rate competitive bidding rules, including the
use of the new bidding portal functionality in EPC. We also direct
USAC, at the direction of the Bureau, to add guidance on their website
and seek stakeholder feedback on the technical aspects of portal
functionality during the development via means that will provide
constructive input. Stakeholders proposed multiple methods to provide
feedback and some commenters requested specific portal functionality.
We find directing USAC, under the oversight of the Bureau, to solicit
direct feedback from stakeholders through interactive feedback sessions
to be the most effective approach for implementing the portal and
ensuring its successful use before going live. We agree with commenters
that user testing and training will provide valuable input for
developing and launching the competitive bidding portal. We conclude
that these methods allow USAC to demonstrate portal functionality,
which in turn supports more informed stakeholder discussions and
specific clarification questions. To promote maximum effectiveness and
smooth implementation and administration of the competitive bidding
portal, we also delegate to the Bureau the authority to address and
resolve unforeseen administrative issues or problems, provided that
doing so is not inconsistent with the decisions we reach here.
 Benefits to the New Approach. First, we find that a competitive
bidding portal will help ensure a more fair and open competitive
bidding process by increasing visibility and transparency into bidding
information received during the E-Rate competitive bidding process. As
noted in the 2020 United States Government Accountability Office (GAO)
E-Rate report, a competitive bidding portal would strengthen E-Rate
program controls and increase transparency by ``allowing USAC direct
access to obtain and monitor bidding information submitted by bidders
without having to request such information.'' The Commission's Office
of Inspector General (OIG) similarly explained that ``submission of
service provider bids prior to bid selection prevents a service
provider or applicant from submitting an altered bid or contract to
USAC . . . to create the appearance of compliance.'' We agree and
further conclude that this increased transparency will give USAC and
the Commission direct and instant insight into the competitive bidding
process to reduce opportunities for potential bid collusion and the
submission of sham or altered bids, thereby protecting the E-Rate
program from waste, fraud, and abuse. We agree with several commenters
that suggest the portal and the insight gained from having direct
access to this competitive bidding documentation and information could
lead to a more fair and open process and reduce potential waste.
Additionally, we find that the competitive bidding portal and
repository would streamline program administration by providing USAC
and the Commission with direct access to the bids and competitive
bidding documentation, which, in turn, would make reviews more
efficient. Moreover, a competitive bidding portal and an associated
repository will streamline both applicant and service provider document
retention and other requirements, simplifying review in many cases,
while requiring only that

[[Page 29053]]

applicants simply upload documents they are already required to retain
and produce through a portal that is integrated with EPC, a system E-
Rate program participants are accustomed to using. The document
repository will alleviate the burden imposed by recordkeeping
requirements on applicants and service providers by preserving
retrievable documents in the repository. Finally, the competitive
bidding portal will bolster ``more robust enforcement of laws designed
to protect the E-Rate program's public procurement process'' by
preserving the integrity of source documents and ensuring that pre-
award bid and bid selection documents remain ``unaltered and available
to auditors and investigators.''
 We disagree with commenters that contend that such a portal or
repository is unnecessary, or that it would not reduce waste, fraud, or
abuse. Some commenters suggest a lack of sufficient justification,
others suggest the current rules provide sufficient protection, while
still others worry that the new requirements will be overly burdensome
for E-Rate program participants. As recent OIG and U.S. Department of
Justice (DOJ) criminal investigations into the program have shown,
fraud remains a problem, and we believe that establishing a portal and
associated repository will reduce opportunities for fraud. As noted by
both OIG and the GAO, the Commission's ability to detect and deter
fraud has historically been limited by its lack of direct access to
underlying competitive bidding documentation. Access to the real-time
submission of competitive bidding documentation will assist in
uncovering fraud, simplifying reviews, ensuring program compliance, and
reducing the potential for waste, fraud, and abuse. Enhanced fraud
detection will also deter program participants from violating the
rules. As stewards of limited universal service funds, we have a
responsibility to identify ways to prevent bad actors from
participating in the E-Rate program and ensure program participants
continue to comply with our rules. We find that the competitive bidding
portal and repository we adopt furthers this objective.
 Although how prospective bidders will respond to applicants' FCC
Forms 470 will change based on the actions we take, on balance, we
expect that imposing these new requirements will significantly benefit
program integrity. While requiring applicants and service providers to
submit documentation that they are already required to maintain and
produce pursuant to Sec. 54.516(a)-(b) of the Commission's rules into
a competitive bidding portal changes how and where program participants
are required to submit this information, we find that it will not
impose a substantial burden on program participants. Applicants are
already required to post their FCC Form 470 on USAC's website in
addition to uploading the form to any state bidding portal that may
also be required. Additionally, certain E-Rate participants are already
accustomed to uploading the documentation into an online portal or
repository, and uploading the documentation into the USAC-managed
competitive bidding portal integrated with EPC should not be a
significant burden. We agree with the OIG that ``as service providers
are already required to submit bids and [applicants] are already
required to compile and maintain bid submissions, providing for the
submission of such data to USAC initially should not result in more
than de minimis additional costs or additional burdens to either
service providers or [ ] applicants.'' Moreover, the document
repository will reduce burdens for applicants and service providers
with meeting recordkeeping and production requirements because the
competitive bidding documentation will be available to USAC and the
Commission through the portal. E-Rate participants will no longer need
to separately retain documentation uploaded to the portal, and USAC and
the Commission will be able to obtain competitive bidding documentation
directly through the portal instead of through document requests to
applicants and service providers. We agree with the National School
Board Association (NSBA) that ``[m]aximizing the program's impact on
school and classroom broadband connectivity rates, while ensuring that
bad actors are unable to defraud the program and ratepayers must be a
high priority for policymakers.'' We also agree with commenter Juniper
Networks that a bidding portal ``would lead to a more fair, open, and
competitive bidding process'' and with Infinity Communications &
Consultants, Inc. that it would ``reinforce the bidding process set
forth in the E-Rate rules and lead to lower instances of bid protests
or questions of bid efficacy.'' In weighing the concerns about the
competitive bidding portal against the benefits of limiting the risk
for potential waste, fraud, or abuse, we conclude that the benefits
weigh in favor of creating the competitive bidding portal and
repository.
 We reject commenters' views that state and local procurement
requirements alone are sufficient to protect the integrity of the E-
Rate program. Our experience over the years has shown that certain E-
Rate applicants, including private and charter schools and private
libraries, are exempt from, or otherwise not subject to, state and
local procurement rules. Moreover, the Commission, as steward of E-Rate
funding, has both the most direct stake in ensuring that the limited
program funds are protected and not misused, and it has the unique
ability to tailor E-Rate program rules based on insight into how the
program operates across all states and localities. While state and
local procurement requirements play an important role in ensuring that
E-Rate funding is protected, state and local requirements vary among
jurisdictions and are not specifically designed to protect the
integrity of the E-Rate program. Additionally, the Commission has an
independent obligation to safeguard every dollar in the Universal
Service Fund, which cannot be delegated to a variety of state and local
authorities to carry out through their procurement rules.
 Many commenters believe that adopting a repository without the
bidding portal would offer several advantages. We disagree and conclude
that adopting only a repository would not achieve the Commission's
goals of protecting the program from waste, fraud, and abuse.
Specifically, we find that implementing a repository without the
bidding portal fails to address OIG's and DOJ's concerns with bid
collusion and bid alteration. Indeed, OIG emphasized that because there
was no upfront collection of bids during the competitive bidding
process, their ability to deter and detect waste, fraud, and abuse was
severely limited. DOJ explained that the bidding portal ``best
preserves the integrity of source documents and any subsequent
investigation'' noting that the ``threat of altered bid documents is
real.'' GAO concurred, reporting that E-Rate participants could
misrepresent facts concerning the competitive bidding processes without
the Commission's or USAC's knowledge. As such, GAO agreed that a portal
``could strengthen program controls by allowing USAC direct access to
obtain and monitor bidding information submitted by bidders without
having to request such information from the applicants or service
providers.'' Failing to adopt the bidding portal would overlook
identified fraud risks in the E-Rate program and prevent law
enforcement officials from being able to identify and stop bad actors
in the program.

[[Page 29054]]

Requiring E-Rate participants to upload bids and competitive bidding
documentation into a repository after the completion of their bid
process does not sufficiently address the risk of applicants and
service providers altering bids during the procurement process nor does
it discourage bid collusion.
 We find that implementing a bidding portal and repository is a
prudent method to simplify program integrity reviews, streamline
audits, and ensure program compliance. We observe that commenters raise
concerns regarding the potential costs associated with creating,
implementing and managing the competitive bidding portal, and the
impact it may have on program participation. For example, Arkansas
State Library expresses concern that small and rural libraries do not
have the staff time or expertise to devote to a more complex filing
process. The Council of the Great City Schools also speculates that the
bidding portal could have the ``unintended effect of deterring service
providers from submitting bids'' resulting in weakened competition and
less cost savings. Other commenters argue that requiring participants
to use a federal competitive bidding portal in addition to other
bidding portals would be burdensome and confusing for applicants and
service providers. For example, AASA speculates that districts would
have to rely more on consultants, increasing compliance costs. To
address the cost concerns, we estimate that the cost of creating,
implementing, and managing the competitive bidding portal for the first
year of operation will be under $750,000, followed thereafter by annual
operating costs of $100,000 to $200,000, which together represents a
comparatively low cost to take measures to protect a program where the
funding cap in funding year 2026 is $5.2 billion. These costs are also
markedly lower than the millions of dollars in E-Rate funding that have
been recovered as a result of OIG and DOJ investigations of competitive
bidding violations. As explained, the competitive bidding portal will
be integrated into the EPC system ensuring that E-Rate program
participants will be able to quickly adjust to the new requirements and
minimizing costs to both the Universal Service Fund and stakeholders.
As noted, to address stakeholder concerns regarding the transition to
the competitive bidding portal, the Bureau will work with USAC to
provide training and guidance on its use.
 While we acknowledge that there will be a change, we disagree that
using the competitive bidding portal will be significantly more complex
than existing rules requiring the FCC Form 470 to be posted on USAC's
website or that a higher level of expertise will be required. The
proposal we adopt requires applicants to upload documents that they are
already required to retain and produce under our rules and provides a
centralized place for service providers to submit bids and communicate
with applicants about any questions they may have. Currently, to
initiate the competitive bidding process, applicants are required to
complete and upload their FCC Forms 470 and documentation into EPC, for
posting on USAC's website. Under the new rules, our expectation is that
service providers will upload bids and applicants will submit their
evaluation and vendor selection documentation into the competitive
bidding portal. As such, E-Rate program participants already possess
the requisite skills they need to comply with these new requirements.
In other words, other than adjusting how this documentation is
collected and shared with the Commission and USAC, the proposal we
adopt is not intended to change the way applicants conduct their
competitive bidding processes. Consequently, we disagree that the
competitive bidding portal will discourage applicants or service
providers from participating in the E-Rate program. Notably, we observe
that no individual service provider submitted a filing opposing the
bidding portal's implementation.
 To the extent that the portal does alter current rules, we expect
that it leans towards a more fair, open, and transparent process,
resulting in more cost-effective service proposals and a reduction of
waste, fraud, and abuse. Indeed, the use of a document repository
should aid smaller entities in complying with recordkeeping
requirements because the required documents would be uploaded and be
available in the portal. Also, we find that many participants are
already utilizing bid portals; as such, being required to upload
similar documentation to a competitive bidding portal should not be
burdensome because it is a familiar process. We also note the potential
streamlining for E-Rate participants, as commenters who use bid portals
for their E-Rate bidding requirements explained that they ``appreciate
the singular place to post, respond, and collect documents.'' We find
that the competitive bidding portal may also assist participants with
complying with state or local requirements by providing a centralized
place for communications and documentation regarding their competitive
bidding processes. As such, although we decline to adopt a one-year
grace period during which applicants would not be denied funding for
procedural-type errors related to the bidding portal's use, we direct
the Bureau to take into account when the new portal was adopted when
considering requests for waiver, particularly for procedural or
administrative errors by smaller or more rural participants.
 We acknowledge that commenters express concerns that the proposed
bidding portal is duplicative of existing state and local portals and
could conflict with state and local laws, noting that state and local
procurement requirements are complex, tailored to the needs of
individual states, and are likely to change over time. As an initial
matter, although E-Rate program participants may have to upload
documentation to different portals, we find that the process will be
minimally burdensome as they will already be familiar with utilizing
bidding portals. Also, we conclude that taking this step to upload
documentation into the federal bidding portal will be beneficial as
applicants and service providers will no longer have to maintain this
documentation once uploaded into the portal, and USAC and the
Commission will not need to request this documentation for reviews or
audit purposes. We next find that the competitive bidding portal will
not conflict with state or local laws nor raise any preemption concerns
because the portal will not supplant existing state and local
requirements and instead must be used alongside these requirements. For
example, State E-rate Coordinators' Alliance (SECA) states that
``numerous E-rate applicants are required by state and local laws to
receive printed, signed, and sealed bids. Some require notarized
signatures to be lawful. Paper bids copies would be precluded by the
portal.'' Infinity Communications & Consultants, Inc. notes that some
states ``require wet signatures for contracts, or hard copy responses
not digital.'' Under our adopted rules, E-Rate program participants are
required to comply with state and local rules; however copies of the
bids, bidding documentation and any communication between applicants
and service providers would also need to be uploaded into the
competitive bidding portal. We recognize that state and local
governments have procurement rules aimed at safeguarding against waste,
fraud and abuse, and the federal bidding portal is

[[Page 29055]]

not intended to impact these measures. Accordingly, in addition to
using the new, USAC-managed competitive bidding portal, our expectation
is that applicants and service providers would continue to use existing
state or local bidding portals where required. We clarify that the
submission of bids or questions to other state or local portals would
not violate E-Rate program rules. Specifically, applicants should
include instructions regarding any additional state or local
requirements in their FCC Form 470 or request for proposals (RFP)
document allowing service providers to upload their response to the FCC
Form 470 in the bidding portal, and to comply with other requirements
for submitting a responsive bid. The bidding portal will not replace
other procurement requirements under state or local procurement laws,
including submitting the bid or questions in an additional portal. We
clarify that if a service provider or applicant is submitting different
information to a state/local portal than what is being submitted to the
competitive bidding portal, that may be treated as a competitive
bidding violation and the E-Rate funding requests could be subject to
denial. We direct the USAC, under the direction of the Bureau, to
provide guidance and training on this issue.
 We reject commenters' remaining arguments regarding potential
conflicts between the bidding portal and state and local laws. Some
commenters argue that the proposed bidding portal would conflict with
state requirements concerning the publicizing of bid requests. For
example, Infinity notes that California Public Contract Code and Utah's
State Statute both require public advertisement for the submission of
bids. We conclude that the rules we adopt and the competitive bidding
portal requirements do not conflict with rules requiring the
publication of bids--applicants may post advertisements and public
notices soliciting bids to the FCC Forms 470 as required by state
regulations and include instructions that copies of the bids must be
uploaded to the competitive bidding portal as well. We also find that a
public opening of bids would not violate E-Rate program rules. Further,
state rules that require a bid be emailed or hand delivered do not
conflict with the portal, service providers merely need to ensure that
copies of the bids are submitted into the federal competitive bidding
portal. Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD) speculates that
``[r]equired bidders' security, in the form of cash, a cashier's check
made payable to the school district, a certified check made payable to
the school district, or a bidder's bond executed by an admitted surety
insurer made payable to the school district, may not be transmissible
through a third-party portal.'' We find that there is no such conflict
between California's procurement laws and the federal competitive
bidding portal as California's Public Contract Code does not prevent E-
Rate program participants from submitting bids to the federal bidding
portal and the rules we adopt place no restrictions on the submissions
of securities required under state law. Additionally, to the extent
there are state or local laws requiring bidder's security and specific
instructions for submitting the security, these laws do not preclude
the creation of a competitive bidding portal, as applicants and service
providers may satisfy the state or local requirements regarding the
bidder's security requirements while also submitting the bids and
competitive bidding documentation to the competitive bidding portal.
Similarly, we disagree with Schools, Health & Libraries Broadband
(SHLB) that Mississippi state procurement law precludes the use of a
federal competitive bidding portal. While the statute states that it
``shall not require any bidder to submit bids electronically,'' service
providers may choose to submit electronic bids. We find that this is
not incongruent with the competitive bidding portal and that service
providers can reply to the applicant's FCC Form 470 using the
competitive bidding portal and be compliant with Mississippi state
procurement requirements. The South Dakota Department of Education
speculates that the portal will interfere with the state's inclusion of
ineligible E-Rate entities into its procurement, which may impact the
bid evaluation process for eligible entities. However, requiring the
bids, questions about the RFP and FCC Form 470, walkthroughs with
vendors, and bid/vendor evaluation documentation related to the E-Rate
supported contract to be uploaded should not interfere with a
procurement that includes ineligible entities. We are not changing the
requirements of the Commission's competitive bidding rules and the
rules that apply to ineligible entities remain in place. Overall, we
note that stakeholders have not provided an example of an actual
conflict with the competitive bidding portal's requirements and instead
have speculated that there could be conflicts. To the extent that there
is a true conflict between the competitive bidding portal and state or
local laws, parties may request a waiver of the Commission's rules.
 Communications between Applicants and Service Providers. In the
Promoting Competitive Bidding NPRM, the Commission proposed that
``[s]ervice providers may anonymously submit questions or other
inquiries to applicants through the bidding portal, to which applicants
must respond during the competitive bidding process.'' In addition, the
Commission proposed that ``no communication between service providers
and applicants related to the competitive bid or the competitive
bidding process would be permitted outside of the bidding portal during
the competitive bidding process.'' Commenters raise concerns regarding
this process, asking whether the applicant could set the timeline for
questions and answers in a fair and open manner, and whether this
requirement effectively precludes applicants from holding bidder
conferences or walkthroughs to discuss service needs with potential
bidders and answer any questions. We adopt a modified version of the
proposal prohibiting communication between service providers,
applicants, and any representative thereof outside the bidding portal.
A few commenters requested clarity regarding when the ban on
communication applies, while others expressed concern about the burden
imposed by these new rules. We clarify that bidders and applicants will
use the portal for communications regarding the requested services and
products beginning on the date the applicant files the FCC Form 470
until the contract is awarded, or the contract award date, with limited
exceptions described. New requirements limiting communication between
applicants and service providers is a change, however we find that the
portal will assist participants with complying with these rules as
documentation will only have to be uploaded to the competitive bidding
portal and program participants will not have to separately retain the
uploaded competitive bidding emails and related communication
documentation.
 We also adopt the proposal for bidders to be able to submit
anonymous questions in the bidding portal for all participants to view,
and for applicants to answer those questions in the bidding portal. We
direct the Bureau and USAC to create a process for submitting questions
anonymously through the competitive bidding portal and for the
applicant to respond to the questions through the portal. Service
providers may submit their questions regarding

[[Page 29056]]

the competitive bidding process to applicants through the competitive
bidding portal without using the anonymous question format. Applicants
will be required to respond to the bidders' questions through the
portal so all bidders may see the questions asked and the provided
responses. We find that this question and response requirement will not
supplant an applicant's existing ability to set deadlines for questions
and otherwise ensure that all interested bidders are treated fairly and
given access to the same information. However, if an applicant has
already answered a question, they do not need to answer the same
question multiple times. The South Dakota Department of Education
raised concerns that the bidding portal rules could be challenging for
rural applicants who largely receive no bids or one bid. Applicants
that receive no bids are allowed to request quotes or bids from service
providers; however, the solicitation and response must be uploaded to
the portal to demonstrate how the service provider was selected.
Applicants that receive one bid during the competitive bidding process
may use the bid provided it is cost-effective and consistent with the
rules. Additionally, states may withhold confidential information
regarding its internal procurement and evaluation process. However,
documentation on the final bid evaluation and vendor selection process
(i.e., bid matrices or other documentation showing how each bid was
carefully considered and evaluated) must be uploaded to the portal.
After the contract award notice has been issued and uploaded to the
portal, confidential contract negotiation documentation is not required
to be uploaded, but the final contract is required.
 In addition, under our new rules, applicants can continue to hold
conferences or other meetings with interested bidders. Questions and
answers that were provided during the meeting and are relevant to the
competitive bidding process must be uploaded to the competitive bidding
portal within 72 hours to ensure that all potential bidders have access
to the same information, and the competitive bidding process is fair
and open to all bidders. A summary of the meetings held between the
applicant and any potential bidders must be uploaded to the competitive
bidding portal by the time the FCC Form 471 is filed. We find that this
affords applicants the ability to hold these important conferences and
walkthroughs without raising a concern about certain bidders having
conversations with an applicant in a manner that gives special
treatment. Internal communications between the applicant's bid
evaluation team do not need to uploaded, but the final bid evaluation
results must be uploaded. The documentation included in the portal
should be similar to the documentation applicant and service providers
are already required to retain and produce under the Commission's
rules. We believe this enables applicants to use a variety of methods,
including conferences and walkthroughs, to ensure that interested
bidders have the required information to thoroughly respond to a bid
solicitation, while ensuring that the program is protected against
special treatment, inside information, or other anticompetitive
practices that undermine the integrity of the E-Rate program.
 Bid Holding Period. In the Promoting Competitive Bidding NPRM, the
Commission sought comment on ``requiring applicants to wait a specified
amount of time before they can access bids submitted in response to
their FCC Form 470 service requests.'' The Commission discussed the
risk that the current process enables applicants to share bids received
from one service provider with another, perhaps more favored service
provider, in a manner that violates the program rules, and it asked
whether a bid holding period could address this concern. The Commission
further asked whether withholding the bids from applicants until the
deadline for bids has passed would help applicants comply with Sec.
54.503(c) of the Commission's rules, which requires applicants to wait
at least four weeks from the date of posting the FCC Form 470 to USAC's
website before entering into a contract with a service provider.
Consistent with the majority of commenters, we decline to require a bid
holding period for the competitive bidding portal at this time. We
agree with INCOMPAS that prohibiting applicants from reviewing bids
early would prevent them from identifying potential issues and permit
service providers to ``cure their proposal and correct their bid,''
thus leading more service providers to be disqualified, resulting in
higher costs of service for the E-Rate program. We also agree with SHLB
that ``requiring USAC to withhold proposals from applicants for some
period of time would needlessly extend the bidding process.'' Some
commenters express concern that the ``current system of allowing
applicants to open bids on a rolling basis could lead to a lack of
competition because applicants might view earlier bids more favorably
than later bids (or vice versa) based simply on when they are
received.'' However, we conclude that the benefits of a bid holding
period are outweighed by the costs of a holding period. We anticipate
that because of the measures adopted, applicants will be deterred from
viewing earlier bids more favorably and instead will evaluate all bids
fairly pursuant to our rules. We find that the competitive bidding
portal will assist service providers in correcting their bids and
streamlining the competitive bidding process. Accordingly, under the
rules we adopt, applicants will be notified when a bid is uploaded into
the portal and service providers will be able to communicate with
applicants in the competitive bidding portal to modify bids to address
any issues that may be identified during the E-Rate competitive bidding
process and provide documentation of this communication in the portal.
 Some commenters note that certain states have sealed bid
requirements, or further require that applicants open bids at a
predefined time. To accommodate this, we direct the Bureau and USAC to
develop controls on who can access bids and an audit log for the
bidding portal that would show a date and time for when a bid is
received, opened, and downloaded, and by whom, along with the IP
address. Applicants will be required to abide by state and local
requirements regarding opening bids. We find that the audit log would
help applicants demonstrate compliance with state and local laws that
may preclude them from opening a bid prior to the bid deadline.
 The access controls and audit log will also address OIG's concerns
about bid collusion and improper sharing of bids. OIG recommended that
bids be withheld from the applicant for a 28-day period to help prevent
improper bid sharing or collusion between applicants and service
providers. We note that because there is no mandatory 28-day period for
bids to be submitted in the E-Rate program, holding bids for a 28-day
period would not fully address OIG's concerns about bid collusion and
improper bid sharing activities as there may still be time for parties
to improperly share information and submit a bid to the FCC Form 470
after the 28-day holding period has expired. Applicants may file the
FCC Form 470 to initiate the competitive bidding process up to one year
before the start of the relevant funding year and thus, there could
still be opportunities for bid collusion or improper bid sharing
activities even with a 28-day holding period for each bid submitted. We

[[Page 29057]]

believe an audit log and controls on who can access the bids will be a
better way to address this issue than implementing a 28-day holding
period as the audit controls and logs will indicate who accessed bids,
the date/time when bids were accessed, and the date and time of bids as
they are received. If there was improper bid sharing or bid collusion,
the audit log would help identify these actions allowing USAC and the
Commission to take appropriate actions.
 State and Other Master Contracts. In the Promoting Competitive
Bidding NPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether, ``for those
applicants using state master contracts, [there is] documentation that
applicants should be required to upload [to] demonstrate compliance
with the E-Rate rules.'' Some commenters identify challenges that a
bidding portal would create for applicants conducting large
procurements, or those who must comply with unique rules and processes.
For example, commenters note concerns with the use of state master
contracts, in particular state master contracts that result in multiple
awards schedules and require the use of mini-bids. Commenters offer
that, to account for state master contracts, the bidding portal must
have ``considerable flexibility,'' or further, that competitive bidding
processes that result in state master contracts should be exempt from
the bidding portal. We require applicants to upload a copy of a state
master contract and the related bidding documentation to the
competitive bidding portal when filing their FCC Form 471 application
if the state master contract was used as part of an applicant's
competitive bidding process or is the contract that was selected. We
disagree with SECA that the competitive bidding portal is ``unable to
accommodate multi-stage bidding or mini-bids conducted using E-rate
qualified master contracts.'' Instead, we find that the bidding portal
will have sufficient flexibility to accommodate a variety of
competitive bidding processes, including those with multiple stages.
When applicants are required to perform a ``mini-bid'' evaluation based
on a multi-award state master contract, the documents that the
applicant prepared, in connection with the mini-bid process, including
those reflecting how the applicant selected the winning bidder among
the available vendors in the multi-award state master contract, must
also be uploaded to the competitive bidding portal. For consortium
applicants, we require the consortium leader to submit the competitive
bidding and contract documentation related to the consortium's FCC Form
471 on behalf of its members to the competitive bidding portal. We find
that this approach is consistent with the role of a consortium leader
as the entity that takes the lead in responding to USAC inquires
related to the consortium applicant's competitive bidding process.
 For multi-stage bidding, we require that applicants use the portal
for each round of the procurement, and that portal functionality will
enable multiple successive rounds in a multi-stage procurement to be
linked or otherwise associated. This functionality will permit
applicants that do multi-stage procurements, or who wish to include a
``Best and Final Offer'' phase of a procurement, to manage the entire
procurement through the bidding portal.
 Multi-Year Contracts. For multi-year contracts, we require
applicants to upload the required competitive bidding and contract
documentation to the competitive bidding portal only once in the first
year of the contract, and applicants will not be required to upload
duplicative competitive bidding and contract documentation for the
remainder of the contract's term provided there are not any
modifications that require a new competitive bidding process. For
existing multi-year contracts that are currently being used to support
funding requests, in funding year 2029, applicants will be required to
upload the associated bids, competitive bidding, and bid evaluation
documents for the multi-year contract into the portal by the time the
applicant submits their FCC Forms 471 that rely on that contract. This
is one year after the portal is implemented, giving applicants time to
focus on the funding year 2028 competitive bidding process before
needing to provide past competitive bidding documentation to the
repository.
 In the Promoting Competitive Bidding NPRM, the Commission asked
whether applicants and service providers should ``be permitted access
to their stored competitive bidding documents for a period long enough
to be able to comply with recordkeeping requirements.'' The Commission
also asked, ``if E-Rate program participants retain access to their
records, should this access be afforded to them in a way to permit them
to produce the records at the request of any representative (including
any auditor) appointed by a state education department, USAC, the
Commission, or any local, state or federal agency with jurisdiction
over the entity, as is required by Sec. 54.516(b)?'' We answer both
these questions affirmatively. Under our adopted rules, once an
applicant uploads the competitive bidding documentation into the
bidding portal and repository, applicants will be able to access this
documentation when needed and provide it to other local, state, or
federal agencies with jurisdiction over the applicant as necessary.
Thus, by preserving this documentation in the bidding portal and
repository, the portal will assist in ensuring compliance with the
competitive bidding recordkeeping and production requirements set forth
in Sec. 54.516(a)-(b) of the Commission's rules. We agree with the
Illinois Office of Broadband that the bidding portal ``reduces the
burden of complying with the Commission's document retention rules over
the long term.'' In adopting this requirement, we do not make any
modifications to Sec. 54.516(a) of the Commission's rules. However,
applicants and service providers do not need to separately retain
documents that are also uploaded to the competitive bidding portal and
can rely on this documentation to meet their document retention
requirements.
 Processing of FCC Forms 471. We expect that USAC will continue to
issue funding commitments in a timely manner according to the standard
that the Commission provided in the First 2014 E-Rate Order, 80 FR 167,
January 5, 2015. There, the Commission directed USAC ``to aim to issue
funding commitments or denials for all `workable' funding requests by
September 1st of each funding year,'' noting that this date would
``provide[ ] USAC with approximately five months beyond the [usual]
application filing window deadline to review all timely filed and
complete funding requests.'' In issuing this direction, the Commission
acknowledged that ``even `workable' funding requests may be time
consuming for USAC to process'' and that USAC should continue to
perform a ``thorough review of each application,'' including by
``contact[ing] applicants to seek additional information concerning a
funding request'' and ``provid[ing] applicants with an opportunity to
respond to [USAC's] questions.''
 A few commenters raise concerns about whether the additional data
and documentation submitted to the competitive bidding portal may
result in system issues or delays in reviewing applications and slow
procurement timelines. While these process changes will result in
additional documentation, we find that expecting USAC to maintain the
same processing timelines for issuing funding commitments is

[[Page 29058]]

justified, given the paramount importance of making funding commitments
prior to the start of the typical school year, i.e., in or around early
September. We direct USAC to incorporate data analytics and other tools
to select specific FCC Form 471 applications for additional review and
to detect potential competitive bidding violations during pre-
commitment reviews using the additional documentation that will be
available through the competitive bidding portal. While any additional
pre-commitment reviews may increase processing times in some respects,
we find that USAC's processing times will be lessened in other respects
as it can use the submitted competitive bidding and contract
documentation to resolve potential issues with funding applications
internally, rather than incur delays by reaching out to applicants or
service providers for additional information. We find that asking USAC
to continue to follow existing processing times and review standards
while, at the same time, strategically incorporating this additional
competitive bidding and contract documentation into its review
processes strikes a reasonable balance between ensuring that funding
commitments are issued in time for schools and libraries to purchase
vital broadband services and equipment and ensuring that USAC uses this
additional information to detect rule violations and strengthen program
integrity.
 Information Security and Confidentiality. Some commenters raise the
question of whether proprietary and confidential information submitted
to the competitive bidding portal would be kept confidential. For
example, the South Dakota Department of Education notes that the public
availability of bidding information submitted into the competitive
bidding portal could run afoul of state law. Given the possibility that
certain bidding documentation (i.e., non-winning bids) submitted to the
bidding portal may contain confidential financial or proprietary
information, we will treat bids and other pricing data submitted to the
bidding portal as presumptively confidential and will not make the non-
winning bids and submitted pricing data routinely available for public
inspection. This includes bid reviews by applicants and other related
documents which may include or reference information from bids.
However, we are not making any changes to the data that is currently
available for the E-Rate program, and all pricing data included on the
FCC Form 471 will remain publicly available. We direct the Bureau, in
consultation with the Office of General Counsel, to evaluate and
determine whether additional data (e.g., aggregated information for
reporting purposes) could be made publicly available without
compromising the security or confidentiality concerns raised in the
record, including not publicly disclosing any data that is
confidential, like non-winning bids. We direct USAC to retain all
documentation in the portal and repository in accordance with the
applicable federal records schedule for Universal Service Fund-related
records and protect, retain, manage, and use all data and documentation
in accordance with applicable federal information security and privacy
requirements. We also direct that access to the competitive bidding
portal and repository be limited to the applicant's Account
Administrator and up to two other authorized users (including
consultants) and audit logs to be maintained on when, by whom, and what
documentation was accessed in the portal.
 Bid Response Template. In the Promoting Competitive Bidding NPRM,
the Commission sought comment on ``whether service providers should be
required to submit information in a manner that enables applicants to
compare competing bids.'' The Commission also asked whether applicants
face difficulty in comparing bids submitted in different formats. Most
commenters did not address this issue. DOJ supports this proposal,
specifically stating that service providers should submit information
``in a manner that enables applicants to compare competing bids.'' In
particular, DOJ supports a requirement that service providers submit a
summary form, which could be a portion of the FCC Form 471, that
contains ``key data points,'' in an effort to allow USAC to better
leverage the data for compliance and investigative purposes, and allow
applicants to ``be confident that they are comparing apples to apples
when selecting a service provider.''
 We direct the Bureau, after seeking comment if deemed necessary or
advisable, to develop a standardized bid response template, and make it
available for applicants to use on an optional basis. We find that a
standardized template, made available for service providers to use for
submitting bids, would prove useful to applicants, as it could help
standardize bid responses and make it easier for applicants to compare
bids and ensure compliance with our rules for several reasons. First,
we find that having a standardized bid response template would help
service providers formulate bids in a more uniform manner by making
clear the required information. Second, a standard template would help
applicants in their bid evaluation process because each response would
contain data that could easily and appropriately be compared across
service providers. Third, we find that a bid template could help USAC
better utilize data analytics because it will allow for the data points
to be provided in a uniform manner, making it easier for USAC to
identify areas of concern that warrant further review. Applicants
choosing to use the template can require potential bidders to use the
template bid response form by stating that use of the template is a
requirement for responding to its FCC Form 470. We will determine in
the future whether to require mandatory use of a standardized bid
response form by service providers.
 We also take steps to streamline or clarify aspects of the E-Rate
program and its administration based on the record received in response
to the 2023 FNPRM, 88 FR 152, August 9, 2023. Specifically, we amend
the E-Rate program rules to improve how applicants transition between
service providers during a funding year and establish a process for
applicants to increase bandwidth within a funding year. We also take
this opportunity to provide guidance on transition of services; clarify
cost allocation rules and procedures; provide guidance on competitive
bidding requirements; eliminate the FCC Form 486; amend the
Commission's invoicing rules; and update E-Rate program definitions.
Each of these issues have caused challenges for applicants in applying
for and receiving discounts on eligible services, and we anticipate
that these changes will result in an overall simplification of E-Rate
procedures and processes.
 First, we adopt changes to improve how applicants request funding
when they are transitioning between two service providers (or service
offerings) during the funding year, given the difficulty in determining
the precise cutover date during the application filing window. To
prevent funding duplicative services, E-Rate procedures do not allow
USAC to commit funding to two funding requests for service, to the same
recipients, that overlap in time. At the same time, due to concerns
about exceeding the E-Rate funding cap, the Commission's service
substitution rules require that post-commitment service substitutions
be based on the lower of either the pre-discount price of the service
for which support was originally requested or the pre-discount price of
the new, substituted service. In
