FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Modernizing Spectrum Sharing for Satellite Broadband
Document number: 2026-09565
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Space Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 26928
Publication date: 2026-05-13

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 92 (Wednesday, May 13, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 92 (Wednesday, May 13, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 26928-26948]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-09565]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 25

[SB Docket No. 25-157; FCC 26-26; FR ID 345051]


Modernizing Spectrum Sharing for Satellite Broadband

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or we) adopts a Report and Order (Order) that revises the
spectrum sharing framework for Geostationary Orbit (GSO) and Non-
Geostationary Orbit (NGSO) systems that currently relies on NGSO
systems complying with Equivalent Power Flux Density (EPFD) limits
developed in the late-1990s. The consequence today of applying such
EPFD limits in the United States is that operators must overprotect GSO
systems, which in turn means that American households and businesses--
most critically in rural and remote areas--do not receive the fastest
space-based NGSO satellite broadband American innovation has available.
Based on the technical record in this proceeding, the Order replaces
the EPFD framework with modern, performance-based GSO protection
criteria. The Order extends the Commission's framework for good-faith
coordination and allow NGSO and GSO operators to bargain for
appropriate interference protections through voluntary, private
agreement. The Order further adopts technical backstops to protect GSO
systems when coordination has not been reached.

DATES: These rules are effective July 13, 2026, except for the
amendments to Sec. Sec. 25.146(a)(3) (amendatory instruction 2) and
25.289(a)(2) (amendatory instruction 4), which are indefinitely
delayed. The Commission will publish a document in the Federal Register
announcing the effective date of these rule sections.
 The incorporation of reference of certain material listed in this
rule was approved by the Director of the Federal Register as of January
17, 2018.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Clay DeCell, Attorney Advisor,
Satellite Programs and Policy Division, Space Bureau, at
 [email protected] or at (202) 418-0803.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Order,
FCC 26-26, adopted April 30, 2026, and released May 1, 2026. The
document is available for public inspection online at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-26A1.pdf . The document is also
available for inspection and copying during business hours in the FCC
Reference Center, 45 L Street NE, Washington, DC 20554. To request
materials in accessible formats for people with disabilities, send an
email to [email protected] or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs
Bureau at 202-418-0530 (voice), 202-418-0432 (TTY). ITU Regulations
Article 22, Section II is referenced in the amendatory text of this
document and was previously approved for 25.289.

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires
that an agency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice and
comment rulemakings, unless the agency certifies that ``the rule will
not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has
prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the
possible impact of the rule and policy changes contained in the Order
on small entities. The FRFA is set forth in Section IV below.

Final Paperwork Reduction Act Analysis

 The Order contains modified information collection requirements
subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-
13. It will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
for review under Section 3507(d) of the PRA. OMB, other Federal
agencies, and the general public are invited to comment on the modified
information collection requirements contained in this document.
 In the Order, we have assessed the effects of providing NGSO
satellite system applicants an alternative to certifying compliance
with EPFD limits in the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-18.6, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands
for operations in the United States, by instead demonstrating that they
will comply with certain GSO satellite network protection criteria. We
find that doing so will serve the public interest and is unlikely to
directly affect businesses with fewer than 25 employees.

Congressional Review Act

 The Commission has determined, and the Administrator of the Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget,
concurs that this rule is major under the Congressional Review Act, 5
U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a copy of this Report and Order
to Congress and the Government Accountability Office pursuant to the
Congressional Review Act, see 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Synopsis

I. Introduction

 1. As satellite broadband rapidly matures into an integral and
integrated communications technology, the Commission must aggressively
update its rules to ensure Americans reap the abundance of innovation
and investment by the space industry. In the Order, we revise the
decades-old framework for how GSO and NGSO systems share spectrum. Our
legacy rules have significantly limited the ability of operators to
deliver high-speed, low-latency broadband services to consumers. Until
now, NGSO operators' power levels have been restricted by EPFD limits
developed in the late-1990s to protect GSO satellites. Such EPFD limits
were based on theoretical designs for NGSO systems of that era, long
before modern advancements were developed for the NGSO constellations
currently in orbit. The consequence today of applying such EPFD limits
in the United States is that operators must overprotect GSO systems.
The cost of this government-imposed overprotection is that American
households and businesses--most critically in rural and remote areas--
do not receive the fastest space-based broadband American innovation
has available.

[[Page 26929]]

 2. The benefits of our changes today may total well over $2
billion, with capacity increases of 100% to 700% possible using the
same number of in-orbit NGSO satellites. Allowing for more intensive
spectrum use brings satellite broadband providers closer to the
milestone of delivering gigabit service from space--a feat unimaginable
only a few years ago. Such capability will bring greater competition to
the broadband marketplace as space-based connectivity reaches speeds
and latency similar to that of terrestrial fiber. And by reducing the
number of satellites required to cover an area with a given capacity,
our new framework will allow for lower unit costs to serve a geographic
area, which in turn can reduce the price of broadband to consumers. In
short, by removing an enormous regulatory constraint on NGSO systems,
the Commission takes another step to unleash the American space
industry to deliver for consumers.
 3. Specifically, in the Order, we replace the EPFD framework with
modern, performance-based GSO protection criteria that take account of
the improved spectrum sharing possibilities that modern satellite
technology has brought, including through use of adaptive coding and
modulation (ACM). As the cornerstone of our new sharing regime, we
extend our time-tested framework for good-faith coordination and allow
NGSO and GSO operators to bargain for appropriate interference
protections through voluntary, private agreement. We adopt the
following technical backstops to protect GSO systems when coordination
has not been reached:
 A long-term protection criterion of 3% time-weighted
average throughput degradation for GSO satellite links using ACM;
 A short-term protection criterion of 0.1% absolute
increase in link unavailability;
 A supplemental protection criterion of -10.5 dB
interference-to-noise (I/N) for 80% of the time for GSO satellite links
that do not use ACM, such as point-to-multipoint video transmissions;
and
 A supplemental protection requirement for NGSO systems to
observe a minimum 3-degree avoidance angle of the GSO arc.
 4. Having taken a fresh look at today's satellite technology and
operations, these new rules will promote more efficient and effective
use of the shared spectrum, and support a more competitive market for
satellite broadband and other in-demand services.

II. Background

 5. Overview. The American space sector is booming. In the past few
years alone, thousands of broadband-capable satellites have been
launched into low-Earth orbit (LEO), connecting Americans with low-
latency, high-speed services heretofore unavailable in many rural and
underserved areas of the United States. By one estimate, the supply of
high-throughput satellite capacity tripled between 2021 and 2023, with
NGSO satellites accounting for over 90% of the net supply during that
period, and projected to account for 97% of the increase in supply from
2023 to 2028. At the same time, GSO satellite operators have continued
to deploy powerful, new satellites with enhanced capabilities. The
space sector is helping bridge the digital divide.
 6. These broadband satellite services rely on shared spectrum. In
the most commonly used frequency bands, between 10.7 GHz and 30 GHz,
NGSO systems share primary fixed-satellite service (FSS) allocations
with GSO networks, and must also operate compatibly with broadcasting-
satellite service (BSS) networks and stations in other services,
including terrestrial services. NGSO FSS systems must comply with power
limits expressed in EPFD to demonstrate that they meet their broader
obligation not to cause unacceptable interference to GSO FSS and BSS
networks. NGSO FSS systems must also meet separate power limits
expressed in power-flux density (PFD) to protect terrestrial services.
Within the 10.7-30 GHz range, EPFD downlink limits apply in the 10.7-
12.7 GHz, 17.3-18.6 GHz, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands in the United States.
Applicants for NGSO FSS space station licenses, and non-U.S.-licensed
satellite operators seeking access to the U.S. market, must certify
that they will comply with the specified EPFD limits.
 7. EPFD History. As reviewed in the NPRM, the current EPFD limits
were developed in the late 1990s for the protection of GSO networks
from then-proposed NGSO systems. They were adopted by the international
community at the International Telecommunication Union's (ITU) World
Radiocommunication Conference (WRC) in 2000, and subsequently
incorporated into the Commission's rules. In 2019, the international
community again considered sharing criteria among GSO and NGSO FSS
systems, this time in the higher Q- and V-bands between 37.5 GHz and
51.4 GHz. WRC-19 did not adopt EPFD limits in these bands. Instead,
given the expected use of ACM by GSO networks in these bands, it
required NGSO FSS systems to meet certain long-term and short-term GSO
protection criteria that incorporate a degraded throughput methodology.
 8. Current ITU Work. WRC-23 considered a proposal from the Inter-
American Telecommunication Commission (CITEL) co-signed by ten member
states, including the United States, to review the EPFD limits under a
future agenda item for WRC-27. While the proposed agenda item was not
adopted, WRC-23 invited ITU-R to conduct technical studies on the EPFD
limits and to inform WRC-27 of the results of the studies, without any
regulatory consequences. These studies are being carried out in ITU-R
Working Party (WP) 4A.
 9. Waivers. On January 9, 2026, the Space Bureau granted SpaceX a
waiver of the EPFD limits in the United States to operate pursuant to
its satellite configuration used during real-world testing of an Nco of
8 and a GSO-arc avoidance angle of 4 degrees. On February 20, 2026, the
Space Bureau granted Amazon a similar waiver for its NGSO system.
 10. NPRM. On April 28, 2025, the Commission launched this
proceeding by granting a SpaceX petition for rulemaking to review the
decades-old spectrum sharing regime between GSO and NGSO systems in
downlink frequency bands between 10.7 GHz and 30 GHz that are subject
to EPFD limits, and to amend Sec. Sec. 25.146 and 25.289 of the
Commission's rules. The NPRM sought to develop a substantial technical
record concerning modern and efficient spectrum sharing among NGSO FSS
systems and GSO FSS and BSS networks in the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-18.6, and
19.7-20.2 GHz bands, while ensuring that any rule changes do not affect
the continued protection of other services. In response to the NPRM, 38
comments, 23 reply comments, and numerous ex parte presentations were
filed.

III. Discussion

 11. The voluminous record in this proceeding includes rarely
available, real-world testing data assessing the impact of EPFD
exceedances on operational GSO networks, along with technical and
economic analyses and other comments. Based on this record, we conclude
that technological advancements in the past three decades and the
inherent issues in the EPFD limits themselves warrant the establishment
of a new, performance-based spectrum sharing framework between GSO and
NGSO systems in the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-18.6, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands.
Leveraging the latest

[[Page 26930]]

satellite technology, the U.S. space industry can make better use of
spectrum resources to substantially expand and improve the broadband
services available in the United States, thereby furthering ``the
policy of the United States to encourage the provision of new
technologies and services to the public.''
 12. As described below, we expect the modernized NGSO-GSO sharing
framework to result in substantial benefits for American consumers, by
enabling new NGSO systems to use more satellites to serve the same
area, at potentially higher power, and over a wider portion of the
visible sky. For example, when an NGSO system can employ eight
satellites to provide service simultaneously in a given geographic area
and frequency band, instead of being effectively limited to one
satellite under current EPFD limits, and while continuing to protect
GSO networks as supported by real-world testing, it immediately boosts
capacity, which translates to faster broadband speeds for American
consumers. Increasing the capacity available to any location can
improve quality of service or allow competitors to provide the same
quality of service with a smaller constellation, which could
potentially lower prices to consumers. Expanded, low-latency satellite
broadband at lower cost may also increase competition for broadband
services in new areas, including some urban areas where prior satellite
capacity constraints may have bounded consumers' willingness to switch.
This, in turn, results in greater societal welfare benefits, with one
study estimating welfare to increase by between $10 billion and $100
billion globally if EPFD limits were widely replaced.
 13. We replace the outdated and wooden EPFD limitations with a
modern framework that gives NGSO and GSO operators the flexibility to
reach protection criteria through good-faith coordination. It is at
once a fundamental change in regulatory design, but at the same time
consistent with the primacy we place on good-faith coordination across
many other contexts. As the Commission has emphasized, private
coordination among satellite operators, based on real-world operating
parameters, offers the best opportunity for efficient spectrum sharing.
The current EPFD limits do not accommodate such coordination because
they must be met regardless of any agreements between particular NGSO
and GSO satellite operators. Our approach not only encourages good-
faith coordination efforts; it requires them. And the new, performance-
based protection criteria focus on what matters (i.e., delivered
service), allowing innovation in NGSO system designs which respect the
new limits. Whereas EPFD limits categorically restricted an input, the
approach we adopt today gives parties the flexibility to negotiate a
more efficient outcome.
 14. As a backstop to good-faith coordination, we adopt GSO
protection criteria that take account of the improved spectrum sharing
possibilities that modern satellite technology has brought, including
through use of ACM. Specifically, we require NGSO satellites
transmitting in the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-18.6, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands to
protect co-frequency GSO networks using a long-term protection
criterion of 3% time-weighted average throughput degradation. We adopt
a short-term GSO protection criterion of 0.1% absolute increase in link
unavailability. For GSO satellite links that do not use ACM, we adopt a
long-term protection criterion of -10.5 dB I/N for 80% of the time. As
an additional measure of protection for GSO networks, we require NGSO
systems to observe a minimum 3-degree avoidance angle of the GSO arc.
We decline to establish aggregate limits or other limits on NGSO
systems at this time. These new backstop provisions will ensure that
NGSO broadband services can reap the benefits of significantly more
efficient spectrum sharing while ensuring that NGSO systems continue
not to cause ``unacceptable interference'' to GSO FSS and BSS networks.
 15. Below, we outline the public-interest benefits of our decision,
based on the extensive record in this proceeding. We then explain why
the purported costs of modernizing our sharing rules are overstated,
speculative, and, in any case, mitigated by the suite of additional
protections we adopt today. Finally, we resolve assorted issues of
implementation and compliance.

A. Benefits of Modernized Sharing Rules

 16. Dramatically boosting the capacity of NGSO broadband systems
serves the public interest. Adding more system capacity is the most
impactful way for NGSO operators to address their most acute and
recurring technical challenge: providing 5G-quality data rates to a
growing number of users during periods of peak congestion, without
sacrificing on signal reliability. Enabling that level of performance
makes satellite broadband a more compelling alternative for consumers
in areas with limited competitive options. And it lowers barriers to
entry and potentially stranded investments by reducing the need for new
satellite launches and expensive infrastructure builds.
 17. The record unambiguously demonstrates that legacy EPFD
restrictions present perhaps the largest regulatory constraint on NGSO
systems to deliver more capacity to consumers. As discussed below, we
find that modernizing our NGSO-GSO sharing framework to boost NGSO
capacity and reduce the necessary size of NGSO constellations will
bring substantial public-interest benefits. We also note the broader
macroeconomic benefits across America. One study, for example, has
indicated that increases in NGSO system capacity of 74% to 180% could
reduce average costs per unit of capacity of between 43% and 64%. The
study further estimated increases in consumer welfare ranging from 11%,
given a 10% reduction in price and a 25% increase in capacity, to 113%,
assuming a 50% reduction in price and a 250% increase in capacity. And
if revisions to the EPFD regime were adopted globally, they could
result in welfare benefits to all customers ranging from $10 billion to
$100 billion.
1. Boosting Capacity and Speeds
 18. The ability of surging NGSO satellite deployments to meet the
needs of Americans on the wrong side of the digital divide is limited
by the design and operational restrictions placed on NGSO systems by
the need to comply with EPFD limits. To meet these limits, NGSO
operators have three primary strategies. First, NGSO operators limit
the number of satellite beams that can serve any given location
simultaneously using the same frequencies (i.e., the number of co-
frequency beams or Nco), limiting spectrum reuse and capacity. Second,
NGSO operators implement wide ``avoidance angles'' of the GSO arc,
which restrict satellites from transmitting when they are within a
certain-degree separation from the transmission path of a GSO
satellite. This technique increases the number of satellites NGSO
operators need to provide full coverage and causes less efficient
rerouting of network paths, which further reduces performance and
increases latency. Third, NGSO operators reduce their power levels even
outside the GSO-arc avoidance angle to ensure off-axis emissions remain
below the EPFD limit, with lower power levels reducing data rates and
leading to less robust connectivity for end users. In total, compliance
with the current EPFD limits directly degrades the efficiency of
spectrum use by NGSO systems.
 19. The EPFD limits are coupled with the ITU's software and
methodology for assessing compliance with those limits,

[[Page 26931]]

which can further restrict real-world NGSO operations. For example, the
ITU software considers a relatively sensitive reference antenna pattern
for GSO earth stations, resulting in a greater calculated EPFD into GSO
earth stations and therefore greater restrictions on NGSO operations to
fall below the EPFD limits as calculated with reference to this antenna
pattern. In addition, the ITU software uses a worst-case geometry
selection algorithm when choosing among available NGSO satellites to
transmit to a given location. This assumes that the NGSO operator will
always select the satellite with the worst-case geometry (often, the
satellite closest to the GSO arc), although it is unlikely that an
operator would rely on such an algorithm to conduct actual operations.
Rather, satellite operators rely on a complex, global resource
management system for assigning satellite capacity to their customers.
In total, according to one study, the assumed EPFD of an NGSO system
was substantially below the maximum allowed EPFD in Ka-band at almost
all points when using the ITU methodology, and up to 30 dB below the
limits for short-term interference in the upper portion of the Ka-band
specifically. By restricting EPFD below even the limits themselves,
NGSO capacity, coverage, and service are further reduced. Beyond
stating that EPFD limits rely on conservative or disputed assumptions,
commenters also argue the current ITU process invites ``regulatory
gamesmanship.''
 20. In contrast to legacy EPFD regulations, the record demonstrates
substantial potential for enhanced NGSO service offerings under a
modernized NGSO-GSO sharing framework. Analyses for current and planned
Ku-band and Ka-band NGSO systems indicate that modernized sharing rules
could deliver increases in NGSO system capacity of 100% to 700% in a
given area in the United States, because NGSO operators would be able
to increase the number of satellites operating simultaneously in a
given area and a given frequency band from one to as many as eight. At
the same time, a reduction in the GSO-arc avoidance angle would
increase the number of satellites available to serve an earth station
location and thereby increase coverage, potentially reducing the size
and cost of NGSO systems.
a. Real-World Measurement Campaigns
 21. This rulemaking has benefitted from rarely available, real-
world measurement campaigns, which assessed the impact of the SpaceX
Starlink NGSO system in different operational configurations on typical
GSO network mass-market terminals. These real-world test results
demonstrate the potential for enhanced NGSO operations, in excess of
current EPFD limits, and the resulting impacts on typical GSO service
links.
 22. In one set of testing, SpaceX operated the Starlink system with
GSO-arc avoidance angles resembling typical GSO separation arcs in Ku-
band and Ka-band, e.g., 2, 3, 4 and 6 degrees. The test setup included
a high-precision spectrum analyzer connected to a mass-market GSO
terminal from a major GSO operator. The average de-sense to the GSO
link resulting from eight co-frequency beams with an avoidance angle of
4 degrees from the GSO arc was less than 0.1 dB, which translates to a
degraded throughput of less than approximately 0.7%. In another set of
testing, using a different location and GSO network, SpaceX
demonstrated that, for the Starlink system similarly configured to use
eight co-frequency beams and a 4-degree GSO-arc avoidance angle, the
long-term de-sense of the GSO link was negligible and the increase in
short-term link unavailability was approximately 0.05%. In two other
sets of testing, with different locations and GSO networks, operating
the Starlink system with up to eight co-frequency beams and a 4- or
4.5-degree GSO-arc avoidance angle similarly showed minimal long-term
signal de-sense (and associated degraded throughput) to the GSO links.
And a fifth set of testing provided similar results. Further, the
increase in absolute unavailability in a test using a very small, 35 cm
user terminal was 0.0005%. Notably, SpaceX has conducted measurements
in Jordan with a GSO-arc avoidance angle of 3 degrees and an Nco of 6
for a 60 cm earth station receiving antenna. The average co-polarized
de-sense from this test was approximately 0.17 dB, which corresponds to
an I/N of approximately -13.9 dB.
 23. The results of these five extensive, months-long test campaigns
offer direct, real-world evidence that a currently operating NGSO
system could, in comparison with its configuration needed to meet
current EPFD limits, increase by 700% its number of satellites (i.e.,
from 1 satellite to 8 satellites) operating simultaneously co-frequency
in the same area while reducing its GSO-arc avoidance angle by 60%--
from 10 degrees to 4 degrees--with resultant effects on typical GSO
networks of less than 3% degraded throughput and 0.1% absolute increase
in unavailability. While commenters note certain limitations of the
SpaceX real-world testing--that it was only conducted in the Ku-band;
that it does not reflect year-long rain fade effects; and that tested
interference to a GSO earth station located in the center of the GSO
beam, where the desired signal is strongest, would be lower than the
interference to a GSO earth station located at the edge of the GSO
beam, where the desired signal is weakest--no other commenter has
presented alternative interference measurements on the record for
consideration.
b. Simulations
 24. Technical studies containing simulations further support the
conclusion that NGSO systems could significantly improve capacity and
coverage with limited effects on GSO networks. In one scenario analyzed
for the Amazon system, for example, the NGSO system could operate at
increased power levels, reduce its GSO-arc avoidance angle from 18
degrees to 3 degrees, and operate at an Nco of 4 (quadrupling its
capacity in any given area), and the largest increase in unavailability
for all ten studied GSO links would be 0.000000073%. The largest
decrease in throughput was 1.27% for a customer terminal, with half of
the ten links studied showing a decrease of 0.00956% or less. In
another scenario analyzed for the Amazon system, the NGSO system could
maintain its lower power level, reduce its GSO-arc avoidance angle to 2
degrees, and operate at an Nco of 8 (octupling the capacity), and the
largest increase in unavailability would be 0.000001756%. At most,
Amazon estimated GSO operators would experience a loss of 2.72% in
throughput, with half of the ten links studied showing a throughput
decrease of 0.175% or less. For SpaceX's Starlink, simulations of
interference from the NGSO system into a 46 cm Ku-band user terminal in
Oregon showed an absolute increase in unavailability of 0.0047%,
assuming an Nco of 15 and a GSO-arc avoidance angle of 18 degrees, and
a 0.0251% increase if the avoidance angle were reduced to 4 degrees.
Another simulation attempted to replicate the results of the SpaceX
real-world testing in Bogota, Colombia and found compliance with a 0.1%
absolute increase in unavailability limit.
 25. Simulations on the record assessing the capacity gains of
degraded throughput rely on varying assumptions, which we examine later
from a GSO coexistence perspective. For present purposes, the
simulations presented support the conclusion that the EPFD limits
greatly constrain NGSO capacity. We disagree with suggestions

[[Page 26932]]

that the combined record of rarely available, real-world measurement
data and numerous simulations is an insufficient technical basis on
which to adopt a degraded throughput methodology aligned with the
Commission's NGSO-NGSO sharing framework and the international NGSO-GSO
sharing framework in Q- and V-bands. As the studies show, even a simple
change of Nco from one to two could double the capacity available in a
given area, while meeting GSO protection criteria proposed on the
record.
2. Connecting the Unconnected
 26. Satellite connections have long been a lifeline for Americans
in rural and remote areas, where rugged terrain, sparse population, and
economic realities have often kept terrestrial networks out of reach.
Today, satellites are an increasingly powerful tool in the combined
efforts to close the digital divide. The Federal Government has
directed billions in funding for broadband deployment and adoption,
culminating in the $65 billion investment in the 2021 Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law. Yet, in 2024, more than one third of Americans had
only one provider of high-speed broadband or lacked access altogether.
 27. This rulemaking has benefitted from the views and experiences
of Americans living and working in rural and underserved areas, and
those who advocate on their behalf, on the impact that modernization of
the NGSO-GSO sharing framework could have for Americans on the wrong
side of the digital divide. These citizens and non-profits note that in
their communities, as in many rural areas, NGSO FSS satellites may
offer the only viable broadband solution, enabling access to telehealth
services, remote learning, digital job training, remote work
opportunities, and emergency communications. These commenters argue
that modernizing the NGSO-GSO sharing framework will enable NGSO
providers to expand capacity, increase speeds, and improve service
reliability, which are ``transformational improvements for the
communities we serve.'' Rural voices on the record uniformly urge us to
update the NGSO-GSO spectrum sharing rules, without delay.
 28. NGSO satellite operators are investing heavily as uptake grows,
and the potential for low-latency, gigabit satellite broadband is on
the horizon. High-throughput satellite capacity has been forecast to
grow nine-fold between 2023 and 2028, with NGSO constellations driving
97% of the net increase. And new NGSO satellite capacity is already
being put to significant use--not only offering high-speed, low-latency
broadband in rural areas, but also supporting critical industries, from
aviation and shipping to manufacturing and agriculture, and providing
network resiliency, delivering robust connectivity capable of
supporting life-saving real-time communications. Yet supply constraints
remain. It is imperative that we look at new ways to leverage the
exploding growth of NGSO systems to aid the combined effort to expand
access and competition in broadband and other services in the United
States--starting with the most constraining regulatory requirement on
NGSO broadband systems today.
3. Fostering New Competitive Entry
 29. Modernizing the NGSO-GSO sharing regime would also bring
particular benefits for new entrant LEO-satellite systems. With greater
operational flexibility under revised sharing rules, new LEO systems
would need smaller constellations and still have greater capacity to
reach more customers, which would reflect a substantial reduction in
launch costs, satellite costs, and costs of a new LEO constellation.
For example, one analysis indicates that a constellation that would
require 462 LEO satellites under existing EPFD rules to have a certain
coverage could obtain the same coverage with updated rules with only
360 satellites. ICLE argues the EPFD limits impose ``significant market
distortions'' that ``translate directly into higher costs per unit of
capacity delivered to consumers, as operators must deploy more
satellites and infrastructure to achieve the same service levels.''
Lower costs from a revised NGSO-GSO sharing framework would encourage
new entry as well as lower prices for customers. In addition, greater
capacity would make LEO broadband more competitive vis-[agrave]-vis
fixed broadband and bring greater choice to consumers.
4. Maximizing Efficient Spectrum Use
 30. In modernizing the spectrum sharing framework between GSO and
NGSO satellite systems, we seek to achieve abundance and reject
technically unnecessary restrictions borne from a zero-sum mindset. We
are guided by the Commission's policy statement on spectrum management
in doing so. This policy, when applied to the current rulemaking,
favors efficiency over absolute protection guarantees. As most
pertinent to this rulemaking, the Commission noted that:
 The electromagnetic environment is highly variable, and
zero risk of occasional service degradation or interruption cannot be
guaranteed.
 Services should plan for the spectrum environment in which
they intend to operate, the service they intend to provide, and the
characteristics of spectrally and spatially proximate operations.
Planning should be ongoing and account for changes in spectrum
operating environments.
 Radio transmitter and receiver system operators and
equipment manufacturers should plan for and design error tolerant
systems, using good engineering practices, to mitigate degradation from
interference.
 Quantitative analyses of interactions between services
that are fact-and evidence-based, sufficiently robust, transparent, and
reproducible are needed to better inform spectrum management decision-
making.
 31. Our decision making in this proceeding squarely aligns with
these principles and is supported by the best-available, real-world
data presented in the record as set forth below. Further, when
considering more intensive use of spectrum for new and innovative
services, we are acutely aware that ``[a] uniform or absolute
expectation of service availability could preclude the introduction of
valuable new services in the RF [radiofrequency] environment and
undermine the efficient use of spectrum resources.'' And we continue to
expect proponents of interference claims ``to supply sufficiently
complete, transparent, and reproducible quantitative analytical models
of the interactions between radio services, with respect to transmitter
and receiver performance characteristics and the RF environment.''
 32. Even when considered in their own right, the current EPFD
limits have raised significant concerns as to whether they constitute
an efficient spectrum sharing regime for GSO and NGSO systems in the
10.7-12.7 GHz, 17.3-18.6 GHz, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands. Most starkly,
the differing treatment of Ka-band frequencies--where the EPFD limit in
the upper portion of the band is substantially more restrictive than
the EPFD limit in the lower portion of the band--is widely criticized
in the record as technically unjustified. In addition, the overall
methodology used to derive the current EPFD limits has been called into
question, including the use of methodologies designed to address short-
term interference to develop long-term EPFD limits, overly conservative
modeling of rain attenuation, and the

[[Page 26933]]

inclusion of a large number of unstable links with negative link margin
values in the set of GSO reference links used to derive the EPFD
limits.
 33. Compliance with the current EPFD limits results in spectrally
inefficient, overprotection of modern GSO networks that exceeds the
protection GSO operators afford each other. Indeed, the comparison with
GSO-GSO protection is illustrative. As GSO satellites operate from
fixed locations along the 360-degree GSO arc, a primary strategy for
managing potential GSO-GSO interference is through orbital separation.
Internationally, the GSO orbital separation provisions in the ITU Radio
Regulations presume negligible interference beyond orbital separation
of 6 degrees in the Ku-band and 8 degrees in Ka-band. The Commission's
own orbital spacing policy for GSO FSS networks in these bands is based
on two-degree spacing. Yet, as noted in one U.S. study submitted to ITU
WP 4A, maintaining a level of GSO-GSO protection equivalent to the ITU
EPFD limits would require significantly larger orbital separations--
estimated as at least 25 and 46 degrees in the Ku- and Ka-bands,
respectively. Thus, the ITU EPFD limits are 4 to 5 times more
restrictive than equivalent GSO-GSO protections that guard against all
but negligible levels of interference--and 12 to 23 times more
restrictive than the Commission's equivalent separation rules.
 34. Analyses on the record further quantify these current
protection levels. According to one study modeling an NGSO system
operating under current EPFD limits, short-term interference to a set
of ten GSO reference links resulted in undetectable increases in
absolute unavailability in both the lower and upper Ka-bands, while the
maximum decrease in throughput in the lower Ka-band was 0.162%. Five of
the other links showed throughput decreases of 0.0011% or less. In the
upper Ka-band (where EPFD limits are significantly more restraining)
the maximum decrease in throughput was 0.0148% with five of the other
links having decreases of 0.000012% or less.
5. Encouraging Good-Faith Coordination
 35. Beyond the improvements in technical efficiency of NGSO
operations and attendant lower costs for consumers, a modernized NGSO-
GSO sharing framework can encourage private negotiations where the
current EPFD regime has prevented beneficial bargaining. While ITU
Radio Regulations explicitly permit EPFD limits to be exceeded on the
territory of an administration that so agrees, coordination between any
particular NGSO and GSO operator does not affect the NGSO operator's
obligation to demonstrate adherence to the EPFD limits at the ITU.
Under revised NGSO-GSO sharing rules, private bargaining among GSO and
NGSO operators will have greater relevance. And these benefits will be
added to the significant improvements in NGSO system capacity and
efficiency, with limited impact on GSO operations, and will combine
with the explosive growth of the NGSO satellite industry (which further
increases the benefits of efficiency gains) in comparison with the
relatively stable, or declining, rate of growth of many GSO operations.
 36. Other Commission precedent supports a requirement of good-faith
coordination backstopped by performance-based interference metrics in
the NGSO-GSO sharing context. Indeed, when recently considering
protection requirements between NGSO FSS systems, which universally
incorporate ACM, the Commission adopted a long-term protection
criterion of 3% degraded throughput, and a short-term protection
criterion based on the absolute increase in link unavailability (0.4%),
and it declined to create aggregate limits on NGSO interference into
other NGSO systems. Importantly, the Commission explained that
notwithstanding its newly adopted default protection requirements,
coordination among satellite operators in the first instance ``offers
the best opportunity for efficient spectrum sharing.'' Similarly, when
the Commission revised its two-degree orbital spacing rules for GSO
satellites in 2015 it explicitly acknowledged the value of coordination
agreements reached between GSO satellite operators and offered
continued protection of coordinated operations even when they did not
comply with default, two-degree spacing rules. In addition, there is no
conflict between the comprehensive update to the NGSO-GSO sharing
framework undertaken in this rulemaking based on a substantial
technical record and the previous adoption--in the absence of any well-
developed alternative--of ITU EPFD limits, including in the 17.3-17.8
GHz band, which reflected prior domestic alignment with ITU rules
before a compelling reason to depart from those rules was developed.
 37. We re-emphasize this fundamental principle--that private
agreements, not heavy-handed regulation, lead to the most efficient
satellite spectrum sharing outcomes--and firmly incorporate it into
NGSO-GSO sharing in the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-18.6, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands.
Unlike compliance with EPFD limits, which is assessed by the ITU BR and
effectively replaces any coordination among GSO and NGSO operators in
bands subject to EPFD limits, our default GSO protection criteria and
framework will explicitly recognize and require good-faith
coordination. This is facilitated by the fact that, while we adopt a
default set of GSO reference links below to facilitate technical
showings of compliance with the GSO protection criteria by NGSO
applicants, the particular reference links are taken from particular
satellite networks. We believe interference protections should
ultimately be rooted in real-world interference realities. So when an
NGSO operator completes coordination with a particular GSO network
serving the United States, we will permit the NGSO operator to revise
its technical compatibility showing by omitting the links of the GSO
network with which coordination was completed. By doing so, we avoid
the intractable barriers to coordination under the current regime while
offering a transparent means for agreements between NGSO and GSO
operators to be reflected in the authorized operating parameters of the
NGSO system.
6. Keeping Pace With Technological Advancements
 38. Satellite technology has advanced profoundly since EPFD limits
were developed in the 1990s. Analog satellite transponders have been
replaced by digital systems with onboard processors. Large, fixed beams
have given way to smaller, steerable beams using phase array antennas.
Adaptive coding and modulation techniques allow satellite links to be
maintained despite interference (such as adverse weather) by varying
throughput. Operators have incorporated dynamic beam pointing, uplink
and downlink power control, and network protocols that provide greater
resilience to environmental effects and interference. And on the earth
station side, large dishes have given way to very small aperture
terminals that allow for widespread, cost-effective connectivity.
 39. These technological developments both allow NGSO systems to
better control and limit interference into GSO networks and strengthen
GSO operations' ability to adapt to changing interference environments.
Fundamentally, they have enabled more intensive, compatible shared use
of the spectrum. Indeed, the availability of ACM with expected GSO
networks in the Q- and V-bands was a significant

[[Page 26934]]

factor that led the international community to decline EPFD limits in
the Q- and V-bands and instead adopt an NGSO-GSO sharing framework
incorporating a long-term GSO protection criterion of 3% degraded
throughput.
7. Promoting U.S. Leadership Globally
 40. In launching the NPRM in this proceeding, we concluded it was
appropriate to begin our domestic review of the NGSO-GSO sharing regime
without awaiting the outcome of ongoing deliberations at the ITU.
Experience to date has reinforced that judgment. While individual
member states, including the United States, have continued to
contribute to the ongoing technical studies on the current Article 22
EPFD limits in ITU WP 4A, needless procedural roadblocks and delay
tactics have repeatedly ground international technical discussions to a
halt. Although some stakeholders have suggested deferring domestic
action pending further ITU developments, we believe it is important to
move forward in a timely manner to provide regulatory clarity and
support connectivity for millions of Americans, even as the ITU process
continues toward WRC-27.
 41. At the same time, we believe our approach can promote global
collaboration toward spectrum harmonization. We anticipate that the
record developed in this proceeding, including technical analyses and,
over time, real-world implementation outcomes, may serve as a useful
reference point for the ITU's ongoing work. We also hope that the
Commission's policy framework can contribute constructively to
discussions leading up to WRC-27, as the international community
explores approaches to NGSO-GSO sharing that enhance broadband
performance, expand access in rural and remote areas, promote
competition, and ultimately benefit consumers worldwide.
 42. As we originally anticipated, this rulemaking has compiled an
exceptional technical record--including real-world measurements and
additional, detailed technical simulations not submitted to
international fora--that enable us to make a forward-looking decision
now in the best interests of Americans. While international
deliberations may--and should--converge on a similar revision to the
EPFD framework in the future, the ITU Radio Regulations explicitly
recognize administrations' rights to exceed EPFD limits on their own
territory in the meantime. And such exceedances are technically
feasible without altering EPFD compliance in neighboring countries with
use of narrow, spot beams and other modern NGSO satellite technologies.
Our action will promote American leadership at a time of increasing
global competition.

B. Modernized Sharing Rules for NGSO-GSO

1. Coordination Default and Degraded Throughput Backstop
 43. We consider and ultimately reject countervailing arguments in
favor of retaining the current EPFD limits. One argument is that GSO
operations are uniquely prone to interference. SES, for example,
asserts that the ``EPFD framework is necessary because GSO satellites
operate at fixed orbital positions in a specific orbital arc and cannot
maneuver or switch satellites to mitigate the interference caused by
NGSO systems operating in shared frequency bands.'' However, the EPFD
limits are not the only way to protect GSO networks from unacceptable
interference, as shown by the international adoption of the degraded
throughput methodology to protect GSO networks in Q- and V-bands.
Eutelsat argues that EPFD limits are uniquely suited to protecting GSO
operations, because ``EPFD limits mitigate [the] risks [of dynamic,
time-varying interference caused by NGSO systems] by placing strict
bounds on both peak and aggregate interference levels'' and
``appropriately protect high-value links to support diverse
applications by differentiating EPFD limits according to terminal
characteristics.'' However, the degraded throughput methodology also
limits peak and aggregate interference (or short-term and long-term
interference, in the terminology of a degraded throughput analysis) and
accounts for differing terminal characteristics through a set of GSO
reference links.
 44. In addition, while Viasat argues that alternatives to EPFD
limits are a hinderance to innovation by GSO operators, the degraded
throughput methodology will allow continued innovation by protecting
GSO operators from actual, unacceptable interference, as demonstrated
by the NGSO applicant, while also significantly improving the
efficiency of the NGSO system and use of the spectrum overall. Viasat
also argues that calls for reform of the NGSO-GSO sharing framework are
merely ``calls to hobble competition'' as they rest on ``deeply flawed
claims that eliminating the EPFD limits would not expose existing and
future GSO operations to unacceptable levels of interference.'' While
it is unclear what level of interference Viasat would deem
``acceptable,'' especially considering its support of the extremely
restrictive upper Ka-band EPFD limits, the repeated, months-long, real-
world measurements submitted by SpaceX have demonstrated that EPFD
limits can be exceeded without significant impact to currently
operating GSO networks. Viasat further claims that any reforms to the
NGSO-GSO sharing framework ``would frustrate efforts by GSO operators
to introduce innovative service offerings.'' To the extent this means
the future deployment of earth station terminals particularly
susceptible to interference that require the levels of protection
offered by the upper Ka-band EPFD limits, the burdens on NGSO systems
from such unequal spectrum sharing have not been justified. Viasat and
other commenters also argue that the significant recent growth in NGSO
systems is proof that EPFD limits are not unduly constraining. But the
fact of such growth--spurred by technological advances and the inherent
benefits of lower latency and potentially broader coverage derived from
NGSO satellite constellations, especially in LEO--does not negate any
of the benefits of NGSO-GSO sharing reform.
 45. SES argues that eliminating EPFD protections would shift the
burden of interference mitigation onto GSO operators and the Commission
in administering a new framework. However, NGSO operators would still
have a unilateral requirement to protect GSO networks under a degraded
throughput framework the Commission is already administering in the
NGSO-NGSO sharing context. SES also raises concerns that, without EPFD
limits in place, NGSO operators may tilt the competitive landscape in
their favor and eventually monopolize shared spectrum bands. Yet as
long as NGSO systems have a one-way requirement to protect GSO
networks, and not claim protection from them, it is impossible for NGSO
systems to monopolize the shared spectrum. SES further argues that
moving away from the EPFD regime would devalue GSO service assets
potentially to the point of stranding those assets, and discourage
future GSO investments and innovation. SES provides no economic
evidence in support of this strong claim, nor does it contend that the
use of the degraded throughput methodology in Q- and V-bands has
foreclosed future GSO use of those bands. We believe that under
appropriate protection criteria in a degraded throughput framework GSO
networks can continue to grow and provide valuable services.
 46. Commenters also present technical simulations showing

[[Page 26935]]

exceedances of proposed protection criteria. For example, analyses of
the Amazon system assuming an Nco of 16 and a GSO-arc avoidance angle
as low as 2 degrees indicate exceedances of the proposed threshold
limits at certain locations. An analysis of the Starlink system at a
GSO network earth station in Lima, Peru, assuming an Nco of 8 and a
GSO-arc avoidance angle of 4 degrees, also indicates exceedances of a
0.1% absolute increase in unavailability. Additionally, Eutelsat
presents simulations in which the Starlink system, when using an EPFD-
compliant configuration of an Nco of 1 and a GSO-arc avoidance angle of
18 degrees, would nonetheless exceed the thresholds of 3% degraded
throughput and 0.1% absolute increase in unavailability for the four
analyzed GSO links in Ku-band--thus indicating that the current EPFD
limits may be less protective than the proposed new protection
criteria, a conclusion not suggested by any other commenter and
contrary to the real-world testing summarized above. Ultimately,
compliance with the GSO protection criteria we are adopting must be
demonstrated by the NGSO applicant. If certain NGSO operational
parameters are not currently feasible while meeting those criteria for
the set of GSO reference links, then they will not be permitted. Thus,
simulations showing exceedances for certain NGSO operational parameters
at certain locations do not undermine our conclusion that significant
capacity and service improvements are possible under performance-based
GSO protection criteria, as demonstrated by real-world testing and
technical simulations.
 47. Commenters also present simulations showing exceedances of
proposed protection criteria that demonstrate the interplay between
short-term and long-term interference protections. For example, studies
of the Starlink system in Ka-band assuming an Nco of 40 and a GSO-arc
avoidance angle of either 18 degrees or 4 degrees found less than a
0.1% absolute increase in unavailability at non-ACM GSO network user
terminal locations in Oregon (0.016% and 0.03%, respectively), Utah
(0.041% and 0.056%, respectively), Oklahoma (0.071% and 0.098%,
respectively), Alabama (0.030% and 0.032%, respectively), and New
Mexico (0.046% and 0.095%, respectively); and exceedances of the 0.1%
limit in New York (0.104% and 0.171%, respectively). For the Amazon
system, studies assuming an Nco of 16 and a GSO-arc avoidance angle of
either 6 degrees or 2 degrees in Ka-band showed compliance with a 0.1%
absolute increase in unavailability limit for user terminals in Oregon
(0.025% and 0.038%, respectively) and Alabama (0.01% and 0.035%,
respectively); mixed results--compliance with an avoidance angle of 6
degrees and exceedances at 2 degrees--for earth stations in Oklahoma
(0.024% and 0.566%, respectively), New York (0.03% and 0.39%,
respectively), and New Mexico (0.01% and 1.37%, respectively); and
exceedances for an earth station in Utah (0.14% and 1.47%,
respectively). However, in all these cases for both the Starlink and
Amazon systems, the separate long-term limit proposed for non-ACM GSO
links such as these, -10.5 dB I/N for 80% of the time, was exceeded.
Because both long-term and short-term limits would need to be met at
all locations, the effect of the -10.5 dB I/N long-term limit would
further reduce the expected short-term absolute increases in
unavailability in all cases, even where a 0.1% short-term limit was met
with a wide margin. With ACM networks, analyses for the Amazon Ka-band
system, for example, similarly indicate that the proposed long-term
protection criteria of 3% throughput degradation is the limiting factor
even when a short-term 0.1% absolute increase in unavailability limit
is met.
 48. Having concluded that existing EPFD limits are needlessly
prescriptive, outdated, and overprotective of GSO operations, and that
they unreasonably constrain services by innovative new NGSO systems, we
turn to their replacement. For FSS systems using ACM, we conclude--
again--that the performance-based metrics of throughput degradation and
increase in absolute unavailability represent efficient and appropriate
protection criteria. Indeed, when recently establishing protection
criteria for NGSO-NGSO sharing in bands including the 10.7-12.7, 17.3-
18.6, and 19.7-20.2 GHz bands, the Commission likewise set long-term
and short-term protection thresholds using these metrics. The
Commission did so because, for ACM satellite systems, the degraded
throughput methodology reflects modern technology, results in efficient
spectrum sharing, and is readily administrable. The same reasoning now
applies to the NGSO-GSO sharing context. Even the ITU, when more
recently establishing protections for GSO networks from NGSO systems in
bands between 37.5 GHz and 51.4 GHz, chose a degraded throughput
methodology, not EPFD limits. In contrast, pursuing merely different
EPFD limits would sacrifice the benefits of performance-based metrics
and needlessly delay reform, as parties proposing the development of
new EPFD limits do not themselves propose definitive limits for
adoption.
 49. A degraded throughput methodology does not make enforceability
more difficult than the current EPFD regime. As noted below, under our
modernized framework, NGSO applicants will be required to submit
transparent technical analyses of how they would meet the GSO
protection criteria, which will be subject to public and Commission
review. In contrast, the current ITU compliance assessments have been
noted as ``opaque'' and encouraging ``gamesmanship.'' Nor is the
degraded throughput analysis unduly complex given its benefits, as it
is already used by satellite operators to assess NGSO-GSO interference.
Nor would GSO operators lose the ability to control their service
quality. As we discussed in response to similar concerns in the NGSO-
NGSO sharing context, the interference criteria must be met at all
analyzed locations. Since the worst-case locations will drive NGSO
operators' determinations of appropriate system parameters and any
mitigation measures, the actual degradations in throughput, absolute
increases in unavailability, and I/N levels will be less than the
protection criteria in many circumstances. And studies on the record
confirm these differing impacts. Thus, earth station equipment that is
used for high-availability applications, and that is less sensitive to
sidelobe interference than the most sensitive user terminals to be
protected, will experience real-world effects significantly below the
protection criteria. In a similar vein, Eutelsat raises concerns that
the degraded throughput methodology inappropriately allows a gateway
link to be degraded as much as a user link, although impacts to gateway
links can impact service to numerous customers at once. Again, this is
a theoretical concern that is unlikely, if ever, to occur in reality,
because the NGSO system must be configured to cause no more
interference than the most protective criteria for a GSO link, and
because larger, gateway earth station antennas are inherently less
susceptible to sidelobe interference than smaller user terminals and
therefore will receive less, often substantially less, interference
than the thresholds.
