FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Reducing Barriers to Network Improvements and Service Changes
Document number: 2026-07622
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 20913
Publication date: 2026-04-20

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 75 (Monday, April 20, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 75 (Monday, April 20, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 20913-20939]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-07622]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 51 and 63

[WC Docket Nos. 25-208, 25-209; FCC 26-19; FR ID 340903]


Reducing Barriers to Network Improvements and Service Changes

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) adopted a Report and Order that reduces regulatory
barriers and costs that hinder the transition from outdated legacy
networks and services to next-generation, Internet Protocol (IP)-based
infrastructure. The actions taken in the Report and Order combine
common sense reforms with core consumer protections that bring the
regulatory environment in line with today's communications marketplace
while retaining and adopting safeguards to protect public safety and
ensure 911 continuity. The Report and Order also concludes that if
state or local requirements conflict with the service discontinuance
framework adopted in the Report and Order, such requirements negate
valid federal regulatory objectives and are subject to preemption.

DATES: This rule is effective May 20, 2026, except for instructions 2
(Sec. 51.329), 3 (Sec. 51.333), 6 (Sec. 63.60), 7

[[Page 20914]]

(Sec. 63.62), 8 (Sec. 63.63), 10 (Sec. 63.71), and 12 (Sec.
63.602), which are delayed indefinitely. The Federal Communications
Commission will publish a document in the Federal Register announcing
the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information about this
proceeding, please contact Michele Berlove, Competition Policy
Division, Wireline Competition Bureau, at (202) 418-1477, or
 [email protected] . For additional information concerning the
Paperwork Reduction Act proposed information collection requirements
contained in this document, send an email to [email protected] or contact
Nicole Ongele at (202) 418-2991.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order in WC Docket Nos. 25-208, 25-209; FCC 26-19, adopted on March
26, 2026, and released on March 27, 2026. The full text of this
document is available for public inspection at the following internet
address: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-19A1.pdf .

Synopsis

I. Discussion

A. Eliminate Network Change Disclosure Filing Requirements

 1. We adopt our proposal in the Network and Services Modernization
Notice (90 FR 41490 (8/28/2025)) to encourage rapid deployment of high-
speed, more resilient infrastructure by eliminating all filing
requirements in the Commission's network change disclosure rules and
the Commission's process of issuing public notices for short-term
network changes and copper retirements and the associated objection
process for interconnected service providers. (We note that, while not
required by the existing rules, the Bureau typically released Public
Notices of long-term network changes as well. However, the objection
process set forth in Sec. 51.333 did not apply to such network change
notices.) These actions effectively codify the relief granted by the
Bureau in the Network Change Disclosure Waiver Order (NCD Waiver
Order). Incumbent local exchange carriers (LECs) will continue to be
required to post public notice of planned network changes through
industry fora, industry publications, or on the carrier's publicly
accessible internet site without the obligation to file duplicative
information with the Commission. To ensure clear notice specifically to
interconnecting carriers, incumbent LECs must continue to (1) provide
direct notice of copper retirements and short-term network changes to
directly interconnected telephone exchange service providers, 911
service providers (defined as an entity that provides 911, E911, or
NG911 capabilities such as call routing, automatic location information
(ALI), automatic number identification (ANI), or the functional
equivalent of those capabilities, directly to a public safety answering
point (PSAP), statewide default answering point, or appropriate local
emergency authority as defined in Sec. 9.3; and/or operates one or
more central offices that directly serve a PSAP), and directly
interconnecting local exchange service providers that support essential
functions within 911 networks, including delivering 911 traffic to
selective routers for transmission to public safety answering points
(PSAPs), and (2) provide public notice and communicate directly with
interconnected telephone exchange service providers about network
changes resulting from force majeure events and other events outside of
the incumbent LEC's control. (As previously noted by the Commission,
our network change disclosure rules do not negate any specific notice
obligations contained in privately negotiated contracts.) We note that
the action we take today does not absolve incumbent LECs of their
obligation under Section 214(a) to obtain Commission authorization for
a copper retirement or other network change as defined in Sec.
51.325(a) of our rules that also results in a service discontinuance
and, indeed, works hand-in-hand with our actions taken below to ensure
continued 911 connectivity when a carrier seeks to discontinue a
service supporting interconnection trunks or the exchange of traffic,
including but not limited to 911 trunks and 911 traffic. (We note that
INCOMPAS has asked that ``copper retirement must not be permitted in
areas where competitive providers rely on legacy loops to reach end-
user customers and where no viable wholesale replacement exists.'' And
CWA has asserted that the actions we take today ``fail[ ] to account
for the significant workforce implications associated with accelerated
copper retirement.'' However, as the Commission has previously noted,
section 251(c)(5) established a notice-based network change disclosure
process, and the Commission thus has no authority to prohibit copper
retirements. And impacts of our actions on the workforce are similarly
outside the scope of the purpose of Section 251(c)(5)'s public notice
requirement, which pertains to impacts on interoperability of the
communications networks.)
 2. Excessive regulatory burdens prevent carriers from investing in
and deploying next-generation networks that are needed to support
modern communication services. Various commenters have noted that
eliminating all filing requirements while maintaining the public notice
requirements will streamline the transition from legacy networks while
still ensuring interconnecting entities receive adequate notice. We
agree with NTCA that this approach ``strike[s] the appropriate balance
between reducing regulatory burden and ensuring stakeholders remain
informed of network changes.''
 3. We find that adopting the change in filing and notice
requirements proposed in the Network and Services Modernization Notice
will not have any impact on the notices end users receive of planned
network changes. Neither Section 251(c)(5) nor our implementing rules
impose end-user notice obligations. Rather, carriers provide such
notices to end users as a matter of practice. In the NCD Waiver Order,
the Bureau noted that it received no comments in opposition to the more
than 400 network change disclosure filings it processed and for which
it released public notices over the preceding two years. And since
issuing that Order, the Bureau has received no request or objection
indicating that the lack of a filing or agency-issued Public Notice has
resulted in disruption to the transmission or routing of services over
an incumbent LEC's facilities. In response to our requests for comment
in the Network and Services Modernization Notice on whether any public
benefit exists from requiring incumbent LECs to file network change
disclosures with the Commission and whether publishing notices of
network changes on carriers' websites provides reasonable public notice
of network changes, commenters suggest the lack of objections submitted
in response to Commission network change Public Notices indicates that
filing network change disclosures has become a purely administrative
task that does not provide any value. Interconnected telephone exchange
service providers may still raise concerns regarding short-term network
changes and copper retirements through less formal Commission
processes.
 4. We conclude that eliminating all filing requirements and
publication of Commission-issued public notices will reduce delays and
encourage development and deployment of modernized networks. Reducing

[[Page 20915]]

regulatory costs and obligations encourages investment in modern
networks and advanced communications services in all areas, especially
those that are expensive to serve due to low population density or
challenging topography. Carriers will not need to divert funds and
resources to complying with burdensome regulations, allowing them to
devote these resources elsewhere. (While the Commission cannot direct
how incumbent LECs spend money gained from the reduction in regulatory
costs and obligations, reducing costs associated with deployment of
networks generally makes all service areas attractive for investment.)
 5. We are not persuaded by the Alarm Industry Communications
Committee's assertion that having network change notices only posted on
incumbent LECs' publicly accessible websites ``significantly reduces
public visibility of critical infrastructure changes.'' The purpose of
Section 251(c)(5)'s public notice requirement was to promote
competition. When the Commission adopted its regulations implementing
Section 251(c)(5), it noted the limited resources available to smaller
carriers that might not participate in industry fora and publications.
It thus included the filing requirement to ensure that ``all carriers,
competing service providers, and potential competitors . . . have equal
opportunities to provide and to receive change information on a
national scale.'' And when the Commission expressly added copper
retirements to its network change disclosure scheme, it required that
incumbent LECs provide direct notice of such network changes to
interconnecting telephone exchange service providers, ensured that
those interconnecting carriers received at least 90-days advance notice
of the planned copper retirement, afforded those providers the
opportunity to object, and noted that objections would be deemed denied
``[u]nless the copper retirement scenario suggests that competitors
will be denied access to the loop facilities required under our rules''
absent Commission action on the objection within the 90-day advance
notice period. Thus, the purpose of the filing requirement was never
about ``public visibility of critical infrastructure changes.''
However, we require that the method of notice the incumbent LEC uses be
publicly accessible--i.e., not behind a paywall.
 6. We do not take the alternative approach of forbearing from all
public notice requirements imposed by Section 251(c)(5) and our
implementing rules because we find that forbearance is not justified at
this time. Section 10 of the Act requires the Commission to forbear
from applying any requirement of the Act or of its regulations to a
telecommunications carrier or telecommunications service if the
Commission determines that (1) enforcement of the requirement ``is not
necessary to ensure that the charges, practices, classifications, or
regulations by, for, or in connection with that telecommunications
carrier or telecommunications service are just and reasonable and are
not unjustly or unreasonably discriminatory,'' (2) enforcement of that
requirement ``is not necessary for the protection of consumers,'' and
(3) ``forbearance from applying such provision or regulation is
consistent with the public interest.'' All three conditions must be met
to support forbearance relief. (We disagree with Wired Broadband et
al.'s assertion that Section 251(c)(5)'s public notice requirement ``is
part of Americans' procedural due process rights'' under the Fifth
Amendment. This requirement is not subject to the Fifth Amendment's due
process clause as the public notice required under that statutory
provision is issued by a private company, not a government entity.)
Thus, while we decline to forbear from these public notice requirements
at this time, we note that future forbearance from these requirements
would not violate the Constitution as the public notice is issued by a
private company not a government entity.
 7. Based on the record in this proceeding, we conclude that the
conditions for granting forbearance relief from all network change
disclosure requirements do not exist at this time and that any
framework or guidance regarding interconnection with incumbent LEC
networks during and after the transition to internet protocol (IP) is
more appropriately addressed in the context of the proposed forbearance
from the incumbent LEC-specific interconnection and related obligations
in the October 2025 IP Interconnection Notice (90 FR 54266 (11/26/
2025)). The rule we adopt today eliminating network change disclosure
filing requirements achieves the appropriate balance between providing
reasonable public notice of planned network changes and relieving
incumbent LECs of unnecessary regulatory burdens.
 8. Ensuring practices are just and reasonable (Section 10(a)(1)).
We conclude that enforcement of the public notice requirements imposed
by Section 251(c)(5) and our implementing rules is necessary to ensure
incumbent LECs' practices are just and reasonable. Forbearance from all
requirements in Section 251(c)(5) and our implementing rules would
allow incumbent LECs to make network changes or copper retirements
without public notice, which might affect interoperability with
interconnecting providers and may result in unintended service
disruptions. Public notice of network changes generally and copper
retirement notices specifically ensures that incumbent LECs' practices
are ``just and reasonable and are not unjustly or unreasonably
discriminatory'' by requiring that interconnecting carriers receive
timely notice regarding changes that may inhibit their ability to
provide services to their end-user customers.
 9. Ensuring protection of consumers (Section 10(a)(2)). We find
that enforcement of the public notice requirements imposed by Section
251(c)(5) and our implementing rules is necessary for the protection of
consumers. The requirement that incumbent LECs provide reasonable
public notice of network changes is meant to alert interconnecting
carriers to changes that might affect their interoperability with the
incumbent LEC's network. Lack of such notice and the opportunity to
ensure interoperability might cause unintentional disruption of
services, ultimately harming consumers.
 10. Consistent with the public interest (Section 10(a)(3)). We
conclude that forbearance from the public notice requirements imposed
by Section 251(c)(5) and our implementing rules would not be consistent
with the public interest. As shown overwhelmingly in the record, lack
of notice at this time could significantly impact the provision of 911
services. While the transition to Next-Generation 911 (NG911) is
progressing alongside broader IP modernization, the NG911 transition
faces unique challenges and may not be complete for some time. As we
noted in the Network and Services Modernization Notice, ``network
transitions subject to Section 251(c)(5) may occur in areas where 911
authorities and originating service providers (OSPs) have not yet
transitioned to . . . [NG911] and will therefore continue for some time
to rely on legacy selective routers and other TDM (time-division
multiplexing)-based infrastructure for delivery of 911 calls to public
safety answering points (PSAPs)'' during this period of overlap. Until
the NG911 transition is complete, it is imperative that carriers
coordinate with state and local 911. Authorities and 911 service
providers, as defined above, and directly interconnecting local
exchange service providers that support essential

[[Page 20916]]

functions within 911 networks so that they are aware of network changes
that could impact their ability to provide these critical services.

B. Section 214 Discontinuance

 11. We next revise our rules implementing Section 214(a) of the Act
to bring them in line with the realities of today's communications
marketplace. First, we adopt our proposal to simplify our rules
applicable to technology transitions discontinuances by establishing
one consolidated rule applicable to all technology transitions
discontinuance applications. (Our technology transitions discontinuance
rules apply only to discontinuance of a retail wireline voice service--
i.e., loop-side services. It does not apply to trunk-side services
provided to another carrier, such as interconnection trunks.) Second,
we adopt our proposal to grant blanket authorization for carriers to
grandfather any legacy voice service, data telecommunications services
operating at speeds below 25/3 Mbps, and interconnected VoIP service
provisioned over copper facilities. Third, we establish requirements
for applications to discontinue a service supporting interconnection
trunks or the exchange of traffic, to ensure continued support for 911
service and also to ensure access for interconnecting providers on non-
TDM services. Fourth, we forbear from Section 214(a) requirements in
certain circumstances for resold service. Fifth, we adopt our proposal
to apply a 31-day automatic grant period to all discontinuance
applications regardless of the applicant's status as dominant or non-
dominant. Sixth, we clarify the required contents of discontinuance
applications. Seventh, we adopt our proposal to revise our rules
applicable to emergency discontinuances to address specific situations
where a carrier may wish to permanently discontinue a service after the
Commission has granted emergency discontinuance authority. Finally, we
clear from the books outdated and irrelevant discontinuance rules. We
do not act at this time on our proposal to forbear from the requirement
that carriers provide notice of planned discontinuances to State
Governors and the Secretary of Defense, as required by Section 214(b).
1. Creating One Consolidated Technology Transitions Discontinuance Rule
 12. As part of the Commission's ongoing efforts to reduce
regulatory burdens and thus allow providers to invest more resources
toward modernizing their networks and developing and deploying newer,
more advanced services, we adopt our proposal in the Network and
Services Modernization Notice to revise the rules applicable to
technology transitions discontinuances by replacing the Adequate
Replacement Test and the Alternative Options Test with a single
consolidated technology transitions discontinuance rule. (The
provisions of Section 63.71(f)(2) pertain to last-mile, end-user legacy
voice service.) In conjunction with this revision, we also eliminate
Sec. 63.602 and amend Sec. 63.71 of our rules to set forth content
requirements applicable to all discontinuance applications, including
certain information set forth in Sec. 63.505. With respect to
technology transitions discontinuance applications, we continue to
require that applications contain a statement identifying the
application as involving a technology transition. This consolidated
rule stipulates that an application to discontinue a currently offered
retail voice service as part of a technology transition is eligible for
streamlined processing if the applicant certifies that one or more of
the following replacement services is available in every location
throughout the affected service area: (1) a facilities-based
interconnected VoIP service; (2) a facilities-based mobile wireless
service; (3) a voice service offered pursuant to an obligation from one
of the Commission's modernized high-cost support programs; (4) a voice
service that has been available from the applicant throughout the
affected service area for the previous six months and for which the
carrier has at least a certain number of existing subscribers and which
supports access to 911; or (5) a widely available alternative voice
service that supports access to 911. (In adopting the Adequate
Replacement Test, the Commission stated that ``in order to meet [the
network coverage] prong and thus be eligible for streamlined
processing, a replacement service must be available to all affected
customers covering the entire geographic scope of the service area
subject to the application and actually function as intended for
affected customers, or else it cannot be certified as a replacement
service for those customers,'' thus ``promot[ing] the core value
established by the Act, including that of ensuring universal access.''
Commenter concerns regarding ``reliance on facilities not yet built and
technologies not yet deployed,'' are obviated by the requirement that
the replacement service must be available in all locations throughout
the affected service area in order to be eligible for streamlined
processing. A facilities-based service is any service that is offered
using (1) physical facilities that the provider owns and that terminate
at the end-user premises; (2) facilities that the provider has obtained
the right to use from other entities, such as dark fiber or satellite
transponder capacity as part of its own network, or has obtained; (3)
unbundled network element (UNE) loops, special access lines, or other
leased facilities that the entity uses to complete terminations to the
end-user premises; (4) wireless spectrum for which the provider holds a
license or that the provider manages or has obtained the right to use
via a spectrum leasing arrangement or comparable arrangement pursuant
to 47 CFR 1.9001-1.9080; or (5) unlicensed spectrum.) Upon due
consideration of the record in this proceeding and the ample support
for this approach reflected therein, we find that this rule will
accelerate the application process while simultaneously protecting
legacy service customers by ensuring that they have replacement service
options available to them when their legacy service is discontinued.
This in turn will ensure that consumers receive the benefits of
technology transitions with ``all reasonable efficiency.''
 14. We find that replacing both the Adequate Replacement Test and
the Alternative Options Test with the single consolidated rule we adopt
today, along with the application content requirements discussed below,
will more effectively accelerate and streamline the technology
transitions discontinuance process while still providing adequate
protection to consumers. We find that, rather than minimizing
uncertainty and confusion, the Adequate Replacement Test actually
caused widespread confusion that may have prevented carriers from
pursuing technology transition discontinuances under the test, as
evidenced by the fact that the Commission did not receive its first
technology transitions discontinuance application pursuant to the
Adequate Replacement Test until nearly eight years after the rule was
adopted and six years after its effective date. (The filing of that
application was itself delayed by several months while AT&T conducted
the performance testing delineated in the Technical Appendix to the
2016 Technology Transitions Order (81 FR 62632 (09/12/2016)). This
extended timeline is contrary to a streamlined process.) We further
find that the Alternative Options Test has failed to align with
competitive marketplace options and has hampered investment and
innovation in modern

[[Page 20917]]

services by effectively discouraging applicants from filing to
discontinue legacy voice services under that test. Indeed, in the
nearly seven years since the Alternative Options Test was adopted, the
Bureau has found that presumptive streamlined treatment under the test
was utilized only eight times. We agree with the International Center
for Law & Economics that making it costly and time-consuming for
carriers to exit obsolete and inefficient copper-based services slows
the flow of capital toward the deployment of next-generation networks,
where it is needed. Creating one straightforward, consolidated rule
that applies to all technology transitions discontinuance applications
will more effectively accelerate and streamline the technology
transitions discontinuance process while still providing adequate
protection to consumers than revising the Adequate Replacement Test and
the Alternative Options Test.
 15. A discontinuance application can rely on the availability of
multiple replacement services, particularly when the application
encompasses multiple wire centers covering large geographic areas. We
decline to adopt Public Knowledge's proposal to require applicants to
identify the replacement service they are relying on for each
subscriber address. Requiring such a level of granularity would impose
an unreasonable burden on carriers and is not always necessary to
confirm the availability of the replacement service(s) across the
geographic area subject to discontinuance. However, we do find merit in
requiring applicants to provide a greater level of detail than simply
providing a high-level aggregate list of which replacement services it
relies on for any given large geographic area covered by the
application. In order to minimize the burden on carriers while still
providing Bureau staff with sufficient information to evaluate the
availability of the replacement services and thus the impact on the
public convenience and necessity, we afford carriers flexibility in how
they break down the available replacement services in the various
affected service areas. We thus require carriers to identify the
available replacement services using the smallest practicable
geographic unit depending on the geographic areas implicated by the
specific application at issue, which could consist of, among other
things, census blocks, census block groups, or ZIP codes. If the
information regarding the geographic availability of the replacement
service(s) is insufficient or incomplete, the Bureau may require
additional information as necessary for its review.
a. Specific Categories of Adequate Replacement Services
 16. As delineated above, the consolidated rule we adopt today sets
forth five categories of replacement services that an application to
discontinue a currently offered retail voice service as part of a
technology transition can rely on to be eligible for streamlined
processing. We now address each of these categories in turn.
 17. The Commission has previously declined to adopt presumptions or
exclusions regarding specific types of replacement services, stating
that the ``public interest analysis demands that applicants provide
objective evidence showing a replacement service will provide quality
service and access to needed applications and functionalities.'' Given
the rapid developments in the communications marketplace since the
Commission adopted the Adequate Replacement and Alternative Options
Tests, we find the Commission's concerns in 2016 and 2018 have been
obviated. While some commenters contend that replacing the Adequate
Replacement Test and the Alternative Options Test with the consolidated
rule we adopt today will harm consumers and leave them with substandard
alternative connections, we find that these concerns, too, are
unfounded.
 18. Since 2018, communications technology has improved, and the
marketplace for voice services, including interconnected VoIP and
mobile voice, has vastly expanded and spurred the creation of new and
innovative communications technologies that benefit consumers and whose
usage has far surpassed that of legacy voice service. Indeed,
interconnected VoIP lines have jumped from 58% of all retail fixed
voice service connections in 2018 to over 79% by December of 2024. The
number of legacy switched access connections has dropped precipitously
since 2018 while the number of fixed broadband connections that support
over-the-top interconnected VoIP service rose to 91 residential fixed
broadband connections per 100 households with speeds of at least 25
Mbps/3 Mbps by the end of 2024. These rapid changes in the marketplace
demonstrate that consumers now have access to a wide array of voice
services provisioned over a variety of technologies. And this disparity
between legacy voice service and interconnected VoIP connections will
only increase as fiber deployments around the country continue. (The
latest report issued by the Fiber Broadband Association indicates that
the number of homes with access to fiber increased by 11% in 2025,
despite rising costs associated with rising labor costs, tariffs on
imported materials, and inflation. According to this report, more than
60% of American homes are now passed by fiber. And the majority of
eligible locations in 2025 in the BEAD program will use fiber.)
 19. We conclude that, rather than allowing legacy voice services to
be discontinued and replaced with inferior options, specifying explicit
categories of adequate replacement services will implement a baseline
of quality and availability for replacement services in the event of a
discontinuance, thus ensuring that no consumer receives replacement
services that fall beneath a certain level of service. (As the
Commission noted in the 2016 Technology Transitions Order, ``[t]he
Bureau will normally authorize the discontinuance `unless it is shown
that customers would be unable to receive service or a reasonable
substitute from another carrier or that the public convenience or
necessity is otherwise adversely affected.' '') Moreover, we find that
specifying categories of adequate replacement services will provide
greater certainty for carriers regarding the kinds of replacement
services that could result in the Commission removing a technology
transitions discontinuance application from streamlined processing. We
also find that the federal government's interest in having a coherent
national policy on these matters outweighs state governments' interests
in the types of service that may qualify as adequate replacements for
purposes of streamlined discontinuance applications. As observed by the
Telecommunications Industry Association, clear guidance on what
qualifies as a replacement service will allow providers to know what
attributes a potential successor service must possess as they work to
improve their community's services. The categories of adequate
replacement services we adopt today will furnish providers with
sufficient criteria to provide certainty in planning transitions, and
ensure that consumers in geographically rural, insular communities,
including Tribal communities, the disability community, and other
vulnerable communities have access to advanced service options.
 20. We conclude that the approach we adopt today will not impede
access to critical applications such as home security alarms and
medical monitoring devices given the wide array of IP-based devices and
over-the-top services that

[[Page 20918]]

perform similar functions available on the market today. Our
streamlined processing rules still require carriers to notify customers
of their applications to discontinue service, which must be done no
later than the date they file their applications, and provide
information regarding replacement service options. Thus, even in
instances where a carrier may seek to avail itself of streamlined
processing of its discontinuance application, any customers or other
interested stakeholders with concerns--including about the technical
and interoperability information for a specific replacement service--
have the opportunity to file comments or objections to that application
with the Commission. Should the Bureau have any concerns about whether
a particular request to discontinue service could adversely affect the
public interest, it will remove the application from streamlined
processing for closer review, thus mitigating the risk that a
replacement service of inferior quality or availability will be imposed
upon consumers in the event of a discontinuance. (In light of the
opportunities to identify instances where a proposed discontinuance may
result in a loss of service to a customer without an adequate
replacement, we decline to adopt additional remediation requirements
after the approval of the discontinuance.) Meanwhile, the streamlined
process will more efficiently deliver access to modernized services
that better support functions like home security and telehealth, as
compared to the legacy networks in place today. And the providers of
these devices and services have been on notice for almost a decade that
the list of ``key applications'' contained in the 2016 Technology
Transitions Order as part of the Adequate Replacement Test was
temporary. Indeed, under the rules adopted in 2016, the requirement
that ``replacement services [ ] be compatible with these devices''
sunset in 2025.
 21. We decline to impose on technology transitions discontinuance
authorizations a condition that ``the replacement service support G.711
codec handshake with RFC 2833 disabled on calls to telephone numbers
serving life safety alarm monitoring receivers, end-to-end through all
carrier handoffs,'' as recommend by AICC. Introducing a new
compatibility requirement for legacy devices, ten years after the 2016
Technology Transitions Order established a sunset date for
compatibility for alarms using low-speed modem devices, would introduce
unnecessary delay from the transition to modern, reliable services.
Such a requirement is also impracticable if the discontinuing carrier
relies on the availability of one or more replacement services offered
by third parties. In such instances, the discontinuing carrier has no
control over the configuration of the network over which the
replacement service is provisioned. However, we encourage carriers to
ensure their IP networks are appropriately configured so as to prevent
alarm signaling failures.
 22. Facilities-based interconnected VoIP service. We find that
facilities-based interconnected VoIP service is an adequate replacement
for purposes of determining eligibility for streamlined processing.
(There is also evidence that facilities-based interconnected VoIP
service compares favorably in price on average to legacy voice
services. Interconnected VoIP providers must meet applicable E911
service requirements as a condition of providing service to consumers
and must support NG911 service upon the request of a 911 Authority.) As
the Commission recently found, interconnected VoIP service benefits
consumers by providing access to networks that can support advanced
protocols and technologies, such as STIR/SHAKEN, which helps protect
consumers from illegally spoofed robocalls, and NG911, which will help
save lives by ensuring faster call delivery to 911 call centers through
improved reliability and resiliency, enhanced information about the
caller's location and the nature of the emergency, and the ability to
receive additional multimedia, including video.
 23. The only specific opposition in the record does not dispute the
quality of facilities-based interconnected VoIP service but instead
raises competition concerns. NASUCA et al. broadly oppose all of the
specific categories of replacement services proposed in the Network and
Services Modernization Notice but do not raise arguments specific to
facilities-based interconnected VoIP services. Other commenters object
to our finding that VoIP need not be offered on a stand-alone basis to
be considered an adequate replacement. We address those arguments
below. We find AARP's claim that there is not sufficient competition in
the interconnected VoIP market to be overstated in light of the current
state of competition and our continuing ability to remove applications
from streamlined processing should the need arise. We agree that in the
context of wireline voice services, the availability of service from
another provider may provide competitive benefits for consumers. As of
December 2023, at least 95% of the U.S. population had 4G LTE coverage
from at least three service providers. And to the extent that the
affected customers will have access to a facilities-based
interconnected VoIP service, they will have the option to purchase
broadband access, giving them access to a multitude of communications
applications, including over-the-top VoIP service. Moreover, the
Commission's standards for streamlined and non-streamlined processing
of discontinuance applications continue to apply. If the Bureau has
concerns regarding whether it is in the public interest to grant a
particular request to discontinue service--including relevant
considerations of competition in a given service area--it can remove
that application from streamlined processing and engage in a further
review. Other than AARP, no commenters weighed in specifically on the
appropriateness of facilities-based interconnected VoIP service as an
adequate replacement for purposes of eligibility for streamlined
processing.
 24. Facilities-based mobile wireless service. We find facilities-
based mobile wireless service operating at speeds of at least 5/1 Mbps,
as reflected on the National Broadband Map, to be an adequate
replacement for purposes of eligibility for streamlined processing.
(The 5/1 Mbps broadband speed is a proxy for services with sufficient
quality to be adequate replacement services.) Mobile telephony (mobile
voice) service is a real-time, two-way voice service that is
interconnected with the public switched network using an in-network
switching facility that enables the provider to reuse frequencies and
accomplish seamless handoff of subscriber calls. As of December 2024,
there were approximately 390.9 million mobile voice subscriptions in
the United States; and according to preliminary data from the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, as of December 2023, approximately
76% of adults were living in and relying on a wireless-only household,
with adults in lower age-groups more likely to live in wireless-only
households. As the market has thus spoken on the adequacy of mobile
wireless service, we disagree with Public Knowledge's argument that a
facilities-based mobile wireless service is not a suitable replacement
for a wireline voice service in the context of a Section 214(a)
discontinuance review. (In addition to these objections, multiple
parties filed comments asserting concerns about the potential negative
health impact of increased electromagnetic radiation as a result of

[[Page 20919]]

the retirement of legacy copper networks and the increased use of
wireless alternatives. Commission-regulated equipment is subject to our
rules limiting human exposure to radio frequency (RF) emissions from
such equipment, as applicable. The Commission's rules limiting human
exposure to RF emissions are outside the scope of this proceeding. As
of December 31, 2024, we note that 4G LTE is available at 99% of
locations and 5G-NR at speeds of at least 7/1 Mbps is available at 96%
of locations nationwide.) As the Commission recently noted, ``consumers
continue to rely more heavily on mobile wireless services,'' and that
these services have thus ``become an essential part of everyday life.''
(As of December 31, 2024, we note that 4G LTE is available at 99% of
locations and 5G-NR at speeds of at least 7/1 Mbps is available at 96%
of locations nationwide. Multiple parties filed comments asserting
concerns about the potential negative health impact of increased
electromagnetic radiation as a result of the retirement of legacy
copper networks and the increased use of wireless alternatives.
Commission-regulated equipment is subject to our rules limiting human
exposure to radio frequency (RF) emissions from such equipment, as
applicable. The Commission's rules limiting human exposure to RF
emissions are outside the scope of this proceeding.)
 25. We decline to adopt additional verification requirements for
the availability of mobile wireless service beyond the data reflected
in the National Broadband Map, as suggested by some commenters. While
NTCA contends that despite broadband mapping improvement over time, it
``remains unreliable on a granular level in many rural areas'' and thus
that the Commission should proceed with caution, we find that there are
already sufficient safeguards in place to account for discrepancies,
including in rural areas, without the need to adopt more stringent,
mobile-specific verification requirements at this time. As compared to
the initial months following the launch of the National Broadband Map,
the data reflected in the map has become much less susceptible to
correction through the challenge process, resulting in a more stable
dataset to inform the agency's work. Based on internal staff analysis,
the total number of challenges to the National Broadband Map in 2025 as
of June 30 equaled one-half of one percent of the total number of
challenges filed in the same period in 2022. And approximately nine
percent of the challenges filed in that period in 2025 were conceded or
upheld, whereas almost 81 percent of the challenges filed during the
equivalent time period in 2022 were conceded or upheld. Nevertheless,
if consumers or stakeholders have concerns regarding a provider's
reported mobile coverage data as reflected on the National Broadband
Map, they may file a mapping challenge and initiate a review of the
reported coverage data in the specified location. To file a challenge
to the availability data in the National Broadband Map, go to https://broadbandmap.fcc.gov/home , type the relevant location into the search
bar, select the `Mobile Broadband' tab, and click on the `Mobile
Challenge' link.) Indeed, affected customers faced with a planned
technology transitions discontinuance relying on the availability of a
facilities-based mobile wireless service, as well as other interested
stakeholders such as public interest groups and state public utility
commissions, may also file objections and seek to have the Bureau
remove the application from streamlined processing for further review
of the availability of mobile wireless service in the affected service
area. Given the existence of these guardrails, we find it unnecessary
and redundant to implement additional mobile-specific verification
requirements as part of this current rulemaking. Such a requirement
would negate the primary purpose of this rulemaking--to make technology
transitions more efficient and encourage the deployment of advanced,
next-generation networks--while providing no material benefit that is
not already available to consumers via the two review mechanisms
enumerated above.
 26. Voice service funded by Commission modernized high-cost
mechanisms. We find facilities-based voice services provided via
funding from one of the Commission's modernized high-cost support
mechanisms to be an adequate replacement for the purposes of
eligibility for streamlined processing. We exclude from the purview of
this rule any legacy high-cost support mechanisms that do not contain
the same deployment reporting obligations as the modernized mechanisms.
The Commission began modernizing its universal service high-cost
support mechanisms in 2011 with the USF/ICC Transformation Order (76 FR
76623 (12/08/2011)), which established the Connect America Fund (CAF).
In that Order, the Commission required support recipients to offer
broadband service in addition to the supported ``voice telephony''
service. (The Commission requires recipients of CAF Phase II support
``to offer broadband service with latency suitable for real-time
applications, including Voice over internet Protocol [VoIP], and usage
capacity that is reasonably comparable to comparable offerings in urban
areas, at rates that are reasonably comparable to rates for comparable
offerings in urban areas.'') In the years since, the Commission has
established additional mechanisms to support voice- and broadband-
capable networks. Recipients of these mechanisms must offer voice
telephony at rates that are reasonably comparable to urban rates and
must report compliance with their deployment obligations showing where
they have built out the required facilities and offer voice and
broadband service. They also must provide access to emergency services
via 911 and provide E911 capabilities wherever local governments have
implemented those systems. No commenters disputed the appropriateness
of voice service provided via funding from one of the Commission's
modernized high-cost support mechanisms as an adequate replacement for
purposes of eligibility for streamlined processing, and we find it
reasonable to accept such service as an adequate replacement.
 27. Carrier's already available alternative voice service. We find
that, where a carrier has already made available its own alternative
voice service throughout the affected service area, the service is an
adequate replacement for the service being discontinued in that area
for purposes of eligibility for streamlined processing if that service
has been available for at least the immediately preceding 60 days and
the carrier certifies that based on the results of its own internal
network testing routinely undertaken to measure performance in rolling
out a new product or service, the service offers substantially similar
levels of network performance and availability--for example, that it is
provisioned over a network with speeds of at least 25/3 Mbps and that
it offers mouth-to-ear latency of no more than 200 ms--and permits
users generally to receive calls that originate on the public switched
telephone network and to terminate calls to the public switched
telephone network or any successor network that utilizes numbers issued
pursuant to the North American Numbering Plan. We find that these
standards better accomplish our goal of encouraging the development of
modern communications service offerings than

[[Page 20920]]

the proposed standards on which we sought comment--i.e., that the
replacement service in question must have been available for a minimum
time period of the immediately preceding six months throughout the
affected service area, and that at least 50 percent of the carrier's
total voice service customer base in the affected service area must be
subscribed to the alternative voice service (this analysis is not
limited to residential subscribers alone, and should include enterprise
subscribers.)--without undue delay while still ensuring that consumers
have available to them an adequate replacement service. Finally, the
service must provide access to 911 and comply fully with our 911
requirements applicable to that service. We require carriers to
describe any such replacement service and to certify that it meets
these temporal, subscriber percentage, and public safety requirements.
As a whole, we find that these requirements adequately balance the need
to ensure a service is stable and satisfies the Commission's goal of
ensuring that carriers can rapidly transition their resources and
investments toward next-generation services. No commenters disputed the
appropriateness of such service as an adequate replacement for purposes
of eligibility for streamlined processing, and we find it reasonable to
accept such service as an adequate replacement.
 28. Widely available alternative voice service. We find a widely
available alternative voice service offered by a third party that is
available in all locations throughout an affected service area and
provides access to 911 and complies fully with applicable 911
requirements, to be an adequate replacement for purposes of being
eligible for streamlined processing if the carrier certifies that based
on publicly available information, the service offers substantially
similar levels of network performance and availability and permits
users generally to receive calls that originate on the public switched
telephone network and to terminate calls to the public switched
telephone network or any successor network that utilizes numbers issued
pursuant to the North American Numbering Plan. Permitting a
discontinuing carrier to rely on the availability of an adequate
replacement service offered by a third party to support a technology
transitions discontinuance application and to rely on publicly
available information to make the requisite showing is consistent with
previous Commission action. We find that this flexible approach will
minimize burdens on carriers while safeguarding consumers' need for an
adequate replacement service.
 29. Permitting third-party alternative voice service with access to
911 and substantially similar levels of network performance and
availability as the service being discontinued to serve as a
replacement service will enable innovative new service offerings, such
as low-earth orbit satellite-based services, to qualify as replacement
services without requiring the Commission to engage in additional time-
consuming rulemaking proceedings and is consistent with both our
standards applicable to voice services funded by our modernized high-
cost universal service support mechanisms discussed earlier in this
section and the standards the Commission previously adopted in
connection with the Adequate Replacement Test.
 30. We find that the standards we adopt for eligibility of a widely
available alternative voice service for streamlined processing obviate
NTCA's concerns regarding that the proposed widely adopted alternative
voice service category as set forth in the Network and Services
Modernization Notice is a ``highly detailed and fact-specific view of a
particular market/geographic area,'' and that such a ``fact-specific
inquiry is more suited to a waiver proceeding under which the
Commission can analyze data brought forth by a petitioning provider as
opposed to utilizing a certification that fails to analyze such data
across the market in question.'' We further find that these standards
address the concerns raised by Public Knowledge after release of the
public draft of this Order that this replacement service category would
not afford sufficient safeguards for consumers and thus might
incentivize discontinuing carriers to rely on third-party services for
which they do not need to make the showings required when relying on
the carrier's own already-available alternative voice service. The
standards we adopt today for this alternative service option provide
sufficient backstops to provide predictability and protect consumers.
Moreover, as we have noted above, our streamlined processing rules
still require carriers to notify customers of their applications to
discontinue service and provide information regarding replacement
service options. Customers with concerns about the adequacy of the
purportedly ``widely available'' alternative service, as well as other
interested parties, can file comments or objections to an application
for streamlined processing with the Commission, and the Bureau has the
discretion to remove the application from streamlined processing for
further review, including the ability to request supplemental
information from the applicant. We further expressly delegate to the
Bureau the authority to remove from streamlined processing an
application relying on this category of replacement service if the
service has little to no customers. Bureau staff may consider the
extent to which the widely available service has been adopted outside
the affected service area. We find that these safeguards address
commenter concerns raised in the record and obviate the need for staff
to conduct such time-consuming reviews of every application filed
relying on this category of replacement service.
b. Voice Service Need Not Be Offered on a Stand-Alone Basis To Be
Considered an Adequate Replacement
 31. We affirm the Bureau's finding in the Stand-Alone and Single-
Service Waiver Order that VoIP need not be offered on a stand-alone
basis to be considered an adequate replacement and thus decline to
impose such a requirement in the consolidated technology transitions
rule we adopt today. (We note that while bundled services that include
VoIP may still be considered an adequate replacement, broadband-only
service would not qualify under this rule as an acceptable replacement
service. Broadband provides fundamentally different functionality from
traditional voice telephony, and while it does enable users to engage
in activities such as email and messaging, it is not an adequate
replacement for voice telephony service for the purposes of our
discontinuance rules. With that said, broadband facilities may be used
to provision a qualifying voice replacement service.) In doing so, we
conclude that the record in this proceeding supports both the Bureau's
finding in that Order that the elimination of the stand-alone
requirement is warranted due to rapid developments in the
communications marketplace since the adoption of the Alternative
Options Test and extending that finding to apply to each of the
categories of replacement service delineated in the consolidated
technology transitions discontinuance rule we adopt today.
 32. Since the Commission adopted its Alternative Options Test with
its stand-alone requirement, the technologies associated with voice
services have improved and the marketplace for voice services, such as
interconnected VoIP and mobile voice, has vastly expanded and spurred
the creation of new and
