FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Review of Foreign Ownership Policies for Broadcast, Common Carrier and Aeronautical Radio Licensees
Document number: 2026-06866
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 17863
Publication date: 2026-04-09

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 68 (Thursday, April 9, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 68 (Thursday, April 9, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 17863-17887]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-06866]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 1

[GN Docket No. 25-149; FCC 26-3; FR ID 294037]


Review of Foreign Ownership Policies for Broadcast, Common
Carrier and Aeronautical Radio Licensees

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) adopted a Report and Order to update foreign
ownership rules for common carrier and broadcast licensees to clarify
the Commission's review under section 310(b) of the Communications Act
of 1934. With regard to common carrier licensees, the Report and Order
adopted rules to codify existing policy regarding which entity is the
controlling U.S. parent; codify the Commission's advance approval
policy regarding certain deemed voting interests; require
identification of trusts and trustees; extend the remedial procedures
and methodology to privately held companies; add requirements regarding
the contents of remedial petitions; require the filing of amendments as
a complete restatement to petitions for declaratory ruling; and clarify
U.S. residency requirements. For broadcast licensees only, the Report
and Order covers: how the Commission should process applications filed
by a broadcast licensee during the pendency of a remedial petition for
declaratory ruling under section 310(b)(4); and other foreign ownership
considerations related to processing applications for NCE and LPFM
stations. Regarding broadcast licensees only, the Report and Order
directs the Media Bureau to issue processing guidelines detailing how
the Commission would process applications filed by a broadcast licensee
during the pendency of a remedial section 310(b)(4) petition; and
clarifies other foreign ownership considerations related to processing
applications for noncommercial educational (NCE) and low power FM
(LPFM) stations.

DATES: Effective date: These rules are effective May 11, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Brenda D. Villanueva,
Telecommunications and Analysis Division, Office of International
Affairs, at [email protected] or (202) 418-7131. For additional
information concerning the Paperwork Reduction Act (PRA) information
collection requirements contained in this document, contact Cathy
Williams at 202-418-2918, or via the internet at
 [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order, in GN Docket No. 25-149; FCC 26-3, adopted on January 29,
2026, and released on January 30, 2026. The full text of this document
is available for public inspection and copying via ECFS at http://apps.fcc.gov/ecfs and the FCC's website at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-3A1.pdf . Documents will be available electronically
in ASCII, Microsoft Word, and/or Adobe Acrobat. Alternative formats are
available for people with disabilities (Braille, large print,
electronic files, audio format), by sending an email to [email protected]
or calling the Commission's Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau at
(202) 418-0530 (voice), (202) 418-0432 (TTY).
 Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis. As required by the
Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA), the Commission has prepared this
present Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) of the possible
significant economic impact on small entities by the policies and rules
proposed in this Report and Order. The Commission will send a copy of
this Report and Order, including this FRFA, to the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy of the Small Business Administration (SBA). In addition, the
Report and Order and FRFA (or summaries thereof) will be published in
the Federal Register.

Synopsis

Discussion

 In this Report and Order, we codify and clarify longstanding
policies and practices with respect to the Commission's foreign
ownership requirements and streamline its review processes under
Section 310(b) of the Act. Certain updates apply to common carrier and
broadcast licensees, and others apply only to broadcast licensees
subject to section 310(b), as discussed below. Through these
streamlining efforts, we promote efficiency, clarity, and consistency
of our rules while continuing to analyze foreign investment to ensure
that it complies with statutory requirements.

A. Common Carrier and Broadcast Licensees

 For common carrier and broadcast licensees,\1\ we adopt the
proposals in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 90 FR 26684 (Section 310
NPRM) to codify certain longstanding foreign ownership policies and
practices to streamline the Commission's review process under Section
310(b). Specifically, we: (1) codify existing policy regarding which
entity in the ownership chain should be designated as the controlling
U.S. parent; (2) codify the Commission's advance approval policy
regarding certain deemed voting interests; (3) amend our rules to
clarify the requirement to identify trusts and trustees in petitions;
(4) amend our rules to extend the remedial procedures to privately held
companies and continue to allow privately held companies to use the
methodology on a case-by-case basis; (5) amend our rules to clarify
requirements regarding the contents of remedial Section 310(b)
petitions; (6) specify the process of filing amendments to Section
310(b) petitions; and (7) clarify U.S. residency requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \1\ We refer to broadcast, common carrier wireless, aeronautical
en route and aeronautical fixed radio station applicants and
licensees (including broadcast permittees) and to common carrier
spectrum lessees collectively as ``licensees'' unless the context
warrants otherwise. We also use the term ``common carrier'' or
``common carrier licensees'' to encompass common carrier wireless,
aeronautical en route and aeronautical fixed radio station
applicants and licensees, and spectrum lessees. ``Spectrum lessees''
is defined in Sec. 1.9003 of part 1, Subpart X (``Spectrum
Leasing''). 47 CFR 1.9003.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Controlling U.S. Parent Definition
 As proposed in the Section 310 NPRM, we adopt a definition of
controlling U.S. parent to provide regulatory certainty, ease
administrative burdens, and codify the Commission's longstanding
practice. For purposes of Section 310(b)(4), we define the controlling
U.S. parent as ``the first controlling entity organized in the United
States that is directly above the

[[Page 17864]]

licensee(s) in the vertical chain of control and does not itself hold a
license subject to [S]ection 310(b).'' NCTA agrees with the
Commission's proposal and no commenter opposes it. NCTA states the
definition ``would provide regulatory certainty for petitioners in
determining how to appropriately factor the controlling U.S. parent in
foreign ownership analyses.''
 Importantly, identifying the controlling U.S. parent is the basis
for assessing foreign ownership in all Section 310(b)(4) petitions.
With the correctly identified controlling U.S. parent, entities can
properly calculate the aggregate foreign ownership interests, ascertain
all the disclosable interest holders, and determine which interests
require specific and/or advance approval. As explained in the Section
310 NPRM, we have encountered mixed approaches where some petitions
correctly identify the controlling U.S. parent as the first controlling
entity organized in the United States that is directly above the
licensee(s) in the vertical chain of control that does not itself hold
a license subject to Section 310(b), while others incorrectly identify
the entity higher up in the vertical ownership chain where there is
first direct foreign ownership. By adopting the proposed controlling
U.S. parent definition, we simply codify our existing practice to bring
clarity to our rules. Finally, we remind petitioners that they continue
to have the flexibilities provided in Sec. Sec. 1.5004(c)(1)
(insertion of new controlling foreign organized company), 1.5004(d)(1)
(insertion of new non-controlling foreign organized company), 1.5001(e)
and (f) (disclosable interest holders), 1.5001(i) (specific approvals),
and 1.5001(k) (advance approval)--which all rely on properly
identifying the controlling U.S. parent.
2. Deemed Voting Interest and Advance Approval
 We adopt the proposals in the Section 310 NPRM and amend the rules
to codify the Commission's existing practice regarding the treatment of
entities that hold a deemed voting interest and are limited partners in
a limited partnership (LP) or are members of a limited liability
company (LLC). We adopt these rules to provide regulatory certainty to
petitioners, streamline the review process, and ensure that the
Commission's long-standing approach is reflected in the foreign
ownership rules. As discussed in detail in the Section 310 NPRM, a
foreign individual or entity that receives specific approval under
Sec. 1.5001(i) may request advance approval to increase the ownership
interest in the future without the need to request additional
authority. Limited partners and LLC members may be deemed to hold a
greater voting interest in the controlling U.S. parent than their
actual interests. Under the deemed voting interest analysis for voting
interests held by limited partners and LLC members, the Commission
assesses whether the interests held in the limited partnership and LLC
are or are not insulated. The Commission determines whether interests
are insulated for limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
and LLCs in accordance with 47 CFR 1.5003. If the limited partnership
or LLC is considered to be insulated under the Commission's rules, the
limited partner or LLC member is deemed to hold a voting interest equal
to its equity interest. On the other hand, if the limited partnership
or LLC is determined to be uninsulated, the limited partner or LLC
member is deemed to hold the same voting interest as the limited
partnership or LLC holds in the next lower tier in the licensee's
vertical ownership chain. If the limited partnership or LLC holds its
interest directly in the controlling U.S. parent, it is deemed to hold
a 100 percent voting interest. Although a foreign individual or entity
with a de jure or de facto controlling interest in the controlling U.S.
parent may request advance approval for 100 percent of the direct and/
or indirect equity and/or voting interests in the controlling U.S.
parent, a foreign individual or entity with a deemed voting interest of
50 percent or greater may only request advance approval for up to a
non-controlling 49.99 percent direct and/or indirect equity and/or
voting interests in the controlling U.S. parent. The Commission
utilizes deemed voting interests to measure foreign influence separate
from its analysis of whether a particular investor has actual decision-
making power. As such, a determination that a foreign investor has
deemed voting interests in the controlling U.S. parent does not
necessarily mean that such foreign investor also has de jure or de
facto control of the controlling U.S. parent. The current rules
regarding advance approval under Sec. 1.5001(k) do not specifically
address deemed voting interests for limited partnerships and LLCs.
 To provide certainty to petitioners and investors, we codify our
long-standing practice concerning the amount of advance approval that
interest holders with deemed voting interest may request for interest
held in LPs and LLCs. Deemed voting interest is only used in a Section
310(b) review to determine which entities require specific approval,
and for which advance approval may be requested. A finding of a deemed
voting interest of 50 percent or more is not a finding of de jure or de
facto control of the controlling U.S. parent. Rather, it is an
indication of the potential influence of the limited partner or LLC
member in the partnership or LLC. The new rules clarify that foreign
individuals and/or entities, including LPs and LLCs, requesting
specific approval pursuant to Sec. 1.5001(i) of the Commission's rules
that have a deemed voting interest but not an actual controlling voting
interest, may request advance approval under Sec. 1.5001(k) to
increase their interest at a future time to a non-controlling 49.99
percent. However, if the Commission determines that there is an actual
controlling interest then the petitioner may request advance approval
of up to and including a controlling 100 percent interest. NCTA
supports the proposals stating that ``[c]odifying these current
practices would add needed clarity to the Commission's rules.'' No
commenter opposes the proposals.
 Therefore, we adopt our proposal and codify our long-standing
practice that under Sec. Sec. 1.5001(i) and 1.5001(k) of the
Commission's rules, a finding of deemed voting interest of 50 percent
or more is not a finding of control in and of itself. First, we amend
the specific approval rule in Sec. 1.5001(i) to codify our long-
standing practice that a finding that a foreign individual or entity is
deemed to hold a 100 percent voting interest in the controlling U.S.
parent for purposes of Sec. 1.5001(i)(4)(ii)(C)(1) or a 50 percent or
greater voting interest in the controlling U.S. parent pursuant to
Sec. 1.5001(i)(4)(ii)(C)(2), does not indicate that the interest
constitutes de jure control for purposes of compliance with section
310(d) of the Act. Second, we amend the advance approval rule in Sec.
1.5001(k) to state that a foreign individual or entity that has a
deemed voting interest of 100 percent pursuant to Sec.
1.5001(i)(4)(ii)(C)(1) or a 50 percent or greater voting interest in
the controlling U.S. parent pursuant to Sec. 1.5001(i)(4)(ii)(C)(2),
but that does not have de jure or de facto control of the controlling
U.S. parent, may request advance approval for the foreign individual or
entity to increase its interests, at some future time, up to any non-
controlling amount not to exceed a 49.99 percent equity and/or voting
interest.
3. Trust and Trustees Requirements
 As proposed in the Section 310 NPRM, we amend the rules to codify
the existing practice to require that

[[Page 17865]]

petitioners identify the trustees of trusts that are disclosable
interest holders in the controlling U.S. parent. The rule changes will
provide clarity about the type of information required for trusts and
trustees in a petition, streamline the filing process, and enable the
Commission to more efficiently review petitions. In the Section 310
NPRM, the Commission proposed to amend our rules to conform with policy
and practice that the trustees must be disclosed under Sec. 1.5001(e),
(f), and (i), as applicable. We received no comments on this proposal.
 Under Sec. 1.5001(e) and (f) of the rules, a petitioner must
disclose trusts, as well as any other entity or individual, U.S. or
foreign, as a disclosable interest holder, if the entity or individual
holds, or would hold, a direct or indirect interest of 10 percent or
more, or a controlling interest, in the controlling U.S. parent of the
petitioning common carrier and broadcast applicant or licensee. In the
broadcast context, the petitioner must utilize the attribution rules
and policies applicable to broadcasters to determine the U.S. and
foreign interests that must be disclosed in a section 310(b)(4)
petition. To analyze whether a particular trust holds an equity and/or
voting interest in the controlling U.S. parent for purposes of
compliance with section 310(b), Commission staff have required the
petitioners to provide the identity of trustees of a trust through
supplemental filings. Therefore, we codify our practice and amend Sec.
1.5001(e), (f), and (i), to require petitioners to provide the name(s)
of the trustee(s) in petitions.
4. Extending the Methodology and Remedial Process to Privately Held
Entities
 We amend the Commission's rules in Sec. 1.5004(f)(3) and (f)(4) to
extend the remedial process available for U.S. public companies to
privately held entities for inadvertent non-compliance with the foreign
ownership benchmarks. In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission sought
comment on extending the Commission's remedial process available to
U.S. public companies for inadvertent non-compliance with the foreign
ownership benchmarks to privately held U.S. companies for all services
subject to section 310(b)(4). The Commission explained that since the
2016 Foreign Ownership Report and Order, it has observed increasingly
complex ownership structures of its licensees, including both U.S.
public and privately held companies. Notably, licensees whose
controlling U.S. parents are privately held companies have reported
that they experience similar issues as public companies, including the
``up-the-chain'' ownership structures that include entities, such as
equity funds, that may themselves either be public companies or have
diverse ownership interests (including other funds). These licensees
also have indicated that they have experienced difficulty in
controlling or preventing changes in these funds, even when the
entities are privately held. Absent the safe harbor available to U.S.
public companies with existing foreign ownership, however, privately
held U.S. companies are subject to potential enforcement action if
there is an inadvertent violation of the foreign ownership benchmarks.
NAB supports the Commission extending its remedial filing process to
privately held companies, and welcomes this development to
``modernize'' the rules to ``reflect the increasing complexity of
ownership structures among regulated entities.'' NAB is ``not aware of
specific data to suggest that broadcasters are any more or less likely
to have complex ownership structures,'' but asserts that the change
would ``reduce burdens on privately held licensees with complex
ownership structures and lower their risk of enforcement actions from
inadvertent violations of the foreign ownership limits.'' No other
comments were received on this topic.
 Accordingly, we amend our rules to allow privately held licensees
to use the remedial filing process and will require them to adhere to
the remedial filing requirements applicable to publicly held companies.
We clarify that in the event that the licensee, regardless of whether
its controlling U.S. parent is a privately held or U.S. public company,
satisfies the elements of this safe harbor for remedial action in the
Commission's rules, the Commission would not expect to take enforcement
action related to the non-compliance. This approach will provide
privately held U.S. companies with a safe harbor for non-compliance
with the rules for changes in ownership beyond the licensee's control
and that were not reasonably foreseeable by, or known to, the licensee.
 Finally, we find that no action is necessary on the separate issue
of formally extending the blanket methodology used by U.S. public
companies to privately held companies. As discussed in the Section 310
NPRM, the Commission has allowed privately held licensees to use the
calculation methodology that is applicable to U.S. public companies on
a case-by-case basis, when, for example, ``there are significant
impediments that prevent a privately held entity from conducting an up-
the-chain analysis to ascertain all of its indirect ownership
interests, including non-voting equity interests held by remote,
insulated investors.'' Neither the record nor the Commission's own
experience indicates a need to depart from this case-by-case approach.
Accordingly, we find that it is appropriate to continue to allow
privately held entities to use this methodology applicable to U.S.
public companies on a case-by-case basis. We note that the Commission
staff frequently works with private entities to address and resolve
impediments to identifying ownership interests, and we expect that this
collaborative process will continue as private entities explore whether
it is appropriate to rely on the methodology available for U.S.
publicly traded companies.
5. Contents of Remedial Petitions
 We adopt the proposal in the Section 310 NPRM to add Sec.
1.5004(f)(5) of the rules to clarify that, consistent with current
practice, remedial petitions must contain all of the information
required for an initial petition for declaratory ruling (Sec. 1.5001
of the Commission's rules sets out the required information to be
disclosed by petitioners) and not just the information related to the
newly discovered non-compliant interest(s) with respect to all services
subject to Section 310(b). As the Commission explained in the Section
310 NPRM, the Commission's foreign ownership rules already require that
remedial petitions must be filed as new petitions and set forth the
required contents of petitions for declaratory ruling. Thus, when an
eligible licensee opts to file a remedial petition under Sec. Sec.
1.5004(f)(3) or (f)(4) to address an instance of non-compliance with
the Commission's foreign ownership rules, the Commission has required
that the remedial petition contain all the information required for an
initial petition and not just the information related to the non-
compliant interest(s). And while the Commission has observed that most
petitioners voluntarily submit a full petition, staff has observed
instances where some petitioners initially provided only the
information related to the non-compliant interest(s), resulting in
added correspondence and coordination with staff and additional
petitioner submissions. We believe that failure to provide all relevant
information unduly delays and frustrates efficient processing of
remedial petitions.
 NCTA supports the Commission's proposal, asserting it would
``reduce the need for follow-up questions from Commission staff and
would align with the Commission's current practice.''

[[Page 17866]]

NCTA also suggests that since this proposal echoes similar requirements
in other sections of the Commission's foreign ownership rules, this
proposed rule change would result in a more streamlined process. In
contrast, NAB asserts that even if this proposed amendment reflects
current staff practice, NAB believes this practice ``unnecessarily
compounds filing burdens and increases processing timelines for
petitioners that are subject to an existing Section 310(b) declaratory
ruling that authorizes a certain level of foreign ownership and may
approve individual foreign investors.'' NAB essentially takes issue
with what our rules already require, suggesting that under the
Commission's proposal, ``every remedial petition would be considered a
new petition that would need to include information concerning not only
new foreign investor(s), but also foreign investor(s) that may already
be authorized by the FCC through a declaratory ruling.'' NAB adds that
``[t]he proposal would also require petitioners to re-justify existing
foreign ownership that has already been carefully considered and
approved by the FCC in a previous proceeding.'' As an alternative to
the Commission's proposal, and to ``alleviate filing burdens,'' NAB
urges the Commission to codify an exception for petitioners subject to
existing Section 310(b) rulings, requiring such petitioners to
``provide information and public interest justifications in a remedial
petition with respect to only new foreign investors for which
Commission approval is required under Section 310(b).'' Further, ``NAB
encourages the FCC to extend this exception to section 310(b) petitions
seeking prior FCC consent for prospective new foreign investment where
the petitioner is already subject to a Section 310(b) declaratory
ruling.''
 We agree with NCTA's assertions and therefore, we adopt our
proposal to codify the existing practice by adding Sec. 1.5004(f)(5)
to clarify that remedial petitions must contain all of the information
required for an initial petition and not just the information related
to the newly discovered non-compliant interest(s) with respect to all
services subject to Section 310(b). Consistent with our decision to
extend the Commission's remedial process for inadvertent violations of
the foreign ownership benchmarks to U.S. privately held companies, we
clarify that our requirements regarding the contents of remedial
petitions apply to both U.S. public companies and U.S. privately held
companies. This approach allows us to view the comprehensive picture of
foreign ownership at the outset of our review as opposed to solely the
new foreign investors for which Commission approval is required.
Further, as NCTA asserts, this approach will reduce the need for
follow-up questions. We disagree with NAB's concern that the proposal
would be burdensome because it would require that every remedial
petition be re-justified as a new petition, including existing foreign
ownership. While remedial petitions are filed as new petitions, the
Commission staff's review will focus on the new, non-compliant
interests in the context of the information submitted via the remedial
petition, limiting the burden of that review on licensees participating
in the proceeding. Furthermore, with respect to the filing of
information regarding existing foreign ownership, we find that any
burden would be mitigated by the fact that such information was filed
previously and that NAB's comment has not quantified any additional
burden from refiling such information. On the other hand, we believe
that requiring that a remedial petition contain the same information as
an initial petition is of significant value because it will enable
staff to review a complete filing and to more efficiently and
effectively make the appropriate determination under the Section 310(b)
public interest analysis. Therefore, we reject NAB's proposed
categorical exemption for reviewing and approving only the new foreign
investors, as we find that this limitation could frustrate our ability
to conduct a comprehensive analysis as required under Section 310(b).
On balance, we find that the benefits of adopting the proposal to
codify the existing practice outweigh any unquantified additional
filing burdens. Obtaining complete information in the first instance,
in turn, will streamline the review process for remedial petitions and
reduce the processing timelines that are also of significant concern to
NAB. Nonetheless, we encourage applicants to consult with Commission
staff to discuss particular facts and circumstances if they believe
that a different approach is warranted or if there are specific factors
that will help facilitate staff's review of the petition.
6. Filing Amendments to Petitions for Declaratory Ruling
 To ensure that the public and Commission staff can access accurate
and complete ownership information without undue confusion about which
filings or portions of filings are active and/or current, we reaffirm
and codify existing amendment filing practices in Sec. 1.5000(b)(1)-
(2). In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether
to codify Commission staff's practice of having petitioners file a
complete restatement of the Section 310(b) petition in cases involving
substantial changes to the petition along with a cover letter providing
a narrative description of what is being amended. To further minimize
burdens, the Commission sought comment on whether certain ministerial
changes could be filed as an amendment or supplement rather than as a
complete restatement.
 No commenter opposes a requirement that any amendments to a pending
petition must be filed as a complete restatement of the initial
petition, but NAB urges that if the Commission does so, it should
``codify an exception allowing for ministerial changes to be filed as a
supplement in the relevant docket that details the minor amendments.''
NAB suggests that ministerial changes could include ``changes made to:
correct lists of attributable interest holders to remove duplicate
entries; update such lists to add additional interest holders or revise
identifying information; or update equity and voting interests to
reflect slight changes to entities or individuals that have already
been disclosed in the initial petitions consistent with the FCC's
foreign ownership or attribution rules.'' NCTA is broadly supportive of
requiring that amendments be filed as a complete restatement of the
initial petition, agreeing with the Commission's reasoning for adopting
such a requirement.
 Based on the record, we codify our existing practices.
Specifically, for substantial changes, an amendment to a pending
petition must be filed as a complete restatement in the International
Communications Filing System (ICFS) (for common carriers) or Electronic
Comment Filing System (ECFS) (for broadcasters) of the initial petition
with a cover letter providing a narrative description of the
substantial change. The ICFS homepage is located at https://www.fcc.gov/icfs . The ECFS homepage is located at https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs . Also, consistent with existing practice, in the case of
ministerial change(s), petitioners must file an amendment in ICFS (for
common carriers) or in ECFS (for broadcasters) under the relevant
application or docket detailing only the relevant change(s). Similar to
what NAB suggests, we provide as guidance the following non-exhaustive
list of ministerial changes: (1) correcting lists of attributable
interest holders to remove duplicate entries; (2) updating such lists
to revise identifying information; (3) correcting

[[Page 17867]]

equity and voting interests amounts to reflect any changes to entities
or individuals that have already been disclosed in the initial petition
consistent with the Commission's foreign ownership or attribution
rules; or (4) correcting misspellings or incorrect addresses. For all
other types of changes not covered by this list, we encourage
applicants to contact Commission staff to review whether a particular
change is substantial or ministerial in nature. For such ministerial
changes, we expect that petitioners will submit a new version of the
relevant exhibit or attachment with the necessary corrections and
provide a brief explanation of the ministerial change in the corrected
exhibit/attachment or by cover letter. For common carriers, petitioners
will submit amendments to a petition under Form 235, ISP-AMD via ICFS.
Ministerial changes to fields in the online application form can be
submitted by changing the response in the application form itself.
Ministerial changes to attachments can be submitted by uploading a new
attachment to the amendment application. We find that this flexible
approach will reduce undue filing burdens on applicants and promote
prompt processing. We caution applicants that filing multiple
amendments or supplements for ministerial changes may increase
Commission staff processing time and/or create undue confusion about
which aspects of the filings are active and/or current. Therefore, in
those instances, we urge applicants to detail the totality of the
ministerial change(s) in a complete restatement of the initial
petition.
7. U.S. Residency Requirements
 We affirm the proposed clarification in the Section 310 NPRM that
there is no Commission requirement that foreign investors in companies
seeking a petition must maintain U.S. residency. We received no
comments on this topic and therefore adopt our proposed clarification.
As we stated in the Section 310 NPRM, a foreign investor's lack of a
U.S. residence is not a factor in the Commission's assessment of
whether a petition is in the public interest. We find that requiring a
foreign investor to maintain U.S. residency would be antithetical to
the Commission's policy of allowing certain levels of foreign ownership
that are not contrary to the public interest. As proposed in the
Section 310 NPRM, this clarification applies to all services subject to
Section 310(b).

C. Broadcast Licensees Only

 As discussed below, regarding broadcast licensees only, we: (1)
direct the Media Bureau to issue processing guidelines as appropriate
detailing how the Commission will process applications filed by a
broadcast licensee during the pendency of a remedial petition under
Section 310(b)(4); and (2) clarify other foreign ownership
considerations related to processing applications for NCE and LPFM
stations.
1. Processing Broadcast Licensee Applications During the Remedial
Process
 We adopt our tentative conclusion in the Section 310 NPRM that the
broadcast industry will be best informed by processing guidelines
establishing how the Commission will process broadcast applications
during the pendency of a remedial petition filed pursuant to Sec.
1.5004(f) of the Commission's rules. We therefore direct and delegate
authority to the Media Bureau to specify such processing guidelines.
 In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission explained that when an
eligible licensee files a remedial Section 310(b)(4) petition seeking
approval of above-benchmark, aggregate foreign ownership interests or
new specific approval not covered under the licensee's existing Section
310(b)(4) ruling, the Commission does not, as a general rule, expect to
take enforcement action related to the licensee's non-compliance with
the foreign ownership rules, provided the licensee satisfies certain
requirements. Nonetheless, the Commission may ultimately determine that
the licensee was not actually entitled to use the remedial process, or
the Commission may ultimately reject the proposed foreign ownership.
Therefore, as the Commission further explained in the Section 310 NPRM,
the existence of the remedial process, on its own, does not necessarily
resolve the issue of whether the broadcast licensee is in compliance
with the Commission's rules during the pendency of a remedial petition
or following remedy of the non-compliance. This is significant because
it has been the Media Bureau's practice, often in consultation with the
Enforcement Bureau, to place a hold on certain types of applications
while a broadcast licensee is subject to an investigation for a
potential violation of the Commission's rules. As a result, any
unresolved foreign ownership questions presented by non-compliance with
our rules or the terms of a prior declaratory ruling may impede the
processing of pending license applications. The Commission therefore
sought comment in the Section 310 NPRM on whether the Commission should
grant the licensee new authorizations or allow a licensee to dispose of
certain authorizations while the remedial petition is pending. The
Commission also sought comment on whether any grant of an authorization
should be explicitly conditioned on the grant of the pending remedial
petition or subject to any enforcement action that may be warranted if
the remedial petition is deemed inadequate, or, alternatively, if staff
should hold pending applications until review of a remedial petition is
complete. Also, the Commission asked if there are certain types of
applications that should or should not be processed in the ordinary
course during the pendency of the remedial process. Finally, the
Commission sought comment on whether to adopt processing guidelines for
this purpose or instead adopt rules.
 In a written ex parte, NAB states that it ``anticipates that the
establishment of specific standards for the processing of broadcast
applications during the pendency of a remedial petition may benefit,
not burden, broadcast licensees.'' No other commenters addressed this
issue.
 We find that processing guidelines would benefit the Commission's
treatment of broadcast license applications, and we direct and delegate
authority to the Media Bureau to specify processing guidelines for
applications filed by a broadcast licensee during the pendency of the
remedial process. Consistent with our decision to extend the
Commission's remedial process for inadvertent violations of the foreign
ownership benchmarks to privately held entities, we consider
``broadcast licensees'' to encompass broadcast station licensees and
permittees that are controlled by U.S. public companies as well as
broadcast station licensees and permittees that are controlled by U.S.
privately held entities. The processing guidelines will provide
guidance on the topics discussed in the Section 310 NPRM, including:
(1) routine types of applications that should continue to be processed
in the normal course during the pendency of the remedial process, such
as applications related to the continued operations of currently
authorized broadcast facilities (e.g., applications for special
temporary authority or minor modifications); and (2) non-routine
applications such as major modifications, license renewals, and
assignments/transfers of control, that would require heightened
scrutiny during the pendency of a remedial

[[Page 17868]]

petition. We find that guidelines are preferable to rules for this
purpose, as guidelines will provide the necessary flexibility to permit
individualized approaches to specific cases as warranted by the facts
and circumstances.
2. Assessing Foreign Ownership of Noncommercial Educational (NCE) and
Low Power FM (LPFM) Stations
 To better incorporate the governance structures of NCE and LPFM
licensees seeking approval for proposed foreign ownership into our
Section 310(b) reviews and to provide regulatory certainty to such
licensees, we clarify how we determine the foreign ownership levels of
these particular stations. In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission
sought comment on changes to the Commission's foreign ownership rules
that would assess the foreign ownership levels of NCE stations,
including full-service FM radio and television stations and LPFM
stations, by considering their unique governance structures. The
Commission noted that while there have been relatively few requests for
proposed foreign ownership of NCE and LPFM stations, several
applications were pending before the Media Bureau involving NCE
applicants with foreign ownership. We received no comments on this
issue.
 As the Commission explained in the Section 310 NPRM, the ownership
of NCE and LPFM stations is subject to the provisions of Section
310(b), just like commercial stations. As such, the Commission's
foreign ownership rules are not limited to commercial stations, though
the rules discuss ownership in terms of the voting and equity shares of
individuals and entities. This characterization of ownership, however,
is rarely applicable in the NCE/LPFM context, as these entities are
often governed by a board of directors or an unincorporated association
without traditional voting or equity shares in the entity. The
Commission's rules and policies, however, have long recognized that
these governing bodies--and, by extension, the individual board
members--direct the operations of these stations. The Commission has
addressed this in the broadcast ownership report context, for
attribution purposes, by looking to the composition of the respondent's
governing board or other governing entity, and whether it is directly
or indirectly under the control of another entity.
 Consistent with our approach in the broadcast ownership reporting
context, for purposes of determining the voting shares of NCE stations
in the course of our Section 310(b) review, we adopt the proposal in
the Section 310 NPRM to consider the composition of the governing board
or other governing entity, and whether it is directly or indirectly
under the control of another entity for purposes of assessing
compliance with the foreign ownership limits set forth in the Act and
the Commission's rules. For example, if an NCE station licensee (or
applicant) is governed by a board with five members, each member of the
governing board would be deemed to hold a 20 percent voting interest in
the licensee absent provisions in the bylaws or other governance
document that formally allocates voting power to governing board
members on something other than a pro rata basis, only if such voting
arrangements are permitted under the laws of the state where the
licensee or applicant was incorporated. In any such cases, each
governing board member would be deemed to hold the voting interest
designated in the governing documents. If the record indicates that the
governing documents are inconsistent with state law, we will consider
the relevance of this information in light of facts and circumstances
presented by the case and any applicable precedent or policies. If
there are four governing board members, each member would be deemed to
hold a 25 percent voting interest, and so forth, absent provisions in
the governing document allocating voting power to governing board
members on a non-pro rata basis. In the event that greater than 25
percent of the controlling interest holders in the licensee's
controlling U.S. parent would be non-U.S. citizens, the licensee would
first need to seek approval for such foreign ownership consistent with
Section 310(b)(4) and the Commission's foreign ownership rules. Direct
and indirect foreign interests in the licensee, other than those held
through a controlling U.S. parent, remain subject to the 20 percent
limits in Section 310(b)(3).
 We also acknowledge that, as with the broadcast ownership context,
there may be station-specific agreements or circumstances that could
impact how the ownership percentages are calculated. For example, the
governing board could cede its decision-making authority over the
station to an executive in the operating organization. Such
circumstances will continue to be subject to individual, case-by-case
review under Section 310(b). In addition, while governing board members
in NCE entities do not typically have equity interests in the licensee,
any such equity interests specific to a particular licensee are subject
to the 310(b) benchmarks. We will recognize weighted governance
structures (i.e., non pro rata) to the extent they are permitted by
applicable federal and state laws regarding the incorporation and
governance of NCE entities. In the course of our review of the
structures referenced in this paragraph, applicants, upon request, must
file a copy of the bylaws, or other written organizational document as
appropriate, to accompany their Section 310(b) analysis, either in a
Section 310(b)(4) petition or when certifying compliance with Section
310(b). The Commission reserves the right to ask for such other
information as necessary to verify that the documentation is consistent
with the relevant state law requirements. We caution applicants that
should it be determined that sham agreements are being filed, the
Commission will act within its enforcement authority. Such
organizational documents must substantiate the entity's governance
structure, as well as establish that the structure is permitted under
relevant state law.
3. NCE/LPFM Application Processing Issues
 As discussed below, to promote regulatory consistency, we make
several clarifications to address various foreign ownership
considerations in the context of filing windows for construction
permits for NCE authorizations. In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission
sought comment on whether and how to clarify the Commission's rules and
procedures related to filing windows for NCE construction permits with
respect to the application of Section 310(b). No commenters addressed
these issues.
 As discussed in the Section 310 NPRM, entities with foreign
interest holders above the statutory benchmarks in Section 310(b)(4)
are eligible to apply for new construction permits that are available
for application during a filing window, including NCE filing windows,
provided they are covered by an existing foreign ownership declaratory
ruling, or have filed a Section 310(b)(4) petition. While the
Commission observes it to be a rare occurrence for such entities to
apply for new construction permits, to offer some further clarity, we
adopt the clarification proposed in the Section 310 NPRM that, with
respect to construction permit applications, under the current
requirements in Sec. 1.5000(b), entities with foreign ownership in
excess of the statutory benchmarks in Section 310(b)(4) and without an
existing declaratory ruling can participate in an NCE/LPFM filing

[[Page 17869]]

window so long as they file a Section 310(b)(4) petition seeking
approval of the foreign ownership interest at the same time they file
the application required for participation in the filing window.
Moreover, for participants in these windows with foreign ownership
above the benchmarks in Section 310(b)(4), we clarify that we will
apply the same processing guidelines we use in the commercial context
for applications that include a Section 310(b)(4) petition for
declaratory ruling, which we will specify in any subsequent procedures
public notice for an NCE window, while allowing for a tailored
approach, if appropriate, in the context of a particular filing window.
Accordingly, we find that we need not consider at this time the other
issues raised in the Section 310 NPRM regarding how we will process
applications from entities with foreign ownership in excess of the
benchmarks, to the extent relevant, as those issues will be resolved in
the context of a particular filing window. In addition, because the
Commission's forbearance authority, and thus its Section 310(b)(3)
forbearance approach, does not extend to broadcast licensees, all NCE
and LPFM filing window participants are subject to the 20 percent
limits on foreign ownership under Section 310(b)(3) of the Act.

D. Other Improvements to the Foreign Ownership Rules

 In the Section 310 NPRM, the Commission sought comment generally on
other opportunities to improve the foreign ownership rules or reduce
regulatory burdens. The Commission also sought comment on opportunities
to alleviate unnecessary regulatory burdens consistent with the Delete,
Delete, Delete Proceeding. We received several proposals from NAB and
an individual commenter, Erik Cudd. Although, as discussed more fully
below, we do not accept certain specific proposals offered by NAB and
Erik Cudd that those commenters assert could reduce burdens, we note
that nevertheless the decisions in this Report and Order reduce
regulatory burdens overall. Specifically, in this Report and Order, we
find that clarifying our rules, codifying existing requirements and
practices related to foreign ownership, and providing guidance with
respect to filing of petitions will reduce uncertainty for applicants,
which in turn should reduce the need to revise or refile requests and
thus will reduce regulatory burdens.
 NAB Suggestions. NAB urges the Commission to establish a limit on
the amount of time from the filing of a Section 310(b) petition to the
Commission's issuance of a public notice announcing that the Section
310(b) petition has been accepted for filing, as well as a timeline for
ruling on a petition. NAB also urges the Commission to consider
exempting certain applications from Executive Branch review, for
example those involving applicants that have been approved in the
recent past, and to adopt expedited or streamlined Executive Branch
reviews for known foreign investors or for foreign interest holders
from countries allied with the United States.'' NAB states that this
approach ``would be consistent with other Administrative initiatives''
such as the Treasury Department's Committee on Foreign Investment in
the United States (CFIUS) fast-track pilot program, which has ``a
`known investor' portal where CFIUS can collect information from
foreign investors prior to a filing'' that is ``intended to help
effectuate the President's America First Investment Policy.'' NAB also
urges the Commission to consider ``excluding certain applications from
referral to the [Committee for the Assessment of Foreign Participation
in the United States Telecommunications Services Sector (Committee)] if
they involve applicants that have been approved in the recent past, as
well as streamlining the Commission's own review under such
circumstances.'' We did not receive any reply comments on NAB's
suggestions.
 We decline to adopt NAB's proposals at this time. First, we decline
to specify a timeframe to place petitions on accepted for filing public
notice. While we strive to adhere to the Commission's 180-day
transaction review timeline, our review of petitions depends on the
complexity of the underlying transaction, the completeness of the
information provided, and the timeliness of the petitioner in
responding to staff inquires. Second, we reject NAB's proposal for the
Commission to adopt a streamlined process for known foreign investors
or from allied countries. This proposal raises many complex issues,
including determining who would qualify as known foreign investors,
defining what constitutes an allied country, and establishing a
Commission `known foreign investor portal' similar to that of the
Treasury Department's known investor portal. We note that the CFIUS
fast-track pilot program is still in its nascent stages. Third, we
decline to exclude certain petitions from referral to the Committee as
we currently exclude referral of petitions to the Committee when the
only foreign ownership is through intermediate holding companies and
U.S. individuals or entities that have ultimate control. NAB states
that it ``understands from members and their counsel that the amount of
time from the filing of petitions to their placement on public notice
varies significantly. Petitioners would benefit from greater
predictability in the initial stages of processing.'' We note that we
have, on a discretionary basis, excluded petitions with only minor
ownership changes after consultation with Committee staff. We will
continue to use our discretion to exclude petitions from referral to
the Committee when appropriate. We believe that our current approach is
adequate to alleviate burdens and expedite review of Section 310(b)
petitions.
 Individual Commenter Suggestions. Erik Cudd, an individual
commenter opposes any foreign ownership of U.S. broadcasters and favors
stricter broadcast ownership limitations. Erik Cudd states that foreign
ownership of U.S. broadcasters ``poses serious risks to national
interests,'' including potential foreign influence over content and
editorial direction, lack of transparency regarding ownership and
controlling parties, and ``[i]ncreased [difficulty] in holding parties
accountable to the American public and legal standards.'' We did not
receive any comments on these suggestions. We decline to adopt these
suggestions. The summary comment without any analysis or data has not
persuaded us that it is necessary to prohibit all foreign ownership of
broadcasters in the context of this rulemaking which is focused
specifically on streamlining, clarifying, and codifying procedures and
processing requirements. Erik Cudd's views about ownership
concentration among broadcasters are not relevant to this proceeding.
As explained at the outset, our decisions carefully balance the dual
public interest objectives of prohibiting potentially harmful foreign
investment and promoting non-harmful foreign investment. Instead of
prohibiting foreign ownership outright, our rules, as improved herein,
provide transparency regarding ownership and controlling parties so
that we can hold relevant individuals and entities accountable for
compliance with our rules and the Act. Our foreign ownership review
process includes Executive Branch review aimed at identifying and
addressing potential harms to national security. Erik Cudd has not
provided any evidence or particularized reasons for his concerns.
