FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Unlicensed Use of the 6 GHz Band; Expanding Flexible Use in Mid-Band Spectrum Between 3.7 and 24 GHz
Document number: 2026-03744
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 9140
Publication date: 2026-02-25

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 37 (Wednesday, February 25, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 37 (Wednesday, February 25, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 9140-9169]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-03744]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 0 and 15

[ET Docket No. 18-295 and GN Docket No. 17-183; FCC 26-1; FR ID 331544]


Unlicensed Use of the 6 GHz Band; Expanding Flexible Use in Mid-
Band Spectrum Between 3.7 and 24 GHz

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) adopts rules allowing unlicensed geofenced variable
power (GVP) devices to operate in the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 portions of
the 6 GHz band (5.925-7.125 GHz) at up to 11 dBm/MHz EIRP power
spectral density and 24 dBm EIRP. GVP devices must use geofencing
systems to prevent harmful interference to licensed microwave links and
radio astronomy observatories. The geofencing systems will calculate
exclusion zones where GVP devices cannot operate on specified
frequencies. Each GVP access point must have a geolocation capability
to determine its location and avoid operating on prohibited frequencies
within the exclusion zones. Client devices must operate 6 dB below the
access point's authorized power. These rules permit the GVP devices to
operate at higher power than very lower power 6 GHz band unlicensed
devices.

DATES: This rule is effective April 27, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Nicholas Oros of the Office of
Engineering and Technology, Policy and Rules Division, at 202-418-0636
or [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Fourth
Report and Order, in ET Docket No. 18-295 and GN Docket No. 17-183, FCC
26-1, adopted on January 29, 2026, and released on January 30, 2026.
The full text of this document is available for public inspection and
can be downloaded at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-26-1A1.pdf . Alternative formats are available for people with disabilities
(Braille, large print, electronic files, audio format) by sending an
email to [email protected] or calling the Commission's Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530 (voice), (202) 418-0432
(TTY).
 Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,
as amended (RFA) requires that an agency

[[Page 9141]]

prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice and comment
rulemakings, unless the agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if
promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a substantial number
of small entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has prepared a Final
Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the possible impact
of the rule changes contained in the Fourth Report and Order on small
entities. The FRFA is set forth in Appendix C, https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-votes-enable-better-faster-wi-fi-and-next-gen-connectivity-0 .
 Paperwork Reduction Act. This document does not contain new or
modified information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1995, Public Law 104-13. In addition, therefore, it
does not contain any new or modified information collection burden
``for small business concerns with fewer than 25 employees,'' pursuant
to the Small Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002, Public Law 107-198,
44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4).
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this this rule is
``major'' under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The
Commission will send a copy of the Fourth Report and Order to Congress
and the Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C.
801(a)(1)(A).

Synopsis

Introduction

 In this document, the Commission adopts rules for geofenced
variable power (GVP) devices to operate in the U-NII-5 (5.925-6.425
GHz) and U-NII-7 (6.525-6.875 GHz) portions of the 6 GHz band at up to
11 dBm/MHz EIRP power spectral density (PSD) and 24 dBm EIRP. GVP
devices must work in tandem with a geofencing system to minimize the
likelihood of a significant risk of harmful interference to licensed
fixed microwave links and radio astronomy observatories. The geofencing
systems will calculate exclusion zones in which the GVP devices will
not be permitted to operate co-frequency with microwave links or in a
portion of the U-NII-7 band used by radio astronomy. Each GVP access
point will be required to have a geolocation capability to determine
its location and avoid operating on prohibited frequencies within the
exclusion zones. GVP client devices will operate under the control of
GVP access points at 6 dB less power than the authorized power of the
controlling GVP access point. Using geofencing will enable GVP devices
to operate at significantly higher power levels than the -5 dBm/MHz
EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP at which non-geofenced very low power (VLP)
devices are permitted to operate. At this time, the Commission is
limiting the GVP device operation to the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 portions
of the 6 GHz band and defer considering such action for the U-NII-6 and
U-NII-8 bands.

Power Limits for GVP Access Points

 In the 6 GHz Second FNPRM (89 FR 874, January 8, 2024), the
Commission sought comment on the appropriate power limits for GVP
devices in the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 bands. As an initial matter, the
Commission noted that Apple, Broadcom et al. had requested that it
permit VLP devices to operate at up to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm
EIRP. Based on the technical record, the Commission declined in the 6
GHz Second Order (89 FR 874, January 8, 2024) to adopt this PSD level
and instead limited VLP operations to a maximum of -5 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD
and 14 dBm EIRP. However, the Commission explained that it could allow
GVP devices to operate at a higher PSD level if such devices are
prohibited from operating co-channel and in close proximity to licensed
microwave receive sites. The Commission proposed that VLP devices be
permitted to operate across the entire 6 GHz band--U-NII-5, U-NII-6, U-
NII-7, and U-NII-8--at up to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP while
under the control of a geofencing system to minimize the likelihood of
harmful interference to licensed incumbent services. Although the
Commission expressly sought comment on these proposed power limits, it
also asked whether it should allow GVP devices to operate with higher
PSD and EIRP limits. The Commission sought comment on a range of power
limits and specifically asked whether it could ``allow a power limit
higher than 14 dBm EIRP,'' identifying as one such example power levels
``up to 21 dBm EIRP.'' Furthermore, the Commission asked whether ``even
higher PSD and EIRP limits [would] increase the risk of harmful
interference to licensed incumbent services'' and whether ``the
proposed geofencing system . . . [would] be sufficient to reduce this
risk.'' By using the phrase ``even higher,'' the Commission signaled
that it sought comment on power limits higher than those discussed
earlier in the paragraph--i.e., higher than 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 21
dBm EIRP.
 Apple, Broadcom et al. request that GVP devices be permitted to
operate at up to 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 21 dBm EIRP across the entire 6
GHz band. According to Apple, Broadcom et al., creating geofencing-
capable devices ``will require manufacturers to add expensive new
hardware and software to a wide range of consumer and enterprise
equipment,'' and such investment cannot be justified for the marginal
benefit that would be provided by the proposed power limits. Apple,
Broadcom et al. stress that unless the GVP maximum permitted power is
21 dBm EIRP, consumers will not experience any additional benefit from
a higher PSD when using channels wider than 80-megahertz because total
power transmitted is proportional to the PSD and capping the maximum
EIRP at 21 dBm would allow all channel bandwidths to operate with more
than 14 dBm EIRP total power. They explain that ``increas[ing] power
limits for all channel sizes available in the 6 GHz band . . . is
important because wider channels are subject to more noise and
therefore require additional power to maintain a sufficient signal-to-
noise ratio. Apple, Broadcom et al. similarly recommend permitting a
maximum PSD of 8 dBm/MHz EIRP so that all channels, regardless of
bandwidth, can operate at the maximum power level. They further claim
that ``an increase in the PSD limit would not result in any higher risk
of harmful interference because of the limitations imposed by the
proposed geofencing system'' (e.g., the proposal that ``the size of an
exclusion zone must increase in proportion to a GVP device's power
level'').
 Apple, Broadcom et al. point to several computer simulations they
submitted prior to the issuance of the 6 GHz Second FNPRM as evidence
that GVP devices can operate at up to 21 dBm EIRP without creating a
significant risk of harmful interference to licensed incumbents. One
computer simulation that modeled the interaction between outdoor VLP
devices and the 97,888 6 GHz band fixed microwave links in the United
States for 20-, 40-, 80-, and 160-megahertz bandwidth VLP signals
concluded that there was only a 0.00059% probability that a VLP device
operating at 21 dBm EIRP would cause a microwave link to experience an
interference-to-noise (I/N) ratio greater than -6 dB. According to
Apple, Broadcom et al., the computer simulation demonstrates that VLP
devices operating at 21 dBm with no additional mitigation rules would
not create a significant harmful interference

[[Page 9142]]

risk. Apple, Broadcom et al. argued that this minimal risk would be
mitigated by the proposed geofencing rules, which ``would prohibit
transmissions in the very rare instances where the [computer
simulations] found that [VLP] operations could exceed the -6 dB I/N
metric.''
 The Dynamic Spectrum Alliance (DSA) and Wi-Fi Alliance support the
same power levels for GVP devices as Apple, Broadcom et al. DSA
believes that the GVP power levels proposed by the Commission, 14 dBm
EIRP and 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD, do not ``provide[ ] a sufficient economic
incentive for companies to make the necessary investments [to] develop[
] and commercializ[e] such [devices].'' DSA points out that the
proposed power levels would only benefit devices operating on 20-
megahertz or 40-megahertz channels, but that most use cases are better
suited to larger channel sizes. DSA urges the Commission to instead
adopt a geofenced VLP framework with a 21 dBm EIRP limit and 8 dBm/MHz
EIRP PSD. According to DSA, ``[t]he higher EIRP limit . . . will
provide greater reliability for [augmented reality/virtual reality]
applications,'' and ``[t]he increased EIRP PSD limits will enable
narrow band applications, which may not be feasible under the [current]
VLP limits.'' The Wi-Fi Alliance ask that the Commission ``create a new
device class for higher power VLP devices capable of operating at up to
21 dBm EIRP and 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD. According to the Wi-Fi Alliance,
allowing VLP devices to operate at up to 21 dBm EIRP ``will enable new
applications that are not possible at the current VLP power levels and
enable a more robust connectivity for existing applications.''
 While Apple initially joined Apple, Broadcom et al. in requesting
GVP power levels of up to 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 21 dBm maximum EIRP,
Apple later proposed a simplified geofencing version with only two
power levels: 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD, both with a
maximum 21 dBm EIRP, instead of permitting variable power up to the 8
dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 21 dBm EIRP limits. The geofencing systems would
calculate two exclusion zones--one for each PSD level--and a GVP device
would check its location to determine whether it may operate and, if
so, its maximum power level. This version would reduce the calculations
needed by the geofencing systems because they would not need to support
variable GVP power levels.
 More recently, Apple and Meta contend that maximum authorized power
levels of at least 11 dBm/MHz PSD and 24 dBm EIRP for GVP access points
and 5 dBm/MHz PSD and 18 dBm EIRP for GVP client devices are
``essential for adequate reliability and performance for GVP use
cases.'' They claim that ``GVP devices are likely to predominately be
wearable devices,'' such as smartwatches and augmented reality glasses,
which have ``significant latency and throughput requirements.'' These
wearable devices would face up to 96 dB of attenuation communicating
across the user's body. They also point to other use cases, such as
multiple peer-to-peer links, which would also greatly benefit from
higher power levels. They claim that their analysis shows that these
higher power levels are essential to meet the performance goals for
these and other envisioned use cases.
 Federated Wireless supports the Commission's proposal to allow
greater power for VLP devices operating under the control of a
geofencing system, but instead of spending time and resources
developing a new system for geofencing, Federated Wireless advocates
relying on the currently authorized AFC systems. Federated Wireless
also encourages permitting GVP devices to operate at higher power than
the proposed 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP because AFC systems are
``capable of offering the same level of protection to incumbents
regardless of the unlicensed device transmit power.''
 The Wi-Fi Alliance points out that the computer simulations upon
which the Commission relied in permitting VLP operations ``show
virtually no impact on the microwave links even for VLP devices
operating at 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD.'' The Wi-Fi Alliance claims that VLP
devices will be predominantly used indoors, that their signals will be
attenuated by body loss when they are used outdoors, and that outdoor
VLP transmitters will operate far below the likely height of any 6 GHz
microwave facilities. Therefore, the Wi-Fi Alliance claims that
existing mitigation requirements are sufficient to protect microwave
operations from VLP devices operating at up to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and
14 dBm EIRP. The Wi-Fi Alliance contends that because the risk of
harmful interference from VLP devices operating at this power level
``is already extremely low,'' there is no benefit in imposing
geofencing requirements. The IEEE LAN/MAN Standards Committee (IEEE
LMSC) also does not believe that the Commission should require
geofencing if it increases the power level to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14
dBm EIRP because it effectively only would permit higher power for 20-
megahertz and 40-megathertz channels and would not result in increased
risk to incumbent services. IEEE LMSC claims that the incremental
improvement from this power increase does not justify mandating the
relatively complex geofencing mechanism and that developing this
geofencing mechanism will potentially delay this VLP mode from
deploying.
 Cisco and HP Enterprise support slightly higher VLP power levels to
accommodate body loss, but caution that increasing VLP power needs to
be done so as to ensure that unlicensed LPI devices continue to coexist
among themselves and with VLP devices. According to Cisco and HP
Enterprise, the top request of enterprise customers is that Wi-Fi be
more predictable and reliable. Cisco and HP Enterprise explain that
interference to enterprise Wi-Fi means less spectrum availability,
which results in smaller channels with decreased capacity and increased
latency. They point out that ``[g]eofencing does not consider
coexistence with enterprise [Wi-Fi] networks'' and that ``[h]igher
power VLP . . . could interfere with other VLP use[s].'' They claim
that enterprise customers would like VLP to be coordinated by the
infrastructure when in the presence of LPI access points. Cisco and HP
state that the actual affect that VLP and GVP devices will have on
enterprise Wi-Fi networks is unknown, but that CableLabs is currently
studying that issue. Cisco and HP Enterprise recommend that the
Commission ``adopt reasonable limits on GVP/VLP while standards
develop''--i.e., ``slightly higher powered VLP to accommodate body
loss''--that improve coexistence among the different types of Wi-Fi
devices.
 AT&T urges caution with respect to liberalizing the 6 GHz
unlicensed rules and expresses concern that the computer simulations on
which VLP device rules are based remain unfiled and untested. AT&T
suggests that the Commission ``gain some understanding of the impact of
actual, commercially deployed VLP devices before liberalizing the rules
by which they operate and, if it ultimately determines to do so, to act
with caution in a manner that is reversible.'' AT&T suggests that the
power limits for GVP devices ``should start conservatively, provide for
future modification, and be capped with reference to [the] risks
defined by geolocation parameters,'' with the power levels lower if the
Commission adopts a geofencing framework that carries substantial risk
to incumbent microwave receivers. AT&T is concerned that the proposal
of 1 dBm/

[[Page 9143]]

MHz EIRP PSD limit ``does not appear to be a conservative starting
point'' and, ``[e]ven more dire, the 6 GHz Second FNPRM seeks comment
on increasing the [maximum] EIRP to 21 dBm.'' AT&T complains that ``the
[GVP] proponents' response to the 6 GHz Second FNPRM amounts to
platitudes that geofencing . . . will self-evidently protect incumbents
and the Commissions needs not worry because their prior studies . . .
should nonetheless carry the day.'' AT&T claims that ``no geofencing
advocate has advanced a proposal for geofencing that allows incumbents
to rationally evaluate the potential for harmful interference.'' AT&T
demands that before the Commission authorizes GVP operations, the
record should contain proposed rules that cover such topics as location
determination and accuracy, how geofencing boundaries will be
implemented, additive interference, the geofencing model (geofencing
system architecture), GVP device elevation, database and geofence
reauthorization intervals, and an exclusion zone buffer to account for
mobility.
 Evergy cautions that the Commission ``should hold off on further
expanding unlicensed operations in the 6 GHz band until enough real-
world experience has occurred to gain the confidence of incumbents in
the utility industry.'' Evergy is concerned that unlicensed devices
will raise the noise floor and result in harmful interference to
incumbent licensed operations. Evergy cautions that if harmful
interference occurs, its ``existing mission-critical systems may become
unreliable and inoperable while its engineers engage in . . . [the]
extremely difficult, if not impossible, task'' of identifying the
responsible unlicensed device(s). Evergy describes the proposed 1 dBm/
MHz EIRP PSD as ``a dramatic increase in power that poses significant
risk to incumbent licensees'' and urges the Commission to reject this
proposal as well as the request by GVP advocates for maximum power
levels of 21 dBm EIRP and 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD. Evergy asks that the
Commission ensures that any geofencing solution protect microwave links
commensurate with the protection provided by the AFC system.
 The American Petroleum Institute (API) does not support permitting
VLP devices to operate at 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD until more field data on
VLP devices and interference is collected, which it predicts would take
two years or more. Provided data is collected over the proper time
frame and the results show VLP devices are operating without impacting
incumbents, API claims that the proposed geofencing system allowing GVP
devices to operate at up to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP appears
to have merit. The Utilities Technology Council and the Edison Electric
Institute (UTC/EEI) joint comments advise the Commission to ``refrain
from further expanding unlicensed operations in the 6 GHz band'' until
it better understands the interference environment from currently
authorized 6 GHz unlicensed devices. The Association of Public-Safety
Communications Officials, International (APCO), noting the rules for
that VLP devices have only recently been implemented, advises the
Commission to let ``[r]eal-world operational experience and testing . .
. guide any future decision-making rather than risk essential public
safety communications networks with theoretical models and lab testing
alone.''
 The Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) states that if VLP
devices ``[are] allowed to operate at 1 dBm/MHz [EIRP] PSD, then it is
imperative that the method used to prevent operation in areas with
elevated risk of harmful interference be infallible.'' EPRI claims that
its research shows that even at the -5 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD level at which
VLP devices operate, a scheme to prevent VLP devices from operating co-
channel in a microwave receiver's main beamwidth is necessary to
prevent harmful interference and that exclusion zones could be an
effective method to protect these sites provided the propagation models
align with the findings from real-world testing.
 Discussion. The Commission is adopting rules to permit GVP devices
to operate in the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 portions of the 6 GHz band at up
to 11 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 24 dBm EIRP while under the control of a
geofencing system. As discussed in more detail in this document, the
geofencing system must comply with various requirements to prevent GVP
operations at locations where they may cause a significant risk of
harmful interference to licensed incumbent services that share the 6
GHz band. The geofencing system will use the same propagation models
and protection criteria that are employed by AFC systems to calculate
exclusion zones in which the GVP access points will not be permitted to
operate co-channel with a microwave receiver. The geofencing system
will also prevent GVP access points from operating near certain radio
astronomy observatories. The GVP access points will be required to have
a geolocation capability to determine when they enter an exclusion zone
and must adjust their operating frequency, if necessary, to meet this
condition. GVP client devices, which will not be required to have a
geolocation capability, will operate only under the control of a GVP
access point at 6 dB less than the controlling access point's
authorized power.
 The Commission adopts the 11 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 24 dBm EIRP power
levels rather than the 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP power levels
proposed in the 6 GHz Second FNPRM for several reasons. First, the
geofencing systems will be equally effective in preventing a
significant risk of harmful interference at the higher power levels
because the size of the exclusion zones will increase to account for
the higher power--i.e., the size of the exclusion zones scales with the
power level. Second, the Commission agrees with commenters who opine
that permitting higher power levels than those proposed in the 6 GHz
Second FNPRM provides a stronger incentive for manufacturers to invest
in geofencing systems and GVP devices. Moreover, the Commission
recognizes that adopting the proposed GVP power levels, which are only
an incremental power increase to the VLP power levels, may not convince
industry to undertake the expenses associated with developing this new
class of devices. Lastly, the Commission believes that 11 dBm/MHz EIRP
PSD and 24 dBm EIRP are necessary for GVP access points to deliver the
required reliability and performance for body worn applications, as
Apple and Meta point out. According to measurements conducted by the
Wireless Research Center of North Carolina, which examined the
attenuation between two body worn devices for six test subjects, body
attenuation can range from 28 to 96 dB. Considering the high level of
signal attenuation that must be overcome between body-worn devices, the
Commission concludes that the higher power levels it's permitting are
appropriate.
 Commenters agree that permitting higher power levels will enable
more versatile GVP devices to be developed and result in a wide variety
of innovative products. As Apple, Broadcom et al., point out, the
higher PSD level will be particularly useful for applications that rely
on narrow channels such as high bitrate audio and control signaling
while the higher maximum power will benefit data-intensive tasks in
applications such as artificial reality/virtual reality, automotive
technologies, screen mirroring, hotspots, and indoor location and
navigation. Adopting the higher power levels requested by industry with
a geofencing requirement provides more versatility to encourage
innovative uses

[[Page 9144]]

and incentivize investment without increasing the harmful interference
risk to incumbent users. The Commission also points out that even
though it's permitting up to 11 dBm/MHz PSD and 24 dBm EIRP levels, the
Commission expects the majority of devices to operate below these
maximum levels most of the time. For many reasons, including to
increase battery life, portable devices generally operate at the
minimum power level necessary to close the link. In addition, the
Commission notes that Apple and Meta's filing shows that body
attenuation is highly variable based on individual factors; the maximum
power is only needed for the extreme cases when body attenuation is at
its highest. Thus, the higher power levels the Commission is allowing
combined with a geofencing system that scales exclusion zones to the
power level provides maximum flexibility for the development of
versatile devices to provide new applications to the public while
continuing to protect incumbent services from a significant risk of
harmful interference.
 The Commission declines to adopt the two-power level model
suggested by Apple. The Commission appreciates the desire to simplify
geofencing system implementation, but believe this decision is best
driven by geofencing system providers based on intended customers and
applications or through industry consensus within a standards process.
The rules the Commission adopts simply define maximum PSD and EIRP and
permit geofencing system providers to determine whether to calculate a
single exclusion zone based on the maximum power or to calculate
multiple exclusion zones indexed for lower power levels. Thus,
geofencing system providers can determine the proper tradeoff between
the flexibility and complexity associated with calculating a single or
multiple exclusion zones.
 The Commission also does not find it appropriate to limit the power
available to GVP devices to protect enterprise LPI Wi-Fi devices, as
suggested by Cisco and HP Enterprise. 6 GHz band unlicensed devices are
expected to share the band with other unlicensed devices. The operators
of enterprise Wi-Fi networks have no basis to expect that they can
manage use of the 6 GHz band spectrum solely for their benefit. One of
the Commission's goals for expanding unlicensed use in the 6 GHz bands
is to encourage the development of innovative consumer devices. By
increasing the power available to VLP devices that employ geofencing,
the Commission will enable exciting new applications, such as body-worn
devices for augmented reality/virtual reality, as well as provide for
higher data rates for existing uses, such as Wi-Fi hotspots. The
Commission does not believe that it would be in the public interest to
forego these new applications to potentially prevent harmful
interference from occurring to other unlicensed device users. The new
applications and higher data rates will be widely available to all
consumers and businesses. The Commission believes this is preferrable
to the alternative of restricting the capabilities of GVP devices by
limiting their power in order to, in effect, permit enterprises to
exclusively use the shared 6 GHz band spectrum within their facilities.
Moreover, the Commission notes that its rules contain provisions
designed to promote coexistence among all devices operating in the 6
GHz bands. For example, GVP devices will need to comply with the same
contention-based protocol requirements already in place for LPI and VLP
devices and the dynamic transmit power control requirement in place for
VLP devices.
 The Commission declines to delay adopting GVP rules in order to
collect more data or conduct testing, as suggested by API, UTC/EEI,
APCO, Evergy, and AT&T. The Commission also sees no reason to adopt the
incremental approach of initially adopting a lower GVP power level and
potentially increasing it after the Commission gains more experience
with GVP operations. The Commission's rules for AFC-enabled standard-
power devices were adopted in 2020, (85 FR 31390, May 26, 2020), and
AFC systems have been approved for commercial operation since February
2024. The Commission has not received any interference complaints
related to 6 GHz standard-power devices operating under the control of
AFC systems. Because GVP geofencing systems will employ the same
propagation models and determine exclusion zones using the same I/N
threshold as the AFC systems, the Commission is confident that the
geofencing systems will be equally effective at preventing a
significant risk of harmful interference. Also, in the unlikely event
that harmful interference occurs, the Commission will require
geofencing systems to adjust any or all exclusion zones. Thus, the
rules contain an effective mitigation strategy should harmful
interference occur.
 The Commission is unpersuaded by Evergy's concerns regarding
increasing the noise floor or causing harmful interference to microwave
receivers. The geofencing system will prevent operation of GVP access
points and associated client devices at locations where they present a
risk of causing harmful interference to microwave receivers. The
Commission notes that Evergy has not presented any technical analysis
indicating that such harmful interference will occur in practice or
that GVP devices operating in conjunction with a geofencing system will
raise the noise floor. The Commission's experience with AFC systems and
the fact that the exclusion zones can be adjusted, if necessary,
indicate that harmful interference is unlikely to be an issue and that
if any interference issues do arise, they can be addressed by the
Commission. As to EPRI's contention that any method used to prevent VLP
device operation in areas with elevated interference risk must be
``infallible,'' we acknowledge that no spectrum management system is
infallible. However, based on past experience with using databases to
effect spectrum management opportunities, such as with the AFC systems
and the spectrum access systems (SAS) used to manage access to the
3550-3700 MHz band in the Citizens Broadband Radio Service, the
Commission believes that the geofencing systems that its rules are
enabling will permit GVP operation without posing a significant risk of
harmful interference.
 The Commission disagrees with AT&T that the lack of a specific
proposal by GVP advocates prevented incumbents from rationally
evaluating the potential for harmful interference. The rules the
Commission is adopting closely mirror its proposal in the 6 GHz Second
FNPRM and require GVP devices to operate pursuant to a geofencing
system that will be based on the same propagation models as used for
the AFC systems. The 6 GHz Second FNPRM sufficiently discussed the
topics that AT&T claims must be included in a serious proposed set of
GVP rules.
 The Commission is not increasing the general (i.e., non-geofenced)
VLP PSD to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP, as suggested by the Wi-Fi Alliance and the
IEEE LMSC. The 6 GHz Second FNPRM explicitly declined to seek comment
on modifying the VLP rules for devices operating without a geofencing
system except for some aspects of the out-of-band emission limits.
Thus, any consideration of higher power for non-geofenced VLP devices
is beyond the scope of the FCC's proceeding.
 Finally, AT&T questions the computer simulations on which the
Commission relied when adopting the VLP device rules. However, the
Commission is not relying on those computer simulation results in
reaching our decision to permit GVP operations. Instead, the

[[Page 9145]]

Commission bases its decision to permit GVP on the adoption of rules
requiring the use of a geofencing system to prevent any significant
risk of harmful interference. Therefore, the veracity of the
simulations the Commission relied on when authorizing VLP devices is
not relevant to the Commission's decision here permitting GVP
operations.

GVP Client Device Power

 The 6 GHz Second FNPRM proposed to require client devices operating
under the control of a GVP access point to transmit only on channels
determined by that GVP access point. Under this proposal, client
devices would not be required to directly obtain or calculate exclusion
zones. The 6 GHz Second FNPRM proposed that client devices operating
under the control of a GVP access point be permitted to operate at the
same power level as the GVP access point.
 AT&T expresses concern that the 6 GHz Second FNPRM proposed to
permit client devices connected to GVP access points to operate at the
same power as the GVP access point, even though only the GVP access
points will be subject to geolocation and geofencing requirements. AT&T
calls this a ``significant and unexplained departure from the
requirement'' for standard-power and LPI operations that client devices
operate at power levels at least 6 dB less than the associated access
points. AT&T suggests that if the Commission does not require GVP
client devices to similarly operate at lower power levels, the
exclusion zones should be extended by 365 meters, the range over which
AT&T claims that two GVP devices could communicate.
 Apple, Broadcom et al. suggest that the Commission's rationale for
adopting lower power limits for standard-power and LPI client devices
does not apply to GVP devices. Apple, Broadcom et al., note that the
Commission mandated lower power for standard-power and LPI client
devices ``as a precaution against the theoretical scenario that a
client device could operate in a location with a substantially
different interference potential compared to its associated standard-
power [access point].'' Apple, Broadcom et al. claim that scenario will
not occur for GVP client devices because they ``must operate in close
proximity [to their access point] due to their lower power levels
relative to standard power [access points].'' Apple, Broadcom et al.
further explain that the power level for LPI client devices was
specifically lowered to prevent outdoor use, an issue that is not
relevant for GVP client devices, which would be allowed to operate
outdoors.
 Apple supports the Commission's proposal to authorize the same
power levels for GVP access points and client devices because the
devices will rely on symmetrical bi-directional communication. Apple
suggests that if the Commission decides to adjust the size of the
exclusion zones determined by the geofencing system to account for the
potential separation distance between a GVP access point and client
device, ``expanding the exclusion zones by 75 meters would be a very
conservative approach,'' as demonstrated by data presented by Apple and
Meta. The Apple and Meta data show the separation distance that can be
achieved between GVP access points and client devices when operating a
communication link at different Wi-Fi modulation and coding schemes
(MCS) in urban and suburban areas. These calculations were based on
operation with 21 dBm EIRP, 4 dB of body loss, 0 dBi antenna gain, a
transmit frequency of 6.5 GHz, and the use of the propagation models
specified in the Commission's rules for AFC operation. This data
illustrates that as the MCS level increases the GVP access points and
client devices must be closer together to successfully communicate.
Apple and Meta maintain that these calculations show that ``a 75-meter
buffer would more than account for the potential distance between a
[GVP access point] and client [device] . . . because this would be
larger than the maximum separation distance established using AFC
modeling for devices operating at MCS 4.'' Apple and Meta claim that
``[GVP] devices are likely to overwhelmingly operate at MCS 4 and
above'' because ``[o]peration at MCS 1 would not support the throughput
requirements needed for this class of devices, which will enable
[augmented reality], video, and other high-throughput applications.''
They also maintain that ``in the real world, [GVP] devices will rarely,
if ever, be separated by 75 meters'' because they ``may not be fixed,
must be workable at far lower power than standard Wi-Fi, and include a
geolocation-capable [access point].'' Apple and Meta note that GVP
devices ``[t]ypically will be body-worn devices that operate with
negligible separation distances.'' Apple and Meta also claim that
AT&T's suggested 365-meter buffer distance cannot be replicated and
that AT&T relies on unrealistic assumptions, such as using only the
free-space propagation model.
 Recently, Apple and Meta have implicitly supported a 6 dB power
differential between GVP access points and associated client devices by
advocating that maximum authorized power levels of at least 11 dBm/MHz
PSD and 24 dBm EIRP for GVP access points and 5 dBm/MHz PSD and 18 dBm
EIRP for GVP client devices are essential for adequate reliability and
performance for GVP use cases.
 Discussion. The Commission is adopting GVP access point power
levels that are higher than were proposed in the 6 GHz Second FNPRM--up
to 11 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 24 dBm EIRP instead of the proposed 1 dBm/
MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP. At these higher power levels, it is
possible for client devices to operate at distances farther from the
controlling GVP access point than anticipated under the Commission's
proposal. Although many potential GVP applications, such as body-worn
devices for augmented reality/virtual reality, will involve access
points and client devices located on the same person, other
applications, such as a GVP mobile hotspot, would likely involve client
devices that are distant from the access point. Consequently, a client
device operating at the same power as its controlling GVP access point
could be located within an exclusion zone even when the GVP access
point is safely outside of the exclusion zone. Therefore, consistent
with existing 6 GHz client device rules, the Commission will require
client devices under the control of a GVP access point to operate at
power levels at least 6 dB less than the power level determined by the
geofencing system for the associated GVP access point. Because the
Commission is implementing this power reduction requirement for GVP
client devices, the Commission declines to extend the exclusion zone
boundaries, as AT&T suggests.
 Apple, Broadcom et al. provide no rationale to support its claim
that GVP client devices must operate in close proximity to GVP access
points. While Apple, Broadcom et al. are correct that one of the
motivations for the 6 dB power differential between LPI access points
and their associated client devices was to limit the client devices to
indoor operation, client devices connected to standard-power access
points are also restricted to 6 dB less power than their associated
access point and such access points and client devices are not limited
to indoor operation. This illustrates that when adopting the rules for
standard-power devices the Commission believed that it is necessary to
impose a 6 dB power difference between access points and client devices
to prevent the client devices from operating too close to

[[Page 9146]]

microwave receivers even when the associated access point is operating
under the control of an AFC system. The Commission continues to hold to
that reasoning and reach the same conclusion for GVP devices. In
addition, Apple provides no basis for contending that GVP devices will
rely on symmetrical bi-directional communication. Other 6 GHz
unlicensed devices such as standard-power and LPI devices function with
a 6 dB power differential between access points and client devices and
the Commission sees no basis for concluding that GVP devices cannot
also be designed to account for this power difference.
 The Commission finds that providing 6 dB lower power for GVP client
devices is a superior approach for compensating for the separation
distance between GVP access points and client devices than adding a 75-
meter buffer to the exclusion zone boundaries, as suggested by Apple
and Meta. The 75-meter buffer size is based on the assumption that at
least MCS 4 will always be necessary for these devices. While this may
be the case for the augmented-reality glasses and wristband
electromyography technology that are the subject of Apple and Meta's
presentation, the Commission is not limiting GVP devices to particular
technologies or applications. GVP devices operating under the rules the
Commission is adopting are expected to operate at a range of MCS levels
as needed for different applications and will be able to employ
technologies other than Wi-Fi. Consequently, the Commission cannot
conclude that GVP access points and client devices will always be
limited to a 75-meter separation distance. Applying the same 6 dB power
level differential between access points and client devices as the
Commission have used for other types 6 GHz unlicensed devices is a more
straightforward approach to protecting licensed operations that share
the 6 GHz band, while also enabling GVP client devices to operate at
the power levels that Apple and Meta state are necessary to ensure
reliable communications. This approach also maintains the coexistence
scheme already in place to protect incumbents from a significant risk
of harmful interference.
 The Commission does not believe that imposing a 6 dB power
differential between GVP access points and associated client devices
will hinder the usefulness of GVP devices. As noted above, Apple and
Meta have advocated that GVP client devices should have a maximum
permitted power level of at least 18 dBm and 5 dBm/MHz to support the
envisioned use cases, such as body-worn devices for augmented reality
applications and multiple peer-to-peer links. While Apple, Broadcom et
al. have indicated that they support 8 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 21 dBm EIRP
power levels and also advocate for no power differential between GVP
assess points and client devices, they have not indicated that limiting
client devices to 3 dB below these power levels will hinder the
implementation of particular use cases. Therefore, the Commission has
no reason to conclude that the power limits its establishing for client
devices under the control of GVP access points will inhibit the
usefulness of GVP devices.
 Under the rules the Commission is adopting, GVP client devices are
limited to a maximum of 5 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 18 dBm EIRP. In
addition, for GVP access points operating within an exclusion zone and
pursuant to geofencing instructions limiting power below the maximum
permitted, associated client devices will similarly be required to
reduce power such that they are at least 6 dB less than the maximum
power permitted for the GVP access point. For example, if a GVP access
point is operating in an exclusion zone and limited by the geofencing
system to 1 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 14 dBm EIRP, an associated client
device will be limited to -5 dBm/MHz EIRP PSD and 8 dBm EIRP. However,
if a GVP access point transmits at less than its maximum permitted
power level, the maximum power for the client device is determined by
subtracting 6 dB from the access points maximum permitted power, not by
subtracting 6 dB from the access points transmit power. For example, if
a GVP access point that is operating outside of any exclusion zone
transmits at 5 dBm/MHz PSD and 18 dBm EIRP, an associated client device
could transmit at this same power level because the maximum permitted
power level of the access point is 11 dBm/MHz PSD and 24 dBm EIRP.

GVP Operations in U-NII-6 and U-NII-8

 In the 6 GHz Second FNPRM, the Commission proposed that geofencing
systems protect BAS and CARS operations in the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8
bands. The Commission noted that both the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 bands are
used by mobile broadcast auxiliary services, including outdoor
electronic news gathering (ENG) trucks and low power short range
devices, such as portable cameras and microphones. Low Power Auxiliary
Stations, which are licensed in portions of the U-NII-8 band, operate
on an itinerant basis and transmit over distances of approximately 100
meters for uses such as wireless microphones, cue and control
communications, and TV camera synchronization signals. ENG trucks
transmit video programming, generally using telescoping directional
antennas that are oriented toward a central receive site from remote
sites, such as the location of news or sporting events, to a central
receive site. The Commission proposed that the geofencing systems
protect the BAS and CARS operations using the same propagation models,
interference protection criterion, and body loss assumptions as used to
protect microwave receivers in the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 bands.
 Due to the steerable nature of the central receive antennas, the
Commission asked if exclusion zones surrounding central receive sites
need to be circular to ensure protection in all directions, or could
they be only part of a circle, i.e., less than 360 degrees. The
Commission noted that BAS and CARS operations are typically licensed
for the entire band(s) in which they operate (i.e., U-NII-6, U-NII-8,
or both) and asked whether GVP devices should avoid operation across
the entire band that a BAS/CARS site receives within the exclusion
zones. The Commission sought comment on whether there are ways to
reduce the size of the exclusion zones to protect BAS and CARS receive
sites, limit the number of frequencies excluded within those zones, or
limit receive site protection to only the specific times when they are
in use. More specifically, the Commission asked whether BAS and CARS
users should be required to notify a geofencing system of their ENG
operations, and for the geofencing systems to incorporate a push
notification feature or similar functionality to provide information
(e.g., actual operating locations and frequency usage, on a near real-
time basis) to GVP devices so that the exclusion zones in the U-NII-6
and U-NII-8 bands can be tailored to actual usage rather than all
possible usage areas. The Commission noted that if it were to adopt a
push notification or similar approach to protect BAS/CARS based on
usage, there would be a need for one or more centralized systems to
register BAS/CARS usage and provide the information to geofencing
systems.
 The Commission proposed that low power short range BAS and CARS
devices, such as portable cameras and microphones, and Low Power
Auxiliary stations be protected from harmful interference by a
combination of a required contention-based protocol and

[[Page 9147]]

the low probability of a GVP device operating on the same channel in a
nearby location. The Commission explained that the sensing function
associated with the contention-based protocol, along with the low
probability for co-channel operation, is sufficient to ensure that GVP
devices detect nearby mobile BAS operations and avoid transmitting co-
channel to protect those operations from harmful interference.
 Apple, Broadcom et al. point to a computer simulation they
submitted prior to the issuance of the 6 GHz Second FNPRM as evidence
that harmful interference will not occur to ENG receive sites from GVP
operations at 21 dBm EIRP. This simulation examined two ENG receive
sites at Cowles Mountain, San Diego, CA, and the Old Post Office in
Washington, DC. The simulations analyzed mobile links from ENG trucks
to BAS central receive sites for a total of six links per site. The
simulations purport to show that both sites had a close to zero percent
probability of experiencing an I/N higher than -6 dB due to VLP devices
operating at 21 dBm. While Apple, Broadcom et al. claim the record
shows there will be an insignificant risk of harmful interference when
GVP operates at 21 dBm EIRP, they ``support the Commission's belt-and-
suspenders use of geofencing for this GVP device class.'' They note
that adopting a contention-based protocol requirement and the
opportunity for broadcasters to report on ENG link locations will
further diminish the risk of harmful interference to ENG incumbent
licensees.
 NAB contends that the Commission's proposal to protect mobile
operations using exclusion zones around registered ENG central receive
sites is based on an incomplete view of how this spectrum is used. It
points out that ``[w]hile transmission from a mobile ENG truck to a
central receive site is a common way that licensed users of this
spectrum operate,'' ``[b]roadcasters make use of this spectrum in
myriad ways when covering newsworthy events, including from camera-back
transmitters to temporary receivers mounted on trucks that can operate
nationwide.'' NAB claims that the proposal for BAS users to provide
operating locations and frequencies to a database administrator would
``add[ ] significant burden and delay to the newsgathering process''
and require ``untold expense to implement a system to capture this
information.'' NAB also criticizes the computer simulation upon which
Apple, Broadcom et al. rely, claiming that the analysis showing
absolutely no interference to ENG receivers is plainly unreasonable
because many hypothetical VLP transmitter locations near an ENG receive
antenna would present a signal exceeding a -6 dB I/N level.
 Discussion. The Commission defers adoption of rules to permit GVP
operation in the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 bands because it does not believe
that the record currently contains sufficient details to adopt
geofencing that will efficiently manage spectrum while protecting
mobile BAS and CARS operations. Because news events can occur anywhere
with little notice, a geofencing system that is based on the actual
location and directionality of the links between ENG truck transmitters
and the central receive sites will require updated information on the
locations of ENG truck transmitters. If the ENG operations are not
tracked in a centralized database, the geofencing systems will have to
protect the ENG receivers over a 360-degreee radius at all times. This
large area will need to be protected across the entire U-NII-6 and U-
NII-8 bands because BAS and CARS licenses typically permit
transmissions across the entire bands. Because ENG news gathering is
conducted by broadcasters throughout the nation, establishing exclusion
zones at every ENG central receive site that covers the entire U-NII-6
and U-NII-8 bands will remove a tremendous amount of spectrum from use
by GVP devices. Hence, to efficiently manage access to this spectrum
the Commission finds that it should consider how geofencing systems can
be designed to use information on actual ENG use to quickly update the
exclusion zones governing GVP device use.
 While Apple, Broadcom et al. support the use of geofencing systems
for GVP devices operating in the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 band and contend
that NAB has not substantiated its claim that providing real-time
information on BAS/CARS use would be a burden to newsgathering
operations, they have not provided any details on how geofencing
systems would collect BAS/CARS usage information and manage GVP device
spectrum use. For the Commission to adopt rules for geofencing systems
that use real-time information on BAS/CARS use, the Commission would
have to address many issues such as: How would the information on BAS/
CARS use be collected? Who would collect this information? What
specific information would be collected? How would the information be
propagated to the various geofencing systems? How would updated
exclusion zones based on this information be pushed to the GVP access
points? How quickly would the GVP access points need to adjust their
spectrum use as BAS/CARS spectrum use changes? Given the lack of record
on how this process would work in practice, the Commission does not
believe that it has sufficient information to adopt rules for
geofencing systems for the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 bands. In adopting rules
to permit GVP device operations in the U-NII-5 and U-NII-7 bands while
deferring consideration of operations in the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 bands,
the Commission is following the same path it used to adopt rules for
VLP devices. In the 2023 6 GHz Second Order, the Commission adopted
rules to permit VLP device operation in U-NII-5 and U-NII-7. In 2024,
after obtaining a more robust record, the Commission expanded VLP
operations to the U-NII-6 and U-NII-8 bands in the 6 GHz Third Order
(90 FR 11373, March 6, 2025).
