FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Advancement of the Low Power Television, TV Translator and Class A Television Service
Document number: 2026-01279
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 91 FR 2861
Publication date: 2026-01-23

Federal Register, Volume 91 Issue 15 (Friday, January 23, 2026)


[Federal Register Volume 91, Number 15 (Friday, January 23, 2026)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 2861-2877]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2026-01279]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 11, 73, and 74

[MB Docket No. 24-148; FCC 25-84; FR ID 325598]


Advancement of the Low Power Television, TV Translator and Class
A Television Service

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC
or Commission) adopts certain changes to its rules concerning Class A
television, low power television and TV translator stations (LPTV
Service). These include operational and technical rule updates aimed at
providing clarity and regulatory certainty to licensees so they can
make informed business decisions about their station operations and to
ensure that the public continues to benefit from their operations.

DATES: Effective February 23, 2026, except the amendments to Sec. Sec.
73.3700(g) (amendatory instruction 11), 73.6001(d) (amendatory
instruction 12), 73.6002(b) (amendatory instruction 14), 74.787(a)
(amendatory instruction 27), 74.791(a) through (c) (amendatory
instruction 29), 74.793(a) through (c) (amendatory instruction 30), and
74.799(i) (amendatory instruction 32) which are delayed. The FCC will
publish a document in the Federal Register announcing the effective
dates of those amendments.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, contact Shaun Maher, Video Division, Media Bureau at
 [email protected] or (202) 418-2324; or Mark Colombo, Video Division,
Media Bureau at [email protected] or (202) 418-7611.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order, in MB Docket Nos. 24-148; FCC 25-84, adopted on December 18,
2025 and released December 19, 2025. The full text of this document is
available via FCC website at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/fcc-25-84A1.pdf . The full text of this document will also be available
via ECFS https://www.fcc.gov/cgb/ecfs/ . (Documents will be available
electronically in ASCII, Word, and/or Adobe Acrobat.) To request these
documents in accessible formats for people with disabilities, send an
email to [email protected] or call the Commission's Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202)

[[Page 2862]]

418-0530 (voice), (202) 418-0432 (TTY).

Synopsis

I. Introduction

 This Report and Order (R&O) adopts certain changes to the
Commission's rules for Class A television, low power television, and TV
translator stations (collectively the LPTV Service) as proposed in the
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 89 FR 53537 (June 27, 2024) (2024)
(NPRM) adopted by the Commission in June 2024 in this proceeding. The
Commission created the LPTV Service in 1982 to bring local television
service to viewers ``otherwise unserved or underserved'' by existing
full power television service providers. Today, these stations are an
established component of the nation's television system, delivering
free over-the-air TV service, including locally produced programming,
to millions of viewers in both rural and urban communities. In light of
changes within the broadcast industry and LPTV Service over the last
forty years, the R&O adopts changes to the Commission's rules to ensure
that the LPTV Service continues to flourish and serve the public
interest long into the future.

II. Background

 The LPTV Service was established over forty years ago as a
secondary, niche service delivering free over-the-air television
service, including locally produced programming, to viewers in rural
and discrete urban communities. With this goal in mind, it was exempted
from certain obligations applicable to full power television
broadcasters, including certain recordkeeping and operating
obligations. Because stations in the LPTV Service are licensed on
available channels found between full service television allocations,
they are authorized at lower power levels and serve smaller geographic
areas. While the type of stations that comprise the LPTV Service have
many similarities under the Commission's rules, they are each a
distinct class of broadcast television station, with differing rights
and responsibilities. Currently, there are approximately 1,759 licensed
low power television (LPTV) stations, 3,096 licensed TV translator
stations, and 397 licensed Class A television (Class A) stations.
 LPTV stations operate in all states and territories and are
permitted to both originate programming, or with permission, retransmit
the signal of another TV station. While many LPTV stations air
``niche'' programming, which is sometimes locally produced, others are
affiliated with a television network, including the top four networks
(ABC, CBS, Fox, and NBC). TV translators, which also include digital
replacement translators (DRTs) or digital-to-digital replacement
translators (DTDRTs), primarily operate in the western regions of the
United States and often deliver the only over-the-air television
service to rural communities. With limited exception, TV translators
may only simultaneously retransmit the signal of another TV station,
with permission. The primary use of TV translator stations are to
provide service to areas where direct reception of full-service
television stations is unsatisfactory or not possible because of
distance or intervening terrain obstructions. TV translators are not
limited to operation within the contour of the station or stations they
rebroadcast. Both LPTV and TV translator stations are secondary and may
not cause interference to, and must accept interference from, full
power television stations, as well as certain land mobile radio
operations and other primary services, and may be displaced by full
power stations. They also do not have to adhere to any regular schedule
of operation.
 Class A stations, which were established pursuant to the Community
Broadcasters Protection Act of 1999 (CBPA), operate at low power, like
LPTV/TV translator stations, but are afforded primary interference
protection status. The extension of Class A status to LPTV stations has
been limited to the terms of the CBPA and the Low Power Protection Act.
Class A stations are required to broadcast a minimum of 18 hours per
day and air an average of at least three hours per week of locally
produced programming each quarter. Although many Class A stations air
independent programming, some are affiliated with a television network,
including the top four networks. In addition, Class A stations must
comply with certain part 73 regulations applicable to full power
television stations, including the Commission's online public
inspection file rules, rules governing informational and educational
children's programming, and the commercial limits in children's
programming. Although Class A stations are not a secondary service,
like LPTV/TV translator stations, they are still subject to the various
licensing and technical requirements found in part 74 of the
Commission's rules.

III. Discussion

A. Revision of Rules Concerning Relocation of Facilities

1. Calculating Distance for Displaced and Channel Sharing Stations
 The R&O amends the displacement and channel sharing rules to
eliminate the reference to a station's community of license (COL) and
incorporate the language of the part 74 minor change rule that measures
distance from the reference coordinates of an ``existing station's
antenna location.'' The Commission concludes that modifying the channel
sharing and displacement rules to measure a station's proposed
relocation based on its antenna location's reference coordinates is a
more accurate method of determining the station's service area at the
time of such facility modifications and will help maximize service to
existing viewers. The Commission finds that using a station's COL is
not as accurate a reference point as its antenna reference coordinates,
especially in light of the flexibility being afforded LPTV Service
stations in this item when designating a COL.
 The Commission rejected calls by commenters to retain the existing
rules. Because LPTV Service stations are not included in the Table of
TV Allotments (Table), they are not assigned any specific COL when
licensed. Based on the contour size and the hyperlocal nature of LPTV
Service stations, precision is necessary in order to retain the intent
of the distance limitation in the rules with regards to minor changes
and minimize service disruption. Therefore, the Commission finds that
changing its rules to measure a station's proposed relocation based on
the reference coordinates of its antenna location provides a more
accurate method for determining a station's service area.
2. The Distance Relocation Limit
 The R&O retains but modifies the current LPTV Service minor
modification distance relocation limit to no greater than 49.1 km from
a station's current antenna reference coordinates. This distance
ensures that LPTV Service stations seeking to relocate their facilities
continue to utilize the minor modification process for just ``minor
changes.'' It will also preserve, to the greatest extent possible,
continuity of service for existing viewers. The R&O declines to adopt
alternative proposals set forth in the record and declines to adopt the
proposed prohibition against rounding when making a distance
calculation.

[[Page 2863]]

 The R&O adopts a rule change to only reference the distance
relocation limit in terms of kilometers and eliminate the reference to
miles. The current Rule states that the distance limit is ``30 miles
(48 kilometers),'' but these values are not equivalent. Thirty miles is
approximately 48.28 km, while 48 km is approximately 29.8 miles. The
Commission concludes that a single standard for calculating distance
will establish precision and clarity for both broadcasters and the
Commission. The R&O next adopts a revised distance limit of 49.1 km and
rejects calls by commenters to eliminate or adopt a different limit
and/or method for determining compliance. The R&O concludes that a
slightly increased limit of 49.1 km (increased from the proposed 48.3
km), will maintain consistency and bring the rule in line with past
processing practices.
 Stations that have or may lose their existing transmitter sites,
may or have been displaced, or are otherwise unable to relocate to a
new, rule-compliant transmitter site may seek a waiver of the distance
limit and the Commission instructs the Media Bureau (Bureau) to review
such waivers on a case-by-case basis under the general waiver standard
pursuant to Sec. 1.4. The Bureau should view waiver requests favorably
where the applicant is seeking a relocation of no greater than 49.1 km
(prior to the new minor modification distance limitation adopted herein
taking effect); or if greater than 49.1 km where the applicant can
demonstrate that it must relocate its facilities due to circumstances
beyond its control (e.g., its tower has been decommissioned or it is
displaced). As part of a waiver request seeking to move no more than
49.1 km, the applicant must demonstrate that the proposal maintains
contour overlap with the current facility. For a waiver request seeking
a relocation of greater than 49.1 km, the applicant must show that it
has taken all reasonable efforts to maximize service to existing
viewers within the station's contour (i.e., no reasonable alternatives
are available that will result in more existing viewers maintaining
coverage). The applicant may also demonstrate that viewers within its
existing contour will remain well-served and have access to similar
programing from other stations.
3. Community of License Designations and Coverage Requirements
 The R&O establishes a flexible, formal standard by which LPTV
Service stations specify a community of license. The Commission finds
that formalizing the COL designation process and providing a set
standard for how LPTV Service stations select a COL will provide
certainty to licensees and clarity to viewers. Currently, stations in
the LPTV Service have been able to informally specify any COL they
choose, regardless of whether they provide service to that location.
Formalizing the COL designation process and providing a flexible
standard for how LPTV Service stations can select its COL will ensure
that COLs listed in the Commission's databases, such as the Licensing
and Management System (LMS), reflect a station's actual service area.
The R&O requires that all stations specify a rule-compliant COL within
six months of the effective date of the rule.
 Formal COL Designations. LPTV Service stations will be afforded the
flexibility to determine where best to locate their stations'
facilities and what COL to list for their facilities based on their
actual service areas. The Commission rejects arguments that, because
LPTV Service stations are not in the Table and can be authorized at any
location, there is limited significance of a COL for these stations and
the Commission should not adopt a more formal standard for stations to
designate a COL. Requiring that LPTV Service stations designate a COL
is intended to provide clarity for viewers, allow stations to foster
relationships with the communities they serve, and better align with
existing rules that already apply to the LPTV Service. Further, given
the secondary status of LPTV/TV translator stations and the fact they
may need to make changes to their facilities at any time, the
Commission concludes that stations should have the flexibility to
determine where to site their facilities and select a community of
license for those facilities.
 The Commission also rejects calls to exempt from the new COL
requirement TV translators rebroadcasting full-power noncommercial
educational (NCE) or ``public'' television stations to designate COLs
because it would provide little meaningful public interest benefit
given the statewide/regional reach of many public TV NCE stations. The
Commission finds that the goals of the new COL rule (i.e., ensuring
clarity for viewers and allowing stations to foster relationships with
the communities they serve) apply equally to all stations in the LPTV
Service regardless of class, location, or operation. Furthermore,
because TV translator stations are not formally licensed as ``public''
or ``NCE'' and are able to rebroadcast commercial or noncommercial
stations, including over the same channel at the same time, there is no
reliable way for the Commission to determine which translators are
``public television translators'' and would be eligible to be exempt
from the COL rule. Such an approach would require additional filings
from TV translators that would likely be more burdensome than simply
utilizing existing Commission resources to confirm if their COL
actually is located within the station's protected service contours.
 Flexible COL Designation Criteria. The R&O adopts flexible criteria
for LPTV Service stations to designate and change a COL. First, all
LPTV Service stations must designate a COL with a boundary that
overlaps with the station's ``protected service contour'' defined as
the contour set forth in Sec. 74.792 for LPTV/TV translator stations
and Sec. 73.6010 for Class A stations. A COL's ``boundary'' for the
purpose of determining whether there is overlap with a station's
protected service contour will be defined as the ``boundary of the
community as has been recognized by any federal, state, local, or
tribal governmental entity.'' A station will be required to certify in
any application designating a COL that its protected service contour
overlaps with the COL's boundary. Commission staff may request support
for the certification in the form of a map demonstrating the overlap.
Stations are permitted to use the name of a county or a commonly used
name of an unincorporated area, as recognized by any federal, state,
local, or tribal governmental entity, as a station's COL. In cases
where no community exists within a station's protected service contour,
a licensee may select a nearby community located outside its protected
service contour and use Longley-Rice to demonstrate the field strength
is at or above the value found in Sec. Sec. 73.6010 or 74.792 (as
appropriate). Any amount of overlap between a station's protected
service contour and boundary of a station's COL will be deemed
sufficient to designate a community as a COL.
 COL Change Limits. The R&O declines to limit COL changes to once-
per-year finding that licensees are best equipped to evaluate which
community they serve within their contour and that the Commission
should continue to provide stations in the LPTV Service the flexibility
they need to site their facilities based on factors such as the nature
of programming, geographic considerations, and market trends.
 Required Filing, Compliance Period, and Fee Exemption. All stations
in the LPTV Service will designate a COL by filing an application for
modification of license and to pay the appropriate filing fee. Within
six months of the effective date of the COL rule, all LPTV Service
stations must have designated a COL

[[Page 2864]]

that is rule-compliant. Stations whose current COL listed in LMS meets
the requirements of the new COL rule do not need to take any action.
Pursuant to Sec. 1.1116, such filings are exempt from paying an
application filing fee where the station files a modification of
license application during this six-month period solely to come into
compliance with the new COL rule. Minor modification applications that
include other requests will incur a fee. The Bureau is instructed to
revise the Commission's forms as necessary to implement the new COL
rule.

B. Minimum Operating Hours for LPTV Stations

 The R&O declines to adopt a minimum operating requirement for LPTV
stations recognizing that such a requirement may be burdensome and have
a detrimental effect on LPTV stations that are traditionally afforded
flexibility to decide their stations' operational schedule. Further,
the Commission finds that LPTV stations are secondary licensees and
many are owned and operated by various small entities whose operating
funds, staff, and audience are limited. Therefore, compliance with a
precise minimum operating schedule based on these entities existing
expectations could prove challenging. Finally, the Commission finds
that such a requirement could also unnecessarily deprive LPTV stations
of important operational flexibility to respond to marketplace demands
and programming opportunities to better serve their niche, local
viewers.
 Although the Commission declined to establish set minimum operating
hours, LPTV stations will continue to be subject to existing
operational requirements. An LPTV station that fails to operate for
more than 10 days must notify the Commission that it is silent, Sec.
74.763(b). If a station remains silent for more than 30 days, it must
seek Commission authority to remain silent, Sec. 73.1635. Upon
resuming operations, stations must notify the Commission, Sec.
73.1740(a)(4). Failure of an LPTV station to operate for a period of 30
days or more, except for causes beyond the control of the licensee,
shall be deemed evidence of discontinuation of operation and the
license of the station may be cancelled at the discretion of the
Commission, Sec. 74.763(c). Finally, as with all broadcast stations,
an LPTV station's license will automatically expire, as a matter of
law, if the station fails to transmit a broadcast signal for any
consecutive twelve-month period, notwithstanding any provision, term,
or condition of the license to the contrary, 47 U.S.C. 312(g). LPTV
stations must also file required applications and/or notifications when
they operate at variance from their licensed parameters, Sec. Sec.
73.1635, 73.1740, 74.763(b).
 Revising the Minimum Operating Requirement For TV Translators. The
R&O also declines to revise the minimum operating rule for TV
translators by replacing the word ``expected'' with ``required.'' The
Commission recognized commenters who pointed out that vast majority of
TV translators already attempt to provide as much service as possible,
and this change would unnecessarily create uncertainty. The Commission
reinforced its expectation that TV translators endeavor to do all they
can to rebroadcast their primary station(s) and provide uninterrupted
service given the nature of TV translator stations, which often provide
service in rural, isolated areas in the absence of any other over-the-
air television service.

C. Clarifying Video Program Signal Requirements

 The R&O clarifies that, with respect to the requirement in Sec.
74.790(g)(3) that ``[w]henever operating, an LPTV station must transmit
at least one over-the-air video program signal . . . , '' the term
``video program signal'' excludes test patterns, slides, and still
pictures with unrelated aural transmissions. The Commission concludes
that this clarification is consistent with what viewers have come to
expect with regards to the type of service provided by television
broadcast stations. Further, the Commission clarifies that this does
not mean that test patterns, slides, or still pictures with unrelated
aural transmissions are precluded, nor does it mean that the Commission
finds that they do not serve the public interest. To make this point
clear, the R&O eliminates the term ``whenever operating'' from the rule
to remove any doubt that the Commission does not intend to restrict
LPTV stations from broadcasting test patterns, slides, or still
pictures with unrelated audio.
 The Commission rejects commenters that argue that this
clarification goes against the flexibility originally granted to the
LPTV stations. The Commission concludes that, although slides with
local community information or still pictures with unrelated audio may
have some public interest importance, it is not prohibiting stations
from airing such material. Instead, the Commission concludes that such
content is by itself insufficient for purposes of meeting the minimum
video program signal obligation under Sec. 74.790(g)(3). Rather than
eliminate LPTV station's operational flexibility, the revised rule
makes clear what it means to provide a ``video program signal'' and
does not impose any new minimum operating requirements or preclude LPTV
stations from broadcasting test patterns, slides, or still pictures
with unrelated aural transmission so long as the station provides a
video program signal that is consistent with the Commission's rules.
The Commission will apply this requirement only to programming aired on
the station's primary stream and not apply it to a station's multicast
stream. For purposes of the rule, ``multicast'' stream(s) shall refer
to a TV broadcast station's non-primary video programming stream(s);
that is, stream(s) other than the station's primary video programming
stream.
 The Commission also rejects arguments that the rule amounts to
unconstitutional Commission regulation of content on broadcast stations
such that it interferes with a station licensee's right of free speech.
The Commission maintains that the rule is wholly content neutral, as it
does not distinguish favored speech from disfavored speech based on the
views or ideas expressed in the programming and is reasonably tailored
to satisfy the substantial governmental interest and long-standing
Commission goal of ensuring that frequencies allocated for television
service continue to be used for the types of video program services
viewers have come to expect from television stations.
 Finally, the Commission finds concerns raised in the record that
adoption of the rule could prevent the airing of emergency information,
such as Emergency Alert System (EAS) tests or alerts, to be unfounded.
The rule does not prohibit the transmission of slides or still pictures
with unrelated audio transmissions and, therefore, should not impede
stations use of such materials in times of emergency, for EAS tests, or
for other exceptional circumstances. In such circumstances, the display
of slides and still pictures is usually brief and in practice should be
inconsequential for determining whether a LPTV station is complying
with its requirement under Sec. 74.790(g)(3), as modified in the R&O.

D. Class A, LPTV and TV Translator Station Designations and Call Signs

1. Changes Between LPTV Service Designations
 The R&O adopts a rule to require LPTV and TV translator stations
that want to change their service designation (i.e., from LPTV to TV
translator, or vice versa) to do so by way of a license

[[Page 2865]]

modification application. By adopting an application requirement, but
not imposing a limit on designation changes, the Commission concludes
that it is creating a formal process for stations to change their
designation that will allow the Commission and public to better track
station classification changes and will provide rule compliance clarity
for stations; while at the same time continuing to provide licensees
the flexibility to change their service designation based on the
programming demands of their viewers and the broadcast marketplace.
Such applications will be filed electronically on LMS on FCC Form 2100,
Schedule D. Applicants will be required to pay the requisite
application filing fee. In order to promote transparency, ensure the
timely processing of such requests (as limited in number as they may
be), and in light of the general support for establishing a formal
process for designation changes, the Commission determined it is
appropriate to apply the same license modification process to Class A
stations. Such applications will be filed electronically on LMS on FCC
Form 2100, Schedule F. Applicants will be required to pay the requisite
application filing fee. The Commission instructed the Bureau to revise
its forms and make all necessary changes to LMS to implement this rule.
 The R&O declines to adopt a rule limiting stations to designation
changes only once every twelve months. The Commission concludes that
limiting LPTV Service designation changes to no more than once every
twelve months would provide only limited benefit that is outweighed by
the public interest benefit of affording licensees flexibility to
respond to marketplace demands and determine what service designation
is appropriate to best serve their viewers.
2. TV Translator Call Sign Assignments
 The R&O clarifies that all TV translator stations must have an
alphanumeric call sign comprised of a prefix consisting of the initial
letter ``K'' or ``W'' (based on the station's geographic location in
relation to the Mississippi River), followed by the channel number
assigned to the station and two additional letters, and a suffix
consisting of the letter ``-D.'' Thirty days after the effective date
of this R&O, the Bureau will automatically modify any TV translator
call signs that does not comply with the TV translator call sign
convention. The 30-day period will allow licensees to inform their
viewers of the impending call sign change as they deem necessary.
Similarly, when a station converts from LPTV to TV translator status,
the Bureau will provide a 30-day period before automatically modifying
a station's call sign to comply with the call sign naming convention in
the TV translator call sign rule, in order to allow the station a
period of time to inform viewers of the impending call sign change as
appropriate. The R&O declines to ``grandfather'' existing, non-
compliant TV translator call signs finding that TV translator stations
are, with limited exception, restricted to rebroadcasting other
station's programing, TV translators do not have their own unique
identity and `grandfathering' existing call signs has no cognizable
public interest benefit.''
3. Class A and LPTV Call Sign Assignments
 The R&O adopts a rule requiring that all Class A and LPTV stations
must have a four-letter call sign, with the suffix ``-LD'' for LPTV
stations and ``-CD'' for Class A stations. In light of the regulatory
and service distinctions between LPTV Service stations, the Commission
concludes that it is appropriate to require that each service conform
to its own call sign prefix and suffix. The R&O will not require LPTV
and Class A stations licensed as of the date of the release date of the
R&O to change their call signs and will ``grandfather'' LPTV and Class
A call signs that are not compliant with the revised rule. A
grandfathered call sign may be retained, unless or until the station
changes its service designation or voluntarily chooses to modify its
call sign. Grandfathered call signs may also be retained as part of an
assignment or transfer of a station's license. Stations that do not
qualify for grandfathering or that want to voluntarily change their
call sign to comply with the new rule will be provided one-year from
the effective date of the rule changes to designate a four-letter call
sign with the correct suffix. During this one-year period, pursuant to
Sec. 1.1116(a), such filings are exempt from payment of the fee
associated with any call sign change request that is submitted by a
station solely to come into compliance with the revised rule. Any
station that subsequently modifies its service designation will be
required to submit a call sign change request and pay the appropriate
fee.
 The R&O also adopts a rule to modify the call sign of a Class A
station that reverts from Class A status to LPTV to reflect its LPTV
status by automatically changing its call sign suffix from ``-CD'' to
``-LD'' upon the change in service designation. The newly classified
LPTV station will retain its current four-letter call sign prefix
unless it conflicts with that of an existing LPTV station. In such a
circumstance, the former Class A station will be required to modify its
four-letter call sign prefix in through the Commission's LMS call sign
reservation process and pay the appropriate fee. When an opportunity
for a status change from LPTV to Class A exists, a station's call sign
will be modified to designate the ``-CD'' suffix as part of the Class A
eligibility and licensing process. The newly created Class A station
will retain its current four-letter call sign prefix unless it
conflicts with that of an existing Class A station. In such a
circumstance, the new Class A station will be required to modify its
four-letter call sign prefix through the Commission's LMS call sign
reservation process and pay the appropriate fee.
 The Commission rejected proposals for alternative call sign
assignments finding such alternatives unworkable and would actually
make the call sign system more confusing for the public and the burden
that would be placed on broadcasters through a wholesale change to the
Commission's call sign system far outweighs any potential benefit.

E. EAS Obligations

 The R&O amends the Commission's rules to clarify that all stations
with the LPTV designation, regardless of how the station is operated,
must generally comply with the part 11 EAS rules and further clarifies
that a station formally designated in the Commission's database as a TV
translator is not required to comply with the part 11 requirements,
such as installing EAS equipment or meeting related obligations like
filing in EAS Test Reporting System, if it entirely rebroadcasts the
programming--including all EAS--of a Primary Station. If a TV
translator airs locally originated content, it may need to install EAS
equipment or monitor their Primary Station during periods of local
origination to ensure that all EAS alerts provided by the Primary
Station are being transmitted. The part 11 EAS rules currently provide
that ``LPTV stations that operate as television broadcast translator
stations, as defined in Sec. 74.701(b) are not required to comply with
the requirements of this part.'' In light of the decision to formalize
the LPTV Service designation process and given the distinctions between
LPTV and TV translator stations that have developed over the years, the
Commission finds removal of this vague and unnecessary exception will
help to ensure that all LPTV stations, when constructed, install the
necessary EAS equipment. It will also

[[Page 2866]]

further the public interest by ensuring emergency alerts are properly
and fully disseminated. The Commission rejects opposition from
commenters that it finds is based on an apparent misunderstanding of
the rule change. The Commission clarifies the revised rule will not
require a LPTV station to procure any new EAS equipment, does not
expand existing EAS obligations, and does not increase burdens on
existing stations that are or are acting as TV translators.

F. Channel 14 Emission Masks

 The R&O adopts a rule that requires that new channel 14 LPTV
Service stations (Channel 14 LPTV Stations) and channel 14 LPTV
stations that apply to modify their facilities specify a ``full
service'' or ``stringent'' emission mask and prohibit the use of the
``simple'' emission mask. The Commission clarifies that stations
currently licensed and operating without causing interference to Land
Mobile Radio (LMR) operations do not need to implement stringent or
full-service masks, unless they propose to modify their facilities. The
Commission found that instances of interference to LMR facilities from
channel 14 television facilities ``have been readily resolved by the
installation of appropriate filters'' and that stringent and full-
service emission masks are more restrictive than the simple mask and
more effectively decrease out-of-band emissions. The Commission
concludes that the cost difference between simple, stringent, and full-
service mask filters is not substantial and because the filters are
generally of similar physical size they should have similar
installation costs. Therefore, the Commission concludes that any
increased cost of requiring Channel 14 LPTV Stations to include
stringent or full-service mask filters would not be unduly burdensome
and any burden would be far outweighed by the benefits of better
protecting LMR facilities from interference.
 All Channel 14 LPTV Stations that are licensed as of the effective
date of the new rule must specify either stringent or full-service mask
filtering if they modify their facilities, unless the station is
decreasing power or making a modification to its facilities that does
not change its service contour. Use of filters superior to those found
in the Commission's rules, including 8-pole, 12-pole, and cascaded
masks, are still permitted to be used so long as they match or exceed
the stringent and full-service masks which are permitted on channel 14.
Relocation within the contour, even if it does not increase the contour
in any direction, will require stringent or full-service mask
filtering. While the overall service area may shrink, the new location
may put the station closer to or potentially even on the same tower as
a land mobile operation. This situation would be more likely to create
interference, a situation we seek to avoid with this rule. With respect
to those Channel 14 LPTV Stations that are licensed as of the effective
date of the new rule, are operating without causing interference to LMR
facilities despite use of a simple emissions mask, and do not seek to
modify their facilities as described above, the Commission does not
require they take any further action. Because such stations are
operating without causing interference we find there is no benefit to
requiring them to utilize stringent or full-service mask filtering
unless there is interference to an LMR facility.

G. Prohibition on Operations Above Channel 36

 The R&O adopts a rule prohibiting LPTV/TV translator stations from
operating above channel 36 (out-of-core channels). Although the
Commission has prohibited new operations on out-of-core channels, it
provided flexibility to LPTV/TV translator stations operating on out-
of-core channels after the conclusion of the Incentive Auction and
repacking process to continue operating on their pre-auction channels
above channel 36 until they were notified by a new 600 MHz Band
licensee that it intended to commence operations. The Commission notes
that the Incentive Auction closed in 2017 and according to the
Commission's records there are currently no LPTV/TV translator stations
operating on out-of-core channels. Accordingly, the Commission finds
that the flexibility previously afforded to out-of-core stations is no
longer necessary. Further, the Commission also deletes its rules
pertaining to station operations on out of core channels and new 600
MHz Band licensee notification requirements finding such rules to now
be obsolete. These changes shall be effective 30 days after publication
of this document. While the Bureau has conducted a thorough review of
LMS to ensure no stations remain licensed and operational above channel
36, this delayed effective date will also provide further assurance of
that fact and, if there are, provide those stations one final
opportunity to locate an in-core channel before being required to cease
operations.

H. Additional Class A, LPTV, and TV Translator Rule Clarifications

1. DTS Emission Masks
 The R&O adopts a rule that will require all transmitters in LPTV
Service station Distributed Transmission System (DTS) facilities to
utilize the same emission mask. The Commission notes that all stations
must specify an emission mask to be implemented with their DTS
facilities; however, the DTS rules adopted by the Commission for LPTV
Service stations did not address whether a different type of emission
mask could be employed or whether the same emission mask must be used
at each DTS site. In order to ensure accurate interference calculations
and reduce the potential for interference, the Commission amends its
rules to require all LPTV Service DTS facilities utilize the same
emission mask at each DTS site. Pursuant to the procedures set forth in
OET Bulletin No. 69, an interference calculation is done for each DTS
transmitter site. See OET Bulletin No. 69--Longley-Rice Methodology For
Evaluating TV Coverage and Interference (Feb. 6, 2004) a copy of which
is available at: https://transition.fcc.gov/oet/info/documents/bulletins/oet69/oet69.pdf . A station is permitted to use any of the
emission masks permitted by the Commission's rules, so long as the same
emission mask is used at all of their DTS transmitter sites. As of the
date of the R&O, there is only one LPTV Service station, WSJT-LD,
Atlantic City, NJ (Fac. ID No. 191421) that has been authorized to
operate using DTS. The station specified the same emission mask at all
sites. No changes to its facilities will be needed to comply with the
new rule. There are no other pending applications for LPTV Service
stations to implement DTS. Applications pending as of the effective
date of this new rule will be required to come into compliance with the
new emission mask requirement prior to being acted on.
2. Interference Allowance
 The Commission adopts a rule that will apply the same requirements
for all LPTV Service stations when entering into an interference
agreement. This includes entering into a signed written agreement that
is submitted with the application, making clear that agreements may
include the exchange of money or other consideration between entities,
and permitting previously agreed upon interference thresholds be
maintained in the event of facility modifications. In order to provide
clarity and transparency, the R&O

[[Page 2867]]

amends the Commission's rules to require LPTV Service stations seeking
to use an agreement to resolve interference concerns to enter into a
signed written agreement that is submitted with any application that
would exceed the 2% interference threshold and makes clear whether
money or other consideration was exchanged. Second, the rule provides
that stations operating pursuant to interference agreements, or that
are unilaterally accepting interference from another station, are
permitted to maintain those agreed upon interference thresholds when
modifying a facility. The Commission concludes that this revision will
not only help maintain the status quo, but preserve existing service to
the public based on agreed upon or unilaterally accepted interference
levels.
3. Maximum Grid Resolution
 The R&O codifies the use of a one square kilometer grid resolution
as the maximum permitted in evaluating the interference caused by LPTV
Service facilities. As a maximum limit, the rule inherently permits a
finer grid resolution. To make this point clear, the Commission adjusts
the text of the rule to clarify that the finer 0.5 km grid resolution
remains available so long as it is specified in an exhibit to the
application.
4. Displacement Public Notice Period
 The R&O eliminates the 30-day public notice period for displacement
applications. The displacement rule currently states that displacement
applications ``will be placed on public notice for a period of not less
than 30 days to permit the filing of petitions to deny.'' This comment
period was implemented because displacements require channel changes
which create a greater concern for interference. At the same time,
displacements are considered applications for minor change, and other
minor change applications are not subject to the 30-day period for
interested parties to file a petition to deny. The Commission concludes
that requiring a displaced LPTV/TV translator station to wait a full 30
days to receive action on its displacement application may result in
avoidable loss of service to viewers or continued loss of service to
viewers by delaying Commission action and thereby a station's ability
to construct and commence operating from its displacement facility.
Therefore, to minimize service disruptions to the public, expedite
processing and construction, reduce burdens on stations and the
Commission, and streamline the displacement process, the 30-day public
notice period for displacement applications is eliminated. Affected
parties that want to oppose grant of a displacement application may
still file an informal objection prior to Commission action and seek
reconsideration up to 30 days after the grant. In addition, affected
parties at any time may report interference concerns that arise after
displacement facilities are constructed and operating.
5. Displacement Eligibility Revisions
 Displacement Caused by Actual Interference. The R&O clarifies what
is meant by ``causing or receiving interference'' as used in Sec.
74.787(a)(4) (Displacement Rule). The Displacement Rule is revised to
make clear that this basis for displacement refers to ``actual''
interference received by a TV broadcast station (i.e., a full power
television station) from an LPTV or TV translator station. While LPTV/
TV translator stations are permitted to cause up to 0.5% predicted
interference to a full power station, as a primary service full power
stations are protected from actual interference within their noise
limited service contour (NLSC), even if the predicted interference is
below the 0.5% threshold. The Commission declined to adopt its proposal
establishing a standard for stations to demonstrate actual interference
due to a paucity of the record on this issue and announced that it will
continue to examine claims of displacement based on actual interference
caused to a full power television station within its NLSC on a case-by-
case basis based on the unique facts presented. The Commission also
noted that actual interference caused by a TV broadcast station to an
LPTV/TV translator has not historically been used for determining
displacement of an LPTV/TV translator station. Because LPTV/TV
translator stations are secondary and may receive up to 2% predicted
interference before being displaced, the presence of actual
interference cannot reliably be utilized to demonstrate displacement.
As such it did not include such a circumstance in the updated
Displacement Rule and concluded that LPTV/TV translator stations that
would receive actual interference significant enough to warrant
displacement from a TV broadcast station will be able to demonstrate it
via the ``predicted'' interference method.
 Displacement Caused by Predicted Interference. The R&O revises the
Displacement Rule to clarify the levels of ``predicted'' interference
that is ``cause[d] or receive[d]'' that qualifies a station for a
displacement channel. Under the revised rule, predicted interference
``caused'' to a TV broadcast station must exceed the 0.5% de minimis
interference threshold specified in Sec. 74.793(e) to qualify the
station to file a displacement application. With respect to predicted
interference ``received'' from a TV broadcast station, the predicted
interference must exceed the 2% interference threshold specified in
Sec. 74.793(h) to qualify the station to file a displacement
application. This revision is intended to clarify what is meant by the
word ``predicted'' in the context of the Commission's current
interference thresholds. It is not intended to expand or restrict
displacement eligibility for predicted interference beyond the scope of
the current rule. It is also not intended to modify our current
interference thresholds (i.e., 0.5% or 2%).
 Displacement Caused by ``Other Protected Station or Service''. The
R&O revises the displacement rule to make clear what ``other protected
station or service'' means by adding two specific situations that would
qualify an LPTV/TV translator station to seek a displacement channel:
(1) interference to LMR facilities and (2) interference to/from
protected television facilities in Canada and Mexico. The Commission
finds that memorializing such circumstances involving ``other protected
station or service'' as qualifying an LPTV/TV translator station for
displacement in the Rules will help provide certainty for licensees.
 Displacement Caused by Interference to Input Channels. The R&O adds
as a basis for displacement interference caused by an LPTV/TV
translator station to a TV translator input channel. Although
translator inputs are not ``protected services,'' and the R&O does not
change that, the Commission concludes it is in the public interest to
provide LPTV/TV translators the ability to seek displacement relief in
order to help prevent interference to input channels given their often
critical role in enabling TV translators to serve their viewers.
Enumerating this basis in our rule will also help reduce burdens on
stations by allowing stations to file for displacement without the need
for waiver. The basis for demonstrating interference in this
circumstance may be ``actual'' or ``predicted'' and that interference
must be measured in relation to the input channel receive site. While
proximity to an input channel's receive site is likely to increase the
potential for interference, the underlying intent of the rule is to
ensure that LPTV/TV translator stations have flexibility to resolve
interference that could impede a TV translator

[[Page 2868]]

station's ability to receive the programing that it is retransmitting.
 Displacement Caused by Full Power Channel Substitutions. The R&O
clarifies when an LPTV/TV translator station displaced by a full power
station's channel substitution may apply for displacement. The
Displacement Rule is amended to specify that such displacement
applications cannot be filed until the report and order granting the
channel substitution and amending the Table is effective. This revision
to the Rules will ensure that the station is in fact qualified for
displacement and prevent stations from prematurely reserving spectrum
on a contingent basis. In unique circumstances where a full power
station is prepared to quickly move to its new channel, an LPTV/TV
translator station may seek waiver and apply for special temporary
authority to commence operations on its planned displacement channel.
The Commission instructs the Bureau to otherwise dismiss, without
prejudice, displacement applications that are filed prematurely.
 Displacement Exhibit. In order to expedite the processing of
displacement applications so that displaced stations can obtain an
authorization, quickly begin construction of their displacement
facility, and preserve service to the public, the R&O adopts a rule
requiring that applicants for displacement include an exhibit briefly
describing the specific cause of displacement. The Commission finds
that requiring a brief description to be filed with the displacement
application is a small task to ask of applicants to prevent processing
delays.
 LPTV Channel Sharing. LPTV/TV translator stations are permitted to
relinquish their licensed channel (sharee station) and enter into a
channel sharing agreement (CSA) in order to share the licensed channel
of another station (host station). Upon termination of a CSA, whichever
station that does not retain rights in the shared channel under the
terms of the CSA must either find a new host to share with or, because
it no longer has a channel on which to operate, submit its license for
cancellation. Previously, the Commission's LPTV/TV translator channel
sharing rules did not specifically state whether ``orphaned'' channel
sharing stations could file an application for a new channel upon
termination of their CSA. The R&O declines to adopt a commenter's
proposal requesting that orphaned LPTV/TV translator stations be
permitted to resume independent non-shared operation through use of the
displacement process. Instead, the Commission finds that a more
appropriate process for LPTV/TV translator channel sharing stations to
reacquire their own, non-shared channel is through the existing major
modification process. Major modification applications are filed on FCC
Form 2100, Schedule C. Prior to filing an application specifying a new,
non-shared channel, an application for modification of license to
dissolve the existing channel sharing arrangement must be filed. This
would be done using FCC Form 2100, Schedule D. The Commission instructs
the Bureau to consider waivers on a case-by-case basis for stations
whose arrangements have expired or will expire prior to the end of the
current major modification freeze. The Bureau should view waiver
requests favorably where the applicant can demonstrate that: (1) its
channel sharing arrangement has been terminated for reasons beyond its
control (e.g., its arrangement was terminated through the unilateral
actions of its channel sharing partner loss of tower site, etc. or the
arrangement expired on its own terms), (2) the station has or will be
required to go silent prior to lifting of the major modification
freeze, (3) grant will preserve service for existing viewers to the
greatest extent possible, and (4) the licensee has undertaken
reasonable efforts to extend its channel sharing agreement until such
time as the freeze is lifted. Applicants should not interpret the
Commission's willingness to provide interim relief through waiver as a
way to avoid processing priorities once the major change freeze is
lifted.
6. Program Test Authority Rule for LPTV/TV Translators
 The R&O adopts a rule that makes the part 73 ``program test
authority'' (PTA) rule applicable to LPTV/TV translator stations.
Currently, full power and Class A stations, with certain limited
exceptions (e.g., stations permitted to operate on channel 14), may
begin operating under PTA after completion of a facility provided that
an application for license to cover is filed within ten days of
commencing operations. The Commission finds that applying the part 73
PTA rule to LPTV/TV translator stations will provide these stations
with the same flexibility as full power and Class A stations to begin
operating automatically pursuant to PTA, with certain exceptions, so
that they may more expeditiously start providing new and modified
service to the public. Television stations on channel 14 will continue
to be required to seek approval prior to commencing operations pursuant
to program test authority. The Commission or the Bureau, under its
delegated authority, may also continue to place conditions as may be
necessary on a station's construction permit requiring grant of program
test authority prior to commencing operations.
