FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Connect America Fund, Alaska Connect Fund, Connect America Fund-Alaska Plan et al
Document number: 2025-22437
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireline Competition Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 57152
Publication date: 2025-12-10

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 235 (Wednesday, December 10, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 235 (Wednesday, December 10, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 57152-57167]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2025-22437]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 54

[WC Docket Nos. 10-90, 23-328, 16-271, 14-58, and 09-197; WT Docket No.
10-208; FCC 25-61; FR ID 320214]


Connect America Fund, Alaska Connect Fund, Connect America Fund--
Alaska Plan et al.

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) further refines the Alaska high-cost mobile-support
programs to ensure efficient use of scarce universal service funds that
will bring 5G-NR to Americans living, working, and traveling in Alaska.
This document grants in part a Petition for Reconsideration and
Clarification by GCI Communications Corp. (GCI) of the Alaska Connect
Fund (ACF), granting it in part by modifying and clarifying several of
its rules. These actions help better realign the requirements and
expectations of the ACF with its intended universal service goals. This
document also makes a clarifying correction to one ACF rule to better
reflect its purpose expressed in the Alaska Connect Fund Order.

DATES: Effective January 9, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Matthew Warner, Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau, Competition and Infrastructure Policy
Division, at [email protected] or (202) 418-2419; Grant B. Lukas,
Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, Competition and Infrastructure
Policy Division, at [email protected] or (202) 418-1057; and
 [email protected] or [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Order
on Reconsideration and Clarification and Order in WC Docket Nos. 10-90,
23-328, 16-271, 14-58, 09-197; and WT Docket No. 10-208; FCC 25-61;
adopted on September 25, 2025, and released on September 26, 2025. The
full text of this document is available at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-25-61A1.pdf .
 Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis. As required by the
Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), the Federal
Communications Commission published an Initial Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis (IRFA) in the Alaska Connect Fund Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (Alaska Connect Fund NPRM), released in October 2023. The
Commission sought written public comment on the proposals in the Alaska
Connect Fund NPRM, including comment on the IFRA. No comments were
filed addressing the IRFA. In November 2024, the Commission released
the Alaska Connect Fund Report and Order and Further Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (Alaska Connect Fund Order) and published a FRFA, as well as
an IRFA for the Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (FNPRM). On
January 5, 2025, GCI Communication Corp. (GCI) filed a Petition for
Clarification and Reconsideration of the Alaska Connect Fund Order (GCI
ACF Petition), which included issues impacting small entities. The
Wireless Telecommunications Bureau (WTB) then sought public comment on
GCI's petition in a Public Notice released March 19, 2025. One party
filed comments in response to the GCI ACF Petition. No relevant issues
impacting small entities were raised in comments to the GCI ACF
Petition. This Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA)
incorporates the FRFA for the Alaska Connect Fund Order, and reflects
the actions the Commission takes in the Order on Reconsideration and
Clarification to revise certain rules established by the Alaska Connect
Fund Order, conforms to the RFA, and it (or summaries thereof) will be
published in the Federal Register.
 Paperwork Reduction Act. This document does not contain new or
modified information collection requirements as required by the
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, Public Law 104-13. In addition, the
Commission notes that pursuant to the Small Business Paperwork Relief
Act of 2002, Public Law 107-198, see 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4), we
previously sought specific comment on how the Commission might further
reduce the information collection burden for small business concerns
with fewer than 25 employees.
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is non-major
under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission
will send a copy of this Order on Reconsideration and Clarification,
Waiver Order, and Order to Congress and the Government Accountability
Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

I. Introduction

 In this Order, the Commission further refines its Alaska high-cost
mobile-

[[Page 57153]]

support programs to ensure efficient use of scarce universal service
funds that will bring 5G-NR to Americans living, working, and traveling
in Alaska. To this end, the item addresses a Petition by GCI
Communication Corp. (GCI) seeking reconsideration and clarification of
various aspects of the Alaska Connect Fund Order, which the Commission
adopted last year. Like its Alaska Plan predecessor, the Alaska Connect
Fund Order established a high-cost universal service support program
designed to address the distinct challenges of providing mobile voice
and broadband service in the hard-to-serve rural and remote areas of
Alaska. The Alaska Connect Fund (ACF) will provide ongoing and certain
support through 2034 to mobile wireless providers that currently
receive high-cost support pursuant to the Alaska Plan. The refinements
to the ACF adopted will better ensure the continued deployment of
affordable and reliable high-speed broadband services to communities
throughout Alaska.
 The Commission grants in part and denies in part the GCI ACF
Petition by making certain modifications and providing further
clarification of ACF rules and requirements for mobile providers.
Specifically, the Commission (1) clarifies certain details of mobile
providers' performance plan requirements and commitments; (2) provides
additional clarification regarding the deployment goals of 5G-NR at 35/
3 Mbps for single-support areas and 5/1 Mbps for duplicate-support
areas, while denying GCI's request to limit the ACF deployment goals
solely to areas with Broadband Serviceable Locations (BSLs); (3)
clarifies the extent of the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau's (WTB's
or Bureau's) discretion to determine a mobile provider's ineligibility
for the ACF due to noncompliance with its Alaska Plan commitments; (4)
modifies and clarifies rules governing the categorization of eligible
and ineligible areas; (5) clarifies that providers have no service
obligations for areas that are deemed ineligible for ACF support; (6)
eliminates and modifies several compliance obligations regarding the
annual infrastructure data filing requirement for ACF mobile providers,
the ACF speed test data submission deadline, and the reasonably
comparable rate requirement; and (7) addresses the extent to which ACF
support and obligations will transfer as a result of mergers or other
transactions among participating providers. Finally, the Commission
corrects one rule to better reflect the Alaska Connect Fund Order.

II. Background

 In 2016, the Commission adopted the Alaska Plan, establishing
flexible universal service rules in order to account for distinct
conditions in Alaska, in recognition that rural and high-cost areas of
Alaska are some of the hardest and most costly to serve in the country.
The Alaska Plan--built on a proposal submitted by the Alaska Telephone
Association (ATA)--addressed support for both fixed and mobile voice
and broadband service in high-cost areas in the state of Alaska. Given
the distinct climate and geographic conditions of Alaska, the
Commission found it to be in the public interest to offer Alaska
providers the option of receiving fixed amounts of high-cost support
over ten years in exchange for participants' individualized commitments
to maintain or improve fixed and mobile broadband service in the state.
The Alaska Plan was expected to bring broadband to as many as 111,302
fixed locations and 133,788 mobile consumers by the end of the 10-year
term on December 31, 2026.
 Due to the approaching end of support under the Alaska Plan, on
January 4, 2023, ATA petitioned for the next version of the Alaska Plan
to ensure ongoing support and help bring 5G to remote Alaska. On
November 1, 2024, the Commission adopted the Alaska Connect Fund Order,
establishing a new high-cost support program--the ACF--that would
provide ongoing and certain support for mobile wireless services in
Alaska through 2034. The ACF will play an important role in ensuring
that Alaskans have access to reliable, advanced mobile service,
particularly in upgrading networks to 5G and encouraging deployment to
unserved and underserved areas. The Commission adopted a two-phase
approach for mobile service. The approach balanced the importance of
giving mobile providers certainty of funding in particular areas to
help meet the Commission's goals of 5G deployment, with the need to
ensure funding is not being used for last generation technologies
(e.g., 2G and 3G). It also targeted funding to areas where it is needed
the most and addressed concerns of duplicate support. The framework the
Commission adopted for mobile support relies on the improved mobile
coverage data obtained in the Broadband Data Collection (BDC), which is
reflected on the Commission's National Broadband Map, and which
provides the most comprehensive picture to date of where mobile
broadband service is and is not available across the country, including
Alaska.
 The Commission extended support for a set period for mobile
providers that: (1) participated in the Alaska Plan and (2) choose to
opt into the ACF, subject to conditions set forth in the Alaska Connect
Fund Order. The terms and goals for mobile support under the ACF are
based on whether an eligible area has only one subsidized provider
(single-support areas) or multiple subsidized providers (duplicate-
support areas). For eligible areas where there is a single subsidized
provider, the current provider will continue receiving support through
the end of 2034 and will be expected to enter into a new performance
plan providing for 5G service where technically and financially
feasible. For eligible areas with multiple subsidized providers, the
Commission adopted a two-phase approach to resolve the problem of
duplicative support: (1) an ACF Mobile Phase I that extends support for
the mobile providers receiving support in these duplicate-support areas
under the current Alaska Plan until December 31, 2029; and (2) an ACF
Mobile Phase II that would provide a single provider in those areas
with support through the end of 2034. The Commission delegated
authority to the WTB to implement and administer various components of
the mobile portion of the ACF. For example, the Commission delegated
authority to WTB to review and approve performance plans for mobile ACF
support. The Commission also delegated authority to WTB in coordination
with the Office of Economics and Analytics (OEA) to develop and publish
a map of areas eligible to receive ACF mobile support. Finally, the
Commission delegated authority to WTB to implement accountability and
oversight measures for mobile-support recipients.
 On January 30, 2025, GCI filed the GCI ACF Petition, seeking
guidance and adjustments to various aspects of the mobile portion of
the Alaska Connect Fund Order. WTB sought public comment on the GCI ACF
Petition in a Public Notice released March 19, 2025. In its subsequent
filings, GCI both proposed specific edits to the Commission's rules
consistent with its reconsideration petition and included additional
changes to the rules. One other party--the Alaska Remote Carrier
Coalition (ARCC)--filed comments in response to the GCI ACF Petition.

[[Page 57154]]

III. Alaska Connect Fund Order on Reconsideration and Clarification

 The Commission grants in part and denies in part the relief
requested in the GCI ACF Petition, as provided below.

A. Performance Plan Deployment Goals and Commitments

 A competitive eligible telecommunications carrier (ETC) previously
receiving support under the Alaska Plan must be subject to a
performance plan approved by WTB in order to continue receiving support
as part of the ACF (extended support). In the performance plan, the
provider must commit to specific deployment obligations and performance
requirements sufficient to demonstrate that support is being used in
the public interest and in accordance with Sec. 54.318(f) of the
Commission's rules and the requirements adopted by the Commission for
the ACF.
 In the Alaska Connect Fund Order, the Commission established
different performance goals for single-support and duplicate-support
areas. For single-support areas, mobile wireless providers are expected
to use ACF support to upgrade service to 5G-New Radio (NR) at 35/3
megabits per second (Mbps), where technically and financially feasible,
by the end of December 2034. For duplicate-support areas, mobile
wireless providers are expected to use ACF support to work on extending
service to 4G LTE at 5/1 Mbps, where technically and financially
feasible, by the end of December 2029 (i.e., by the end of ACF Mobile
Phase I). Providers are required to submit performance plans no later
than September 1, 2026, based on BDC data standards and availability
data as of December 31, 2024.
1. Clarifications of Performance Plan Requirements
 In the GCI ACF Petition, GCI requests that the Commission clarify
several aspects of the performance plan requirements adopted in the
Alaska Connect Fund Order. Specifically, GCI requests: (i)
clarification that performance plans may include multiple technology
and speed commitments within a census tract; (ii) clarification that
performance plans may include older technologies, at least for interim
goals, and (iii) clarification that performance plans and service
requirements may take into account available backhaul capacity for
fixed and mobile performance goals. The Commission addresses these
issues in turn.
 Multiple technology and speed commitments within a census tract.
GCI requests clarification that performance plans do not need to
include the same technology and speed throughout a census tract. To the
extent necessary, the Commission clarifies accordingly. In the Alaska
Connect Fund Order, the Commission stated that ACF performance plans
must ``(1) include the name of the census tract that the provider
commits to serve; (2) include the minimum technology level and speed in
an outdoor stationary environment that the provider commits to provide;
(3) specify the number of hex-9s committed to be covered within each
census tract at the committed-to technology and speed levels, which
shall be no less than the provider's coverage in the Alaska Plan, minus
any ineligible areas; and (4) specify how many additional hex-9s
committed to within each census tract at the committed-to technology
and speed levels are comparable hex-9s.'' The language does not require
performance plans to include only a single technology and speed
throughout a census tract. To the contrary, multiple references to
``the committed-to technology and speed levels'' for hex-9s within each
census tract indicate that a provider may have multiple technology and
speed commitments in a given census tract. Consistent with the intent
of the Alaska Connect Fund Order and language in Sec. 54.318(f)(1),
the Commission clarifies that a single census tract may have multiple
areas and commitments. In such cases, a mobile provider would list the
same census tract separately in its performance plan for each differing
technology and speed commitment. Individual hex-9s, however, will be
limited to a single technology. WTB will release a Public Notice
providing guidance on what to include in the performance plans and
their format.
 Use of older technologies. Additionally, GCI requests that the
Commission clarify whether performance plans can include older
technologies, at least for interim milestones, to accommodate the time
and expense needed to deploy 5G. The Commission makes this
clarification, with certain adjustments below. As noted in the Alaska
Connect Fund Order, the Commission delegated authority to WTB to
negotiate individualized performance plans with each mobile provider.
Section 54.318(f)(7) of the Commission's rules further provides that
WTB ``may approve lower technology . . . than the minimum technology .
. . specified in this section, in some areas[,] as warranted on a case-
by-case basis.'' As part of these negotiations, WTB can consider all
relevant and practical circumstances, including middle-mile mapping
data and backhaul capacity. The Alaska Connect Fund Order also states
that ``[w]here a hex-9 is more than 50 miles from a microwave or fiber
node, this factor alone weighs heavily in favor of allowing a lesser
commitment.''
 The Commission clarifies that, while WTB in its discretion may
approve a lower technology than the minimum specified in Sec. 54.318
of the Commission's rules on a case-by-case basis, a mobile provider
must demonstrate to WTB why upgrading to 5G-NR at 35/3 Mbps (for
single-support areas) or extending to 4G at 5/1 Mbps (for duplicate-
support areas) is not technically or financially feasible and
articulate the reasons warranting an exception as a notation under the
proposed performance plan for each census tract. Where WTB approves a
lower technology commitment in a provider's performance plan, the
mobile provider also must annually certify, by census tract, that the
basis on which it qualified for a lower technology commitment still
applies in the previous calendar year and to describe on FCC Form 481
the efforts that it has taken to improve conditions that served as the
basis for the lower technology commitment.
 WTB will prioritize those commitment areas that did not receive an
upgrade during the Alaska Plan in providers' ACF performance plans,
with a presumption against approving older technology in those areas at
the interim milestone. The Commission finds this additional
clarification from WTB to be necessary because some areas with 2G and
3G commitments may remain underserved without an upgrade to their
mobile service for an extended duration--from January 2017, when the
Alaska Plan began, through the interim milestone for single-support
areas of the ACF, which does not end until December 31, 2031. Such a
15-year trajectory would be unacceptable given the Commission's
adoption of the Alaska Plan Order and Alaska Connect Fund Order
dedicated to bringing advanced telecommunications capability
universally to remote, high-cost areas of Alaska during that time. WTB
will have a strong presumption against approving a technology
commitment lower than 4G LTE at 5/1 Mbps for any milestone. Should any
technology concerns remain following these clarifications, providers
may raise them with WTB in the course of their negotiations over their
individual performance plans.

[[Page 57155]]

 Monthly Usage Goals Accounting for Available Backhaul Capacity. GCI
requests that the Commission follow its precedent in the Alaska Plan
and clarify that performance plans and service requirements may take
into account available backhaul capacity for fixed and mobile
performance goals. The Commission grants GCI's request to the extent
that the Commission clarifies that WTB will consider available backhaul
capacity when negotiating individualized performance plans with each
mobile provider; however, while this consideration is consistent with
the Alaska Plan, the Commission denies GCI's request to the extent that
it seeks to have the ACF follow how the Alaska Plan operates.
 GCI requests that the ACF, ``like the Alaska Plan, must recognize
simultaneous capacity limitations of microwave and satellite backhaul
and permit providers that must use such facilities to commit to lower
monthly usage allowances.'' In its request for clarification on this
issue, GCI contends that the amount of available throughput in Alaska
is limited by the state's middle mile infrastructure, so that providers
cannot meet the national standard for monthly usage allowances in all
areas. GCI notes that microwave and satellite facilities typically have
less capacity than fiber facilities because throughput must be shared
simultaneously by multiple users, including higher-priority users such
as health care providers, schools, libraries, and government entities.
GCI urges that fixed and mobile providers need flexibility in their
performance obligations to account for these limitations.
 The Commission grants GCI's request in part and clarify that WTB
may accept lesser commitments taking into account available backhaul
capacity for mobile provider performance goals. The Alaska Connect Fund
Order permits WTB to approve performance plans with lesser commitments
than the minimum technology and speeds on a case-by-case basis. WTB can
negotiate individualized performance plans with each mobile provider,
and can consider all relevant and practical circumstances, among other
considerations, including middle-mile mapping data and wireline
affiliate commitments in the relevant area to help assess a mobile
provider's proposed commitment in single-support areas at the ACF
support levels.
 While its action is consistent with Alaska Plan precedent, the
Commission denies GCI's request to the extent that GCI is requesting
that the ACF process work the same as the Alaska Plan process.
Performance plans for the Alaska Plan explicitly list the backhaul
available and often allowed ubiquitous, extensive leeway for microwave
backhaul. Due to current middle mile map information available to it
from the Alaska Plan, the Commission now has more information than it
had when the Alaska Plan was adopted in 2016, and staff can use that
information to assess which providers have fiber and microwave backhaul
that reach competitive transport areas. Moreover, the middle-mile
information indicates the capacity on each link. A blanket, lesser
standard for microwave transport, as was typical in the Alaska Plan,
would not be appropriate for the ACF where there may be a multiple
gigabits per second (Gbps) link within reach of a rural community.
2. 5G Deployment Goals for Areas With Broadband Serviceable Locations
 GCI requests that the Commission clarify that 5G-NR at 35/3 Mbps
will not be the speed goal for all areas covered by a provider under
the ACF and amend Sec. 54.318(f)(2) to limit the 35/3 Mbps goal to
eligible hex-9s in a mobile provider's support area with a BSL. The
Commission grants GCI's petition in part to reconsider the 5G-NR at 35/
3 Mbps deployment goals set forth in the Alaska Connect Fund Order, but
declines GCI's request to limit deployment goals solely to areas with
BSLs.
 The Alaska Connect Fund Order requires mobile providers to improve
upon and extend their Alaska Plan coverage. In the Alaska Plan,
providers committed to cover a specified number of Alaskans. However,
in the ACF, the Commission found that ``the population-based approach
in the Alaska Plan can be too limiting to effectively meet the
program's mandate to ensure mobile network coverage is available where
Alaskans live, work, and travel'' and instead adopted an area-based
approach. Specifically, the Commission directed that in their single-
support coverage areas, mobile providers ``are expected to use Alaska
Connect Fund support to upgrade service beyond the service commitment
level they made in the Alaska Plan, with an ultimate goal of achieving
5G-NR at 35/3 Mbps . . . where technically and financially feasible, by
the end of December 2034.'' In their duplicate-support areas, providers
are expected to use ACF support to work on extending service to 4G LTE
at 5/1 Mbps, where technically and financially feasible, by the end of
December 2029 (i.e., by the end of ACF Mobile Phase I).
 GCI argues that the goal for all areas cannot reasonably be 5G at
35/3 Mbps due to ``fall-off'' in speeds in the farthest reaches of the
mobile signal from the broadband cell site, and it petitions for a
reduction of the 35/3 Mbps service goal coverage area. GCI argues that
the ACF's approach ``spreads support over a much broader area,
including areas with low or no population density.'' Because cell site
signals weaken the farther the signal gets from the cell site, GCI
argues that ``[s]ome outlying areas will be covered at data speeds even
below 7/1 Mbps, and some will only have coverage sufficient for voice
or text.'' GCI argues that ``[e]xtending 35/3 Mbps to every location
that has voice service today, many of which areas have only light or
occasional levels of human activity, would require providers to build
more infrastructure than necessary to provide the basic connectivity
those areas need, such as to summon help if needed.'' ARCC observes
that the Commission has an ``unrealistic expectation of 35/3 speed at
every hex edge.'' In its GCI ACF Petition Reply, GCI asks the
Commission to amend Sec. 54.318(f)(2) such that only hex-9s with BSLs
would be subject to the 35/3 Mbps goal.
 The Commission dismisses GCI's requested amendment to Sec.
54.318(f)(2) of the Commission's rules on procedural grounds. As an
initial matter, GCI failed to raise this request for an amendment of
the rule in its Petition. Under the Commission's rules, petitions for
reconsideration in rulemaking proceedings must be filed within 30 days
of publication of the final rule in the Federal Register. In its GCI
ACF Petition, GCI requests the Commission to ``clarify or reconsider
the [5G-NR 35/3 Mbps] goal for `all areas' and provide that in
considering performance plans, it recognizes that performance decreases
with distance from the cell site and that it may not be cost-effective
to add cell sites.'' Thus, the GCI ACF Petition merely asks for the
``flexibility to propose, and have the Wireless Telecommunications
Bureau . . . approve, performance plans that provide for less than 35/3
Mbps service at the [cell] edge.'' GCI did not raise its request for a
rule amendment of Sec. 54.318(f)(2) to eliminate the ACF's technology
and speed requirements for hex-9s without BSLs until its Petition
Reply, submitted on April 29, 2025. Thus, because GCI failed to request
the partial elimination of the technology and speed commitments until
April 29--almost three months after the statutory deadline for filing a
petition for reconsideration (i.e., January 30)--the Commission must
dismiss the request as untimely. In addition, the Commission finds that
GCI's Petition

[[Page 57156]]

Reply arguments were fully considered and rejected by the Commission in
the Alaska Connect Fund Order and are therefore not properly before the
Commission for reconsideration.
 Procedural deficiencies aside, the Commission denies GCI's proposed
change to limit deployment goals to areas with BSLs because it would
ultimately amount to less service for the same amount of support,
undermining the goals of the program. GCI's proposed modification of
the goals is not needed to ensure BSLs are covered, nor is it necessary
for hex-9s without BSLs to be allowed lesser or no commitments. BSLs,
especially in areas with a high density of BSLs, are more likely to be
targeted for coverage due to the economic incentives of covering BSLs
and the availability of high-cost support for providing fixed service
to BSLs. Although the presence of BSLs is a relevant consideration when
evaluating where mobile coverage needs to improve, it is not the only
relevant consideration. Many areas where Americans work and travel do
not have BSLs. If the Commission limited mobile providers' service
commitments to hex-9s with BSLs, then valuable areas where Americans
work and travel--such as roads--may not see any service improvements by
the end of 2034. As observed in the Alaska Connect Fund Order, ``[a]
concentration of BSLs is necessarily evidence that an area is valuable
to its users, but the absence of BSLs does not always indicate that an
area does not need to be covered by mobile networks.'' In explicitly
rejecting the approach that GCI advocates, the Commission observed that
``[t]hough the Commission now has the Fabric, which provides
information on where people live and work, people frequently travel in
and visit areas where there are no Fabric locations, such as along
roads, snow mobile routes, hunting areas, bodies of water, or hiking
trails.'' The Commission also emphasized that ``covering certain bodies
of water is important to meet the `work and travel' aspect of our
universal service goals for Alaskans,'' and those areas do not have
BSLs. Finally, the Commission observes that GCI seemingly appended to
its request for reconsideration of the 5G-NR 35/3 Mbps single-support
goal a similar request for reconsideration of the 5/1 Mbps goal for
duplicate support areas. The Commission interprets GCI's language as
such, and deny this request for the same reasons as discussed above.
 While the Commission denies GCI's specific relief as requested, it
amends Sec. 54.318(f)(6) of the Commission's rules and offers mobile
providers additional clarification of the ``technically and financially
feasible'' standard. The mobile providers have expressed concern that
the ``technically and financially feasible'' standard does not provide
enough guidance for them to determine where WTB will expect 35/3 Mbps
service. The Commission believes that this uncertainty could impede
performance plan negotiations, and therefore, the Commission provides
additional clarification regarding where it expects providers to commit
to providing 35/3 Mbps service. The Commission begins by reiterating
that mobile providers must maintain and improve their Alaska Plan
service. In single-support areas, the Commission expects providers to
provide 5G-NR where infrastructure and transport pricing makes 5G-NR-
based services technically and financially feasible. Based on its
internal staff analysis of provider spectrum holdings, link budget, and
a standard ITU-R propagation model (Sub-6 GHz), the Commission
generally expects a provider to extend 5G-NR at 35/3 Mbps to all
portions of its service areas within a 1.5-mile radius of its cell
sites unless it can otherwise demonstrate that doing so is technically
and financially infeasible, as described below. This expectation is
only applicable where the provider has access to fiber or microwave
backhaul and to competitive transport pricing rates. This 5G-NR at 35/3
Mbps expectation is also subject to the consideration of other
circumstances as warranted and agreed to by WTB. Where a mobile
provider previously committed to cover an area in the Alaska Plan, it
is expected to upgrade that area to at least 5G-NR at 7/1 Mbps in
eligible areas of the ACF. The Commission finds this standard will add
clarity to mobile providers' planning and is achievable within the
budget and timeline of the ACF, while building upon the success of the
Alaska Plan.
 Although the Commission finds it adequately addresses ARCC's
concerns about the 5G deployment obligations with the amendments and
clarifications it makes to the ``technically and financially feasible''
standard as described above, the Commission rejects the argument that
5G-NR provides inherently less coverage than 4G LTE when controlling
for all other variables.
 The Commission also amends 54.318(f)(6) to clarify instances where
5G-NR is not required. ACF is a broadband plan, but as a user gets
farther away from the cell site, the mobile data service becomes slower
and a voice-only service area exists between the broadband data service
area and the area where there is no service at all--i.e., voice-only
areas that exist beyond the cell edge of a provider's broadband data
commitment area, based on Alaska Plan service areas. These areas are
important for public safety, but are not a part of the broadband data
commitments. Accordingly, for voice-only areas that exist beyond the
cell edge of the mobile commitment areas--based on Alaska Plan service
areas--mobile providers do not need to upgrade those areas to 5G-NR or
commit to a minimum data speed and may maintain the facilities and
voice service already in place, unless otherwise committed to in the
ACF. These public safety voice-only areas are distinguishable from the
2G/voice-only areas that were part of some mobile providers'
commitments in the Alaska Plan, the latter of which are required to be
upgraded as part of mobile providers' ACF commitments. Mobile providers
will be able to demonstrate to WTB other reasons why it is not
technically and financially feasible to meet these expectations during
performance plan discussions, and may propose alternatives. The
Commission also reiterates that ``[w]here a hex-9 is more than 50 miles
from a microwave or fiber node, this factor alone weighs heavily in
favor of allowing a lesser commitment'' than 5G-NR. In addition, mobile
providers providing support in duplicate-support areas do not need to
commit to 5G-NR upgrades. WTB also may approve lower technology and
speeds than the minimum technology and speeds specified in Sec.
54.318, as warranted, on a case-by-case basis.

B. Standards for Determining Ineligibility for ACF Support Due to
Alaska Plan Noncompliance

 GCI asserts that WTB has too much discretion to determine
ineligibility for ACF support based on Alaska Plan noncompliance and
requests that the Commission make two key changes. First, GCI requests
that the Commission ``clarify that using the `cure year' to come into
full compliance with Alaska Plan commitments is not grounds to
eliminate a mobile provider from ACF eligibility or reduce its support,
even if some support is delayed pending verification of compliance.''
Second, GCI requests that the Commission modify the rule to ``establish
a de minimis threshold [of 5 percent] for meeting the 10-year
performance commitments, below which an Alaska Plan provider will not
be disqualified.'' The Commission grants GCI's petition with respect to
limiting WTB's delegated authority to determine ineligibility for the
ACF until after the cure year of the Alaska Plan and grants

[[Page 57157]]

GCI's petition in part regarding the de minimis threshold.
 The Alaska Connect Fund Order states that WTB may deem an Alaska
Plan mobile provider ineligible for the ACF if it determines that the
mobile provider failed to comply with its public interest obligations
or other terms and conditions of the Alaska Plan, failed to satisfy its
other Alaska Plan commitments, or failed to meet a build-out milestone.
The Alaska Connect Fund Order also allows WTB to determine whether an
Alaska Plan mobile provider is ineligible for the ACF for specific
coverage areas, or to delay its ACF support until the provider meets
its outstanding obligations under the Alaska Plan or BDC.
 GCI claims that the Alaska Connect Fund Order lacks guidance about
when a failure to complete Alaska Plan commitments by the 2026 deadline
will result in ineligibility for the ACF. GCI expresses concern that
WTB's authority would permit it to ``disqualify GCI or any other
potential ACF participant from ACF participation for missing Alaska
Plan commitments by even one [population count],'' or ``disqualify that
provider from the later competitive selection processes, even if the
Commission decides to permit bids from entities with no proven track
record of deploying mobile service in Alaska.'' GCI argues that its
requested changes would ``ensure that the most qualified providers will
be able to continue to work to expand mobile coverage, while still
maintaining the Alaska Plan's enforcement regime.'' ARCC ``supports
[Commission] clarification when the [Commission] can exercise its best
and reasoned judgment on the issue.''
 The Commission grants GCI's request regarding use of the cure year
and clarifies that WTB is not to make a determination on ACF
eligibility until after the cure year of the Alaska Plan. Under the
Alaska Plan, upon notification that the mobile provider has not met its
final milestone, the mobile provider has twelve months from the date of
the final milestone deadline to come into full compliance (cure year).
This cure year allows the Alaska Plan mobile provider to meet their
final milestone commitments without being penalized for noncompliance
during that twelve-month period. Under the ACF, an Alaska Plan mobile
provider may be deemed ineligible to participate in the ACF if WTB
determines that the provider has failed to comply with its Alaska Plan
obligations, including failing to meet its Alaska Plan build-out
milestones. WTB may determine whether an Alaska Plan mobile provider is
ineligible for ACF based on the mobile provider's compliance with its
Alaska Plan and Broadband Data Collection obligations. The Commission
reads these provisions together as authorizing WTB to determine an
Alaska Plan mobile provider's eligibility based on its compliance with,
among other things, its Alaska Plan final milestone commitments, and
that Alaska Plan mobile providers cannot be penalized (and thus found
noncompliant) for failing to meet their final milestone commitments
until after the expiration of the twelve-month period from the final
milestone deadline. The Commission therefore finds that a reasonable
interpretation of the Alaska Plan and ACF rules together supports the
clarification that WTB will refrain from determining an Alaska Plan
mobile provider's ACF eligibility until after the twelve-month cure
period. While the Commission expects mobile providers to fulfill their
commitments, given that the penalties under the Alaska Plan are not
assessed until after the cure year concludes on December 31, 2027, it
finds that date to be an appropriate time for WTB to initiate its
determination of whether a mobile provider is ineligible for the ACF.
As such, the Commission clarifies that WTB will not determine whether
an Alaska Plan provider is ineligible for the ACF until after December
31, 2027. WTB therefore will have until December 15, 2028--subject to
reasonable extensions by WTB, not to go beyond July 1, 2029--to notify
mobile providers that they are ineligible for the ACF due to Alaska
Plan noncompliance. If WTB determines that an Alaska Plan mobile
provider did not meet its Alaska Plan buildout obligations after the
commencement of the ACF, and also determines that the mobile provider
is not eligible to receive ACF mobile support, WTB can take all actions
necessary to recover all ACF support dating back to January 1, 2027.
 The Commission also grants in part GCI's request to limit ACF
ineligibility to mobile providers that miss more than a de minimis
amount of their Alaska Plan commitments. While mobile providers are
expected to fully meet their Alaska Plan commitments, ineligibility for
the ACF is a serious additional penalty that is reserved only for the
mobile providers that WTB finds to have more than de minimis
noncompliance. If a mobile provider misses any of its Alaska Plan
commitments, the Universal Service Administration Company (USAC) will
recover 1.89 times for each equivalent person for which the mobile
provider has missed providing the committed-to service. This penalty
remains unchanged and applies to de minimis noncompliance at the final
Alaska Plan milestone. However, WTB's delegation of authority could
allow it to limit eligibility in ACF if a compliance gap in Alaska Plan
is greater than de minimis. While the Commission limits WTB's authority
to find a mobile provider to be ineligible to situations in which the
provider has greater than de minimis noncompliance in the Alaska Plan,
it does not define that threshold as 5% noncompliance as GCI requests.
The Commission leaves that determination to WTB based on its assessment
of the circumstances after the cure year concludes.

C. Clarification and Reconsideration of Eligible Areas Designations

1. Modification of Areas Eligible for ACF Support To Make Untestable
Hexes Eligible
 GCI requests that the Commission reconsider the requirement that
hex-9s that cannot be tested are ineligible for ACF support. The
Commission denies GCI's request and affirms its determination that
areas that are untestable are not eligible for ACF support, but it
clarifies that this ineligibility determination applies only to areas
that are permanently untestable and not to areas that are only
temporarily untestable.
 In the Alaska Connect Fund Order, the Commission explained that
areas that are inaccessible or unsafe for testing are ineligible for
ACF support in order to ``ensure that support is targeted to areas
where it is needed the most while maintaining accountability for how
funds are used.'' GCI requests that the Commission reconsider its
decision to eliminate eligibility for untestable hex-9s, arguing that
there is no rationale for eliminating support for those areas when
hexes covered by the same cell sites are eligible. ARCC agrees that
``hex testing challenges should not eliminate hexes from inclusion''
and contends that finding inaccessible hexes ineligible for support
misses the point with the goal of ubiquitous mobile service.
 GCI claims that the large number of hex-9s in its current Alaska
Plan service area makes it impossible to assess whether every hex-9 is
testable. GCI further argues the Commission should not eliminate
support for those areas because the testability of a hex-9 is not a
proxy for whether that area is where Alaskans ``live, work, or
travel''--i.e., areas without any human activity. GCI adds that a
number of hexes may be practically difficult to test for security

[[Page 57158]]

and safety reasons, weather events, or objections from local
communities. Though it acknowledges that the Alaska Connect Fund Order
offers the possibility of performing testing using an uncrewed aircraft
(UA), or drone, as an alternative to on-the-ground-testing, GCI
maintains that there will still be areas where this alternative will
not be a viable option. GCI also argues that to the extent that
untestable hexes are not areas with human activity, the Commission
should find these areas to be eligible for ACF support anyway because
``[s]uch areas are incidentally covered[] and excluding them as
ineligible does not reduce the cost to serve adjacent, supported
areas.'' To this end, GCI proposes the amendment of Sec. 54.318(c)(2)
and the deletion of Sec. Sec. 54.318(c)(1)(iii) and 54.318(i)(4) of
the Commission's rules. GCI also asks the Commission to clarify that
the speed testing conducted will be outdoors/stationary, consistent
with the BDC.
 The Commission reaffirms the fundamental principle in its rules
that areas that are untestable are not eligible for ACF support and
clarifies how this principle would apply. Generally, if a mobile
provider cannot prove it is providing service, then it cannot receive
support for that service. The Commission reiterates, however, that the
principle applies to areas that are not available for testing on a
permanent basis except as described below. In the Alaska Connect Fund
Order, the Commission stated that ``[h]ex-9s that are inaccessible
during all seasons or are a safety hazard to test at all times of the
year are ineligible for support.'' As such, temporarily blocked trails,
the inability to test due to weather events, or the presence of
construction projects do not render an area ineligible because those
areas would become testable at a later date. If an area can be tested
using a UA, then such areas would be deemed eligible for ACF support.
If an area is permanently restricted from speed testing and a UA also
cannot be used to test the area, but the area is nonetheless an area
where people live, work, or travel and would use the service, then the
Commission directs WTB to work with the ACF participant about the
specific areas of concern (e.g., military bases) to determine whether
they should be considered eligible for support. The Commission also
clarifies that any hex-9 with a BSL would be defined as accessible.
Finally, the Commission responds to GCI's request and confirms that
outdoor/stationary data sets will be used for speed tests.
2. Categorization of Areas as Ineligible, Single-, or Duplicate-Support
Areas Based on Broadband Data Collection Availability Data as of
December 31, 2024
 In its Petition, GCI requests that the Commission confirm that the
categorization of hex-9s as ineligible, single-, or duplicate-support
areas will be fixed based on BDC availability data as of December 31,
2024. The Commission grants the GCI ACF Petition in part, and will base
its determination of all ineligible and duplicate-support areas on BDC
availability data as of December 31, 2024. Given that single-support
areas may evolve over the course of the ACF, the Commission declines to
determine single-support areas based solely on BDC availability data as
of December 31, 2024.
 The Commission's rules provide that all areas of Alaska are
eligible for ACF support except: (1) areas previously ineligible under
the Alaska Plan; (2) ``competitive areas'' based on mobile providers'
BDC availability data as of December 31, 2024; and (3) ``[a]reas deemed
inaccessible or unsafe for testing by [WTB], in coordination with
[OEA], and reflected in the Eligible-Areas Map.'' Section 54.318(c)(2)
permits WTB to ``periodically update the map(s) throughout the course
of the Alaska Connect Fund, as necessary.'' The Alaska Connect Fund
Order requires WTB to ``compare BDC availability data as of December
31, 2026 with subsequent BDC availability data to ensure that mobile
voice and mobile broadband service levels [from the Alaska Plan] are
maintained or improve in all previously served areas.'' The Commission
notes that the Alaska Plan does not end until December 31, 2026, and
the cure period does not end until December 31, 2027. WTB can require
the filing of updated performance plans and resolve Eligible-Areas
classifications of hexes throughout the life of the ACF, as needed.
 In its Petition, GCI argues that it is critical for the Commission
to clarify that ``an area cannot become ineligible, or become
`duplicate,' based on BDC availability data for service initiated after
December 31, 2024.'' GCI contends that ``if BDC updates can . . .
convert a single-support area into a duplicate-support area, the
planning basis for the two-support-area structure is lost'' and hinders
multi-year investment recovery planning. GCI explains that providers
plan deployments and order equipment upgrades up to five years in
advance and need certainty as to the ACF support they will receive for
serving specific areas.
 ARCC supports GCI's request for a firm date in determining the
eligibility status of hexes, although ARCC states it is still
evaluating whether December 31, 2024, is the best date for the
Commission to establish as the fixed date. ARCC asserts that providers
need certainty to support efforts to invest and maintain facilities and
be confident that the amount of support will not change over time.
Responding to ARCC, GCI states there is no clear alternative date to
December 31, 2024, ``if the Eligible-Areas Map(s) will be published
with the relevant categorization by October 2025.'' GCI notes that June
30, 2025 BDC data is filed September 1, 2025, leaving Commission staff
little time to analyze and vet the data, and create the maps.
 Based on its review of the record, the Commission grants in part
GCI's request and amends Sec. 54.318(c)(1)(iii) and (d)(1)(ii) to set
a firm date for determining all ineligible--including ``untestable
hexes''--and duplicate-support areas. The Commission also grants GCI's
request in part that the Commission determine all untestable areas
using BDC availability data as of December 31, 2024. All ineligible
areas and duplicate-support areas would be determined using BDC
availability data as of December 31, 2024. Additionally, any area that
is discovered to be ``untestable'' after the initial Eligible-Areas Map
is finalized will count against the provider achieving its commitments,
as all eligible areas of the ACF will be formally established after the
initial Eligible-Areas Map is finalized. The Commission is persuaded by
GCI's and ARCC's arguments that providers need certainty in the amount
of support they will receive and which areas are eligible for that
support for their future network planning. Most of the types of
ineligible areas were already locked as of December 31, 2024, and with
the addition of the untestable areas, which were the only ineligible
areas that were previously not locked using BDC availability data as of
December 31, 2024, all of the ineligible areas will be known when the
ACF begins for network planning purposes. While duplicate-support areas
will be set using BDC availability data as of December 31, 2024, these
areas could become single-support areas after December 31, 2029, after
the Commission takes action on the Further Notice. The Commission finds
that setting all ineligible areas and duplicate support areas with BDC
availability data as of December 31, 2024, removes the possibility of
the hex-9s where a provider could lose support from
