FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Incarcerated People's Communication Services; Implementation of the Martha Wright-Reed Act; Rates for Interstate Inmate Calling Services
Document number: 2025-22125
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 56013
Publication date: 2025-12-05

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 232 (Friday, December 5, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 232 (Friday, December 5, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 56013-56062]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2025-22125]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 64

[WC Docket Nos. 12-375, 23-62; FCC 25-75; FR ID 319372]


Incarcerated People's Communication Services; Implementation of
the Martha Wright-Reed Act; Rates for Interstate Inmate Calling
Services

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) modifies the Commission's previous incarcerated people's
communications services (IPCS) rate caps in response to record evidence
of the significant unintended consequences of those rate caps. It
establishes new interim audio and video IPCS rate caps by basing the
calculation of the Commission's rate caps only on billed minutes,
incorporating all safety and security measure expenses that IPCS
providers reported incurring, and creating an additional rate cap tier
for extremely small jails. It also creates a separate interim rate
additive to ensure recovery of correctional facilities' costs of
administering IPCS. Additionally, it sets a new compliance date for
providers' compliance with the new rules and clarifies that the rate
cap, site commission, and per-minute pricing rules from the
Commission's 2021 Order will no longer apply following that date.

DATES:
 Effective date: This rule is effective December 5, 2025.
 Compliance date: compliance with this rule will be required on
April 6, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Shabbir Hamid, Pricing Policy Division
of the Wireline Competition Bureau, at (202) 418-2328 or via email at
 [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order and Order on Reconsideration, document FCC 25-75, adopted on
October 28, 2025 and released on November 6, 2025, in WC Docket Nos.
12-375 and 23-62. This summary is based on the public redacted version
of the document, the full text of this document can be obtained from
the Commission's Electronic Document Management System (EDOCS) website
at www.fcc.gov/edocs or via the Commission's Electronic Comment Filing
System (ECFS) website at www.fcc.gov/ecfs , or is available at the
following internet address: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-25-75A1.pdf .

Synopsis

I. Introduction

 1. The rates and other practices of the incarcerated people's
communications services (IPCS) industry have been the subject of the
Commission's and Congress' attempts to ensure just and reasonable rates
for consumers and fair compensation for providers for over a decade.
Indeed, the Commission has attempted on multiple occasions over the
last 12 years to address these issues, spawning multiple rounds of
litigation in several federal courts. With the passage of the Martha
Wright-Reed Act and its implementation by the Commission in the 2024
IPCS Order, the regulatory framework to achieve these dual goals was
largely established. But in taking those steps, the new regulatory
framework has led to significant unintended consequences that have been
brought to light by stakeholders, as well as other challenges that are
currently before the First Circuit. The ongoing implementation
challenges and the resulting risks to safety and security they cause
greatly exceed what the Commission considered or anticipated when it
adopted the 2024 IPCS Order, leading the Commission to today's action.
 2. The goal of today's action is to establish a regulatory
framework that is

[[Page 56014]]

faithful to the Martha Wright-Reed Act and is also consistent with the
record that has developed over the last two years. The changes we make
in the IPCS regulatory framework today, in particular changes to the
methodology for calculating IPCS rate caps, supersede the corresponding
aspects of the 2024 IPCS Order and result in revised, interim audio and
video IPCS rate caps that respond to these unintended consequences. We
modify certain aspects of the rate cap calculations and rate structure
to more accurately reflect the costs providers and correctional
authorities incur in the provision of IPCS. The revised audio and video
rate caps we establish are interim, while we seek additional comment in
the Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (Further Notice) on, among
other issues, rate structure and rate cap setting methodologies, the
continued evolution of the IPCS market, and potential unintended
consequences of these proposals. The goal of our actions today is to
create a durable, predictable, and lawful framework that will properly
balance our implementation of the dual statutory mandates--just and
reasonable rates for consumers and providers and fair compensation for
providers--and thereby ensure the continued availability of IPCS to
incarcerated people and preserve correctional officials' ability to
provide safe and secure access to IPCS. The steps we take today will
provide a more stable framework to ensure continued higher levels of
communication between incarcerated people and their loved ones,
bringing all the benefits that has been demonstrated to provide,
including improved reentry into society, reduced recidivism, increased
public safety, and strengthened family ties between parents and
children, between spouses, and with family members generally.

II. Background

 3. The Martha Wright-Reed Act was enacted by Congress in January
2023 to ensure that ``all [IPCS] rates and charges are just and
reasonable'' while continuing to ensure that ``all payphone service
providers are fairly compensated.'' The Act expanded the Commission's
jurisdiction to regulate IPCS to include intrastate IPCS and advanced
communications services, including video IPCS. It also permitted the
Commission to use industry-wide average costs to determine just and
reasonable rates and directed the Commission to ``consider costs
associated with any safety and security measures necessary to provide''
IPCS in determining those rates. In July 2024, the Commission adopted
the 2024 IPCS Order, implementing the Martha Wright-Reed Act and
establishing a new framework for the regulation of the IPCS industry.
The Commission also adopted the 2024 IPCS Notice, seeking further
comment on certain issues, including further disaggregation of the very
small jail rate cap tier and the adoption of a uniform rate additive to
account for costs incurred by correctional facilities providing IPCS.
 4. In October 2024, petitions were filed seeking reconsideration of
various aspects of the 2024 IPCS Order, including for our purposes
here, a petition by NCIC (NCIC Reconsideration Petition). The NCIC
Reconsideration Petition seeks reconsideration of two issues the
Commission addresses herein. First, it challenges the Commission's
decision to exclude certain safety and security costs from the lower
bounds of its zones of reasonableness, asserting that the exclusion led
to rate caps that are ``below the cost of providing service for most
IPCS providers.'' It also seeks reconsideration of the Commission's
decision to include unbilled minutes of use in its cap calculations,
claiming that ``led to unsustainable rate cap reductions.''
 5. During the transition period to the newly adopted rate caps, the
Commission was made aware of certain unintended consequences of the new
IPCS rules for the industry and for correctional facilities. In the
2025 IPCS Waiver Order, the Wireline Competition Bureau (WCB or the
Bureau) found the record, developed subsequent to the adoption of the
2024 IPCS Order, contained evidence indicating that the restructuring
of the IPCS industry required to implement the Commission's new rate
cap rules ``imposes implementation challenges and safety and security
risks greatly exceeding those the Commission envisioned in the 2024
IPCS Order.'' In light of these difficulties, the Bureau adopted the
2025 IPCS Waiver Order, which extended compliance deadlines for the
IPCS rate caps and other rules ``until April 1, 2027 or any alternative
date the Commission sets as part of further action in this
proceeding.'' On July 30, 2025, the Public Interest Parties filed an
Application for Review of the 2025 IPCS Waiver Order, asking the
Commission to rescind the order and allow the relevant IPCS rules to go
into effect as adopted. The Bureau sought and received comment on the
Application for Review.

III. Report and Order and Order on Reconsideration

 6. We adopt a joint Report and Order and Order on Reconsideration
(Order) to address rate cap setting issues that arose in two distinct
procedural settings in this rulemaking--some in response to the 2024
IPCS Notice and others in response to the NCIC Reconsideration
Petition. We combine the discussions of our Report and Order and Order
on Reconsideration into a single holistic discussion to simplify and
clarify our analysis of the various rate cap setting modifications we
make, which are interrelated and interdependent, but which must be
factored together to result in a single set of revised rate caps. For
clarity's sake, we identify throughout this hybrid discussion the
procedural source of each issue we address and therefore the aspect of
the joint Order we issue today.
 7. In this Order, we use a two-step process for revising the IPCS
rate caps. We first address four methodological issues raised in the
record and revise the approach to each in response to comments raised
in the record. We then incorporate the effects of those modifications
into the audio and video rate cap calculations by establishing a zone
of reasonableness for each rate tier, calculating upper and lower
bounds for each rate tier, and then select new rate caps from within
the resulting zones, rounding to whole cent amounts. The rate caps we
establish are interim, acknowledging the limitations of the data
submitted and allowing the Commission to seek further comment before
setting permanent rate caps.
 8. We adopt the following revised, interim audio and video IPCS
rate caps:

[[Page 56015]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05DE25.300

A. Revisions to Rate Cap Setting Methodology and Rate Structure

 9. We first revise four aspects of the rate cap setting approach
the Commission used in the 2024 IPCS Order, based on the record
developed in response to the 2024 IPCS Notice and NCIC's Petition for
Reconsideration of various aspects of the 2024 IPCS Order, as well as
updated information received in the record of this proceeding. As noted
above, these changes supersede the corresponding aspects of the 2024
IPCS Order. First, in response to the NCIC Reconsideration Petition, we
reconsider the use of unbilled minutes in calculating the IPCS rate
caps, excluding such minutes as they result in no compensation for IPCS
providers. Second, pursuant to comment sought in the 2024 IPCS Notice,
we adopt an additional size tier for extremely small jails (from 0 to
49 average daily population (ADP)) to better reflect the generally
higher per-minute and per-capita costs extremely small jails face.
Third, in response to the NCIC Reconsideration Petition, we revise the
treatment of safety and security costs to include all such reported
costs in the revised rate caps. Finally, pursuant to comment sought in
the 2024 IPCS Notice, we adopt a separate rate additive for all rate
tiers of up to $0.02 per minute that may be charged on top of the newly
revised per-minute rate caps. The net effect of these changes will be
to properly balance the way we implement the Martha Wright-Reed Act and
thereby ensure consumers, correctional facilities, and IPCS providers
realize the shared goal of increased communication with all the
benefits that has been shown to produce.
1. Exclusion of Unbilled Minutes in Calculating Rate Caps
 10. NCIC seeks reconsideration of the Commission's inclusion of
unbilled minutes of use in calculating IPCS rate caps in the 2024 IPCS
Order. NCIC argues that the inclusion of unbilled minutes of use--
minutes that facilities may require and for which providers currently
collect no revenue--``would lead to IPCS providers being under-
compensated.'' The majority of commenters that responded to the
petition support NCIC's claim. We agree and therefore grant this
portion of the NCIC Reconsideration Petition.
 11. In the 2024 IPCS Order, the Commission calculated the IPCS rate
caps by dividing used and useful costs incurred in the provision of
IPCS by the sum of billed and unbilled minutes as the unit of sale. It
reasoned that using both billed and unbilled minutes ``better
reflect[ed] the cost of actual minutes.''

[[Page 56016]]

The Commission considered that using both billed and unbilled minutes
would ``ensure all incarcerated persons are charged no more than the
cost of their calls, and treat[] all minutes equally, regardless of a
facility's or a provider's policy decisions on whether and how to
provide free minutes.''
 12. NCIC contends that the Commission erred by including unbilled
minutes in its calculation of rate caps. It claims that the Commission
failed to ``adequately explain how including unbilled minutes, for
which IPCS providers incur costs to carry the traffic and monitor the
communications but receive no revenue, is a better reflection of an
IPCS providers' costs to provide service.'' We find that using total
reported minutes of use to calculate interim rate caps may not produce
rate caps that allow providers sufficient revenues to recover their
costs, even if doing so may be useful in assessing overall industry
cost characteristics. Using both billed and unbilled minutes, without
accounting for the fact that providers may not presently have contracts
in place enabling them to recover from facilities the costs of
providing any unbilled minutes that facilities require, may lead to
under-compensation, contrary to the ``fair compensation'' principle of
section 276(b)(1)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended
(Communications Act).
 13. NCIC challenges the Commission's conclusion that using billed
and unbilled minutes to derive its rate caps was ``an improvement from
the 2021 ICS Order, which divided expenses by paid minutes.'' It
further claims the Commission ``failed to provide any meaningful
discussion on why its prior conclusion to rely on solely [paid] minutes
was in error.'' It cites the Commission's previous conclusion in the
2021 ICS Order to use paid minutes to derive rate caps ``because those
are the minutes that providers rely on to recover their costs.'' As
NCIC noted, using unbilled minutes for which no compensation is
received to calculate rate caps leads ``to IPCS providers' costs being
diluted by non-revenue generating IPCS calls,'' which may not ensure
providers are fairly compensated, as required by the Martha Wright-Reed
Act.
 14. While NCIC seeks to exclude unbilled minutes from the
calculation of IPCS rate caps, it does not seek a return to the use of
paid minutes to calculate rate caps as was done in the 2021 ICS Order.
A return to using paid minutes was not necessary in the 2024 IPCS Order
as the Commission accounted for the difference between paid and billed
minutes by including bad debt expense in its rate cap calculations. In
this Order, we account for this difference by including a similar
allowance for bad debt expense in the costs used to calculate rate
caps.
 15. The Public Interest Parties assert that ``excluding unbilled
minutes would lead to rate caps that are unreasonably high . . . in at
least some facilities.'' But they fail to acknowledge that basing rates
on unbilled minutes will undercompensate providers unless they recover
those costs directly from facilities. We therefore are not persuaded
that excluding unbilled minutes results in interim rate caps that are
not just and reasonable. Additionally, the Commission must take into
account the fact that unbilled minutes represent a non-trivial
percentage of all minutes as it balances the dual goals of ensuring
just and reasonable rates for consumers and fair compensation for
providers. Finally, consumers are direct beneficiaries of unbilled
minutes, an offsetting benefit which must be factored in assessing the
reasonableness of industry rate caps overall. This revision to our rate
caps, as well as the others adopted in this Order, are cost-based,
supported by the record, and meet the dual requirements that our rate
caps be just and reasonable and fairly compensatory. We find that
excluding unbilled minutes in calculating our interim rate caps
satisfies both statutory mandates.
 16. In the 2024 IPCS Order, the Commission further explained its
decision to use unbilled minutes by citing the fact that the ``ratio of
billed minutes to unbilled minutes varies across facilities'' and that
basing rates on billed and unbilled minutes would minimize the problem
of under-recovery in facilities with a higher proportion of unbilled
minutes and over-recovery in facilities with a lower proportion of
unbilled minutes. However, as NCIC observes, that reasoning reflects
the inherent variability of rate caps based on average industry data
and therefore does not constitute a flaw in the Commission's rate cap
setting methodology, only an inherent attribute of average cost-based
ratemaking.
 17. Finally, NCIC questions the Commission's reasoning that ``if
the relative proportions of billed to unbilled minutes were to shift in
the future, a rate cap based on the amount of billed minutes would
become outdated.'' It asserts that the Commission ``already has plans
to address any outdated rate caps in connection with ongoing oversight
of IPCS service.'' The Public Interest Parties assert in contrast that
including unbilled minutes ``eliminat[es] the need for the type of
ongoing monitoring NCIC describes,'' but do not explain how including
unbilled minutes in rate calculations would obviate the need for the
Commission to discharge its ongoing oversight responsibilities under
the Communications Act and the Martha Wright-Reed Act. We agree with
NCIC. We are currently monitoring and fully intend to continue to
monitor the IPCS industry as part of our ongoing oversight obligations
under the Communications Act and the Martha Wright-Reed Act.
 18. We therefore use only billed minutes in calculating our interim
rate caps, superseding our decision in the 2024 IPCS Order, which we
find will help ensure IPCS providers are fairly compensated while still
ensuring just and reasonable rates. Removing unbilled minutes from the
calculation of those rate caps will, in combination with the other
modifications to IPCS rate caps adopted in this Order, ensure those
rate caps comply with the statutory requirement that providers are
fairly compensated. The impact of altering this aspect of the
Commission's rate cap calculation, as further explained in Appendix D,
is material. Unbilled minutes constitute 7.8% of the total number of
minutes reported by the industry in response to the 2023 Mandatory Data
Collection, although this proportion varies across different rate tiers
and between audio and video services. Unbilled minutes consist of a
greater proportion of video minutes than audio minutes, approximately
27.5% of reported video minutes, versus roughly 7% of audio minutes.
Removing unbilled minutes from our calculations increases the per
minute industry averages for audio and video IPCS and safety and
security expenses by as little as 6.2% to as much as 63.7%, depending
on the service and the tier in question (before lower-bound
adjustments). Replacing total minutes with billed minutes increases the
per-minute allowance for recovery of ancillary service expenses
reflected in the rate caps by about 8.5% (before lower-bound
adjustments and rounding to the nearest third decimal place). The
effect of this change is reflected in the interim rate caps adopted by
the Commission.

[[Page 56017]]

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05DE25.301

2. Establishing the Extremely Small Jail Tier
 19. In the 2024 IPCS Notice, the Commission sought comment on the
costs of providing IPCS to very small jails, whether to disaggregate
the very small jail tier, and the types of data that would help capture
the variability of IPCS costs in this very small jail tier. After
analyzing the record received in response to the 2024 IPCS Notice, we
now further disaggregate the very small jail tier into two separate
tiers--very small jails and extremely small jails. Specifically, we
revise our definition of ``very small jails'' to include jails with an
ADP between and including 50 to 99 and create a new rate cap tier for
``extremely small jails'' for jails with an ADP of 0 to 49. These
revisions result in the following rate cap tiers, reflecting
differences in facility type and size, which we hereby adopt:
 A separate tier for all prisons regardless of average
daily population;
 Jails with an average daily population of 1,000 or more
(large jails);
 Jails with an average daily population between and
including 350 to 999 (medium jails);
 Jails with an average daily population between and
including 100 to 349 (small jails);
 Jails with an average daily population between and
including 50 to 99 (very small jails); and
 Jails with an average daily population of 0 to 49
(extremely small jails).
 20. The Martha Wright-Reed Act directs the Commission to ensure
just and reasonable rates and consider costs associated with ``small,
medium, and large facilities'' or ``other characteristics.'' In the
2024 IPCS Order, the Commission interpreted this language as a mandate
to analyze the cost characteristics of different-sized facilities. The
Commission found no need to create separate rate cap tiers among
prisons because they are almost uniformly large, enjoy greater
economies of scale, and the data do not indicate significant
differences in the costs of serving different prison facilities.
Further, the Commission did not interpret the Martha Wright-Reed Act as
a directive that limits the Commission to adopting only three size
tiers. Given the record then before it, the Commission adopted a four-
tiered rate cap structure that includes the ``very small jail'' rate
cap tier that we reexamine here to better reflect the differences in
the costs of serving various sizes of jails.

[[Page 56018]]

 21. Notably, the very small jail tier included jails with an ADP
between 0 and 99, which encompassed over half of all jails in the
United States. Generally speaking, these and other small jails are
located in rural areas--an ``other characteristic[ ]'' within the
meaning of the Martha Wright-Reed Act--where the record suggests that
providing IPCS involves increased costs due to ``higher
telecommunications expenses and customization requirements.'' The
Commission recognized that the rate cap tiers adopted in the 2024 IPCS
Order, while an improvement over its previous rate caps, may still not
effectively capture cost variations within this tier, and sought
comment in the 2024 IPCS Notice on further disaggregation of the very
small jail tier. Given the significant number of such jails and their
distinct cost structures, and given their generally more rural nature,
we find it necessary to further refine our rate cap tiers to better
capture the variability among small jails generally and within the very
small jail tier specifically to more accurately reflect providers'
costs and ensure they are fairly compensated.
 22. As a general matter, we agree with commenters that as ADP
decreases, per-minute or per capita costs for the provision of IPCS
increase for the provider. Several factors cause per-minute IPCS costs
to rise as ADP shrinks. For one, the fixed costs of providing IPCS at
smaller or more rural facilities are distributed over fewer
incarcerated people and therefore fewer minutes of use, which results
in providers tending to have higher costs per minute at smaller
facilities as opposed to larger facilities. Importantly, extremely
small jails and very small jails are more typically located in rural
areas, where the per minute cost of service is higher because of the
reported difficulty of serving those areas. In addition to increased
costs for jail management and account set-up, greater reliance on
prepaid accounts, and fewer calling minutes, IPCS providers that serve
smaller jail facilities typically in rural locations often must also
provision longer haul, higher cost broadband connections to deliver
service. Accordingly, building upon the Commission's prior actions and
based on the record and analysis of IPCS data, we subdivide the very
small jail tier established in the 2024 IPCS Order and instead create
two separate tiers: a more focused very small jail tier for jails with
ADPs between 50 and 99, and a new extremely small jail tier for jails
with ADPs between 0 and 49.
 23. The real world implications of adopting rate caps that do not
sufficiently take into account the higher costs of serving the smallest
and most rural facilities is evident in the record subsequent to the
adoption of the 2024 IPCS Order. One provider reported being ``forced
to cease the provision of IPCS services to four small jails in Arizona
and New Mexico that would no longer be financially viable under the
2024 Order.'' After attempting to find a replacement provider, ``the
facilities had no other choice but to revert to 1980s-style supervised
public pay telephones for use by the incarcerated population.'' Securus
and Pay Tel further emphasize that rate caps that do not take into
account the costs of serving very small facilities ``will undoubtedly
impact small jails in rural areas to the greatest extent, as those
facilities typically have the lowest calling levels and the highest
costs.''
 24. We find that further disaggregating the very small jail tier
into two separate tiers better accounts for the operational challenges
of providing IPCS to very small and extremely small jails, more
accurately captures the heightened costs associated with providing IPCS
to jails in rural areas, and therefore more reliably ensures that IPCS
rates are just, reasonable, and fairly compensatory. Further, the
majority of incarcerated people that would have been covered by the
former very small jail tier rate cap will pay relatively lower rates
than they otherwise would have if the very small jail tier were not
subdivided, given that the majority of incarcerated people within the
two new tiers will be in the revised very small jail tier. Incarcerated
people housed in jails included in the new extremely small jail tier,
while paying marginally higher rates than they otherwise would have if
the very small jail tier were not subdivided, will be assured of the
long-term availability of IPCS at those institutions given that those
rates will more accurately compensate providers for their costs.
 25. We subdivide the former very small jail tier at 50 ADP to
create two tiers, and find that using this additional threshold will
improve or better ensure the provision of IPCS within these tiers,
while balancing the differences in ADP, average length of time
incarcerated people are detained, and consumers' interests. This action
subdivides the rate tier that encompasses the largest number of
facilities. The most recent Bureau of Justice Statistics show that of
the 2,779 jails in operation, over half have an ADP below 100 (567 with
an ADP of between 50 to 99 and 956 with an ADP lower than 50). While
there are a higher number of jails in the lower half of the 0-100 ADP
range, those jails house significantly fewer people. Of the total ADP
of 59,600 in jails below 100 ADP during the 12-month period from July
1, 2021 to June 30, 2022, jails with ADPs from 50 to 99 account for
roughly 40,500 (68%), while jails with ADPs under 50 account for only
19,100 (32%).
 26. We agree with commenters that assert that, because of this
uneven population distribution within the former very small jail tier,
the rate cap for this tier ``saddles many with rates that are far too
high as a result of the costs associated with providing service in the
smallest jails.'' Taking into account the differences in ADP at the
very small jail tier and the extremely small jail tier, we find that
dividing the existing very small jail tier at 50 ADP will ensure that,
at any given point in time, the majority of consumers in this group
will pay lower IPCS rates, reflecting the relatively lower per-minute
cost of service in jails from 50 to 99 ADP, while allowing providers at
extremely small jails to charge rates that will enable them to recover
their higher per-minute cost of service and therefore ensure they will
be able to continue providing service over the long term. Differences
in average length of stay between these two sets of facilities further
amplify the importance of disaggregating the former very small jail
tier to set appropriate rates for both new tiers. According to Worth
Rises, on average, ``people in jails with an ADP of 50 to 99 are
detained for 21.6 days, whereas people in jails with an ADP of 0 to 49
are detained for 13.4 days.'' Shorter detentions would tend to increase
the frequency of one-time administrative costs, all else being the
same. We therefore divide the former very small jail tier into two
separate tiers based on ADP.
 27. We decline to further disaggregate the extremely small jail
tier by setting an additional threshold below 50 ADP. NCIC suggests
that there are a limited number of IPCS providers willing to serve very
small jails because they lack a consistent ADP that would enable
adequate revenue projections. After a certain point, however, we find
further disaggregating the smallest rate cap tiers beyond those we
adopt today would likely offer diminishing benefits. We recognize that
IPCS providers--both large and small--serving jails with, for example,
an ADP below 20 would likely face disproportionate compliance burdens
if an additional, even smaller tier were created. Therefore, after
carefully reviewing the data and record, we conclude 50 ADP represents
a reasonable break point between the very small and extremely small
jail tiers.

[[Page 56019]]

3. Inclusion of Safety and Security Costs
 28. In the 2024 IPCS Order, to determine which provider-reported
expenses to include when calculating industry-average IPCS costs, the
Commission applied a used and useful framework and evaluated various
categories of safety and security expenses. After evaluating seven
categories ``based on the nature of the preponderance of tasks or
functions within each category,'' the Commission found that two
categories of safety and security expenses were used and useful in the
provision of IPCS. The Commission therefore included the reported costs
for the two categories--CALEA compliance measures and communications
security services--in the cost of service, but ultimately concluded
that ``the remaining five categories should not be treated as used and
useful'' for purposes of determining the lower bounds of the zones of
reasonableness. NCIC disputes this conclusion, arguing that the
Commission's ``inconsistent application of the `used and useful'
standard led to material errors'' when the Commission rejected the
costs in those five categories.
 29. We now grant in part NCIC's Petition, by reconsidering the
Commission's previous decision to exclude various safety and security
costs from its IPCS rate cap calculations and instead treat all
reported safety and security costs as used and useful costs for
determining the costs to be included in the lower bounds of the zones
of reasonableness. In its Petition, NCIC alleges that the Commission's
application of the used and useful analysis ``did not fully account for
IPCS providers' safety and security costs.'' NCIC argues that ``the
lack of comprehensive data'' prevented ``a reasoned analysis of the
IPCS costs allocated across the seven categories of safety and security
measures.'' On reconsideration, we agree. While the available record
evidence concerning used and useful safety and security costs provided
a basis for the Commission to exclude certain categories of safety and
security costs, given the record which has developed since the
Commission adopted the 2024 IPCS Order, we find that this led to rate
caps that did not sufficiently recover providers' used and useful
safety and security costs. Accordingly, given our concerns about
jeopardizing access to IPCS if we underestimate used and useful safety
and security costs, we take a more conservative approach on the
existing record and treat all reported such costs as used and useful,
unless and until an improved record going forward shows otherwise,
thereby superseding our treatment of safety and security costs in the
2024 IPCS Order. Therefore, for the purposes of our interim rate caps
we now incorporate all safety and security cost categories in the
Commission's IPCS rate cap calculations and specifically add all such
categories of costs into our calculation of the lower bounds. The
zone's upper bounds already included and incorporated all reported
safety and security costs, and we need make no corresponding change to
the upper bounds as a result. In doing so, we not only reconsider the
Commission's earlier exclusion of five of the seven reported cost
categories, but also incorporate and reaffirm the Commission's earlier
reasons for including the other two reported cost categories.
 30. In the 2023 Mandatory Data Collection, the Commission expanded
the scope of collected data, gathering more granular information
concerning safety and security services offered by providers,
particularly those safety and security services which were used and
useful in the provision of IPCS, and required providers to report on
these data in detail for the first time. The Commission structured
reporting of safety and security expenses by requiring providers to
allocate these expenses across seven different cost categories.
Industry-wide, providers reported the following expenses by category:
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR05DE25.302


[[Page 56020]]


 As the chart demonstrates, providers reported a total of $569.9
million in safety and security costs across all categories, with
Category 3 (``Communications Security Services'') showing the highest
reported costs of any category. These costs represent 34.4% of all
reported costs.
 31. While the Commission's categories were designed to group costs
according to the uses or functions for which they were incurred, the
Bureaus further disaggregated the category-based approach by directing
providers to report cost data for each category between regulated IPCS
(like audio IPCS, video IPCS, and ancillary services) and nonregulated
services using a catch-all column for reporting. Despite these changes
and attempts at clarification, providers still had difficulty in
reporting. Commenters have since disputed the categories as a viable
means of identifying used and useful costs, arguing that ``IPCS
providers do not categorize safety and security measures costs the same
way the [Commission] grouped them.'' For example, the record
demonstrates that responding providers interpreted communications
monitoring services (category 5) to include functions that might be
considered as typical of law enforcement, such as ``aid[ing]
investigations related to detention facilities,'' but that providers
also reported services more typically considered IPCS-related in
category 5, for example costs for ``keeping incarcerated people from
calling blocked numbers and from engaging in three-way calling.''
Similarly, as the National Sheriffs' Association argues, call recording
(category 4) and call monitoring (category 5) both may include
functions they consider used and useful in the provision of IPCS,
insofar as threats are made or crimes are committed during the use of
IPCS. On reconsideration, we find these arguments imply a benefit to
IPCS consumers and that overlapping uses between the categories of
safety and security measures include costs that the Commission did not
evaluate previously, which we find appropriate to contemplate for all
categories. Without more and better information, the Commission
undermined its category-based analysis by requiring providers to lump
reported costs into inexact categories, which, in some instances,
excluded certain reported costs from the categories the Commission
deemed used and useful.
 32. At a more granular level, some of the individual services
within each category also suffered from ambiguity in function and use,
as they could be classified as a law enforcement function, as a service
which supported the provision of IPCS, or potentially both. Cost data
for safety and security measures can be allocated among different
security categories or functions in many ways, for example, by
allocating costs for research and development processes to one specific
category even if those costs apply more broadly to additional
categories. Further, reported safety and security costs--such as
platform development--could support both regulated IPCS and
nonregulated services like text messaging. For example, certain IPCS
providers develop their own proprietary software platforms for use by
customers and law enforcement; such platforms naturally serve multiple
functions, supporting not only the use of IPCS, but also education,
entertainment, or other nonregulated uses, in addition to providing
some safety and security features. Without a prescribed method of cost
allocation or attribution, the categorical distinctions lose
reliability, and can be treated differently by different respondents.
In sum, we find other costs, such as platform development costs, and
other functional overlaps heighten the degree to which regulated and
nonregulated service costs are intermingled, and further obfuscate the
Commission's ability to exclude reported safety and security cost
categories without better data.
 33. Next, given the limitations of the available data in the 2024
IPCS Order, the Commission could not verify whether the costs of each
provider's reported safety and security measures were allocated
consistently to the seven cost categories. Despite the detailed
instructions and description of the safety and security cost categories
the Commission issued in the Mandatory Data Collection, providers did
not report their safety and security data in a uniform fashion; in
fact, the absence of costs reported in certain categories by certain
carriers underscores this point. For example, {[ REDACTED ]{time}
recorded costs for all seven categories of safety and security measures
costs. (Material that is set off by double brackets {[ ]{time} is
subject to a request for confidential treatment and is redacted from
the public version of this document.) Similarly, {[ REDACTED ]{time}
providers reported costs in only two out of seven categories, while the
remaining {[ REDACTED ]{time} reported costs across six different
categories. Different sized providers made very different safety and
security cost allocations. The two largest providers allocated
approximately {[ REDACTED ]{time} percent of their expenses (besides
other ancillary services and other products and services expenses) to
safety and security, in contrast to all other providers which
collectively allocated only about 3.3 percent of these expenses to
safety and security. These percentages are derived from company-wide
data. The expenses reflected in the base used to calculate these
percentages are expenses reported as audio IPCS, video IPCS, safety and
security measures, automated payment services, live agent services,
paper bill/statement services, single-call and related services, and
third-party financial transaction services. Further, the Commission was
aware that providers had difficulty allocating safety and security
costs among categories as instructed or otherwise attributed safety and
security measures to many categories without supporting that
allocation. We find these types of reporting issues to be particularly
impactful on allocation decisions, particularly when some providers
elected not to allocate, despite instructions to do so. Similarly, the
National Sheriffs' Association argues that many providers do not
maintain ``more granular cost'' data that would allow accurate
categorization. Reporting disparities like these cannot be attributed
exclusively to the inexactitude of the Commission's reporting
categories; nonetheless, we agree that, upon reconsideration, these
flaws suggest on balance that the structure of the data collection
needs further refinement.
 34. Despite the Commission's analysis, the safety and security data
on which the Commission relied in the 2024 IPCS Order were imperfect;
our reevaluation of that data in light of the record we have since
developed leaves us without assurance that the Commission's approach
was the best way to implement the relevant directives of the Martha
Wright-Reed Act. We now find that the method of data collection, and
providers' allocations in response to the collection, together impaired
the Commission's ability to assess the effect of excluding certain
safety and security costs. The data collection results fell short of
capturing the manner in which individual safety and security measures
were used in the provision of IPCS, particularly at smaller
institutions. We also agree that more specific, discrete, and granular
cost data and operational information would assist the Commission in
more reliably analyzing the costs and uses of reported safety and
security measures.
 35. The record demonstrates that the unintended consequences of
these

[[Page 56021]]

shortcomings have had a significant impact on providers, correctional
facilities, and ultimately consumers. Correctional facilities have
raised basic safety and security concerns following the adoption of the
2024 IPCS Order suggesting that the adopted rates resulted in reduced
access to certain safety and security measures. For example, certain
IPCS providers state that ``many correctional facilities have made the
difficult--but [2024 IPCS] Order-required--decision to forgo these
services because they lack the funds to pay for them,'' ultimately
impacting the availability of IPCS generally. One provider reported
that it renegotiated contracts with a number of facilities that ``lack
sufficient financial resources to pay for the suite of safety and
security tools they previously relied upon to provide IPCS safely to
their populations and, accordingly, have elected to move forward with a
substantially reduced set of those tools, thus endangering facility and
public safety.'' The effects of the exclusion of certain safety and
security costs from IPCS rate calculations also appears to have
impacted access to IPCS generally. Another IPCS provider reported that
some facilities ``have decided to stop offering IPCS altogether because
they cannot guarantee the continued safety and security of their
facilities.''
 36. While the Commission attempted to reconcile the intermingled
nature of these costs in the 2024 IPCS Order, particularly when setting
the relevant rate caps inside the zones of reasonableness, the results
of the 2023 Mandatory Data Collection did not enable the Commission to
be precise enough to avoid the unintended consequences described above.
As we have noted, the categories excluded by the 2024 IPCS Order
included services or functions that are used and useful. As a result of
excluding the costs of such services from the rate caps, and as the
record since the adoption of the 2024 IPCS Order shows, the fiscal
resources required to provide requisite safety and security services
were put at risk, implicating the availability of IPCS generally. We
therefore take the interim step of reincorporating the five excluded
cost categories of safety and security measures into the lower bounds
and calculating new interim rate caps for audio IPCS and video IPCS
accordingly, while continuing to include the two previously included
categories. The seven categories are as follows: Communications
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA) compliance measures; law
enforcement support services; communication security services;
communication recording services; call monitoring services; voice
biometrics services; and other safety and security measures. This
approach applies the used and useful framework to an imperfect record
and therefore best ensures that all used and useful costs from safety
and security measures necessary to the provision of IPCS will be
accounted for in the governing interim rate caps pending the adoption
of permanent rate caps, alleviating the risk that consumers could lose
access to IPCS at some facilities altogether while the Commission works
to collect more precise data and operational information. While it may
at times be challenging to discern actual IPCS market conditions given
imperfect data and marketplace complexities, the evidence of a threat
to the availability of service is sufficient to justify our actions
today. We note that Pay Tel asserts that ``[b]ut for the 2025 waiver
order suspending several portions of the 2024 order, and the FCC's
ongoing consideration of revisions to the 2024 order, Pay Tel would
likely have been forced to forego service in other high-cost jails.''
Ultimately, we do not have the option to wait until market failure
becomes more widespread to intervene. The inclusion of these costs for
the purposes of our interim rate caps produces a reasonable outcome
given the fact that they are based on providers' reported costs. We
note that the upcoming data collection to establish permanent rates for
IPCS will provide the Commission and interested parties another
opportunity to revisit and reconsider these topics in the future.
4. Interim Facility Cost Rate Additive
 37. On an interim basis and consistent with the record, we adopt a
uniform rate additive of up to $0.02 per minute separate from and in
addition to our rate caps to account for the costs correctional
facilities incur in allowing access to IPCS. This additive is
applicable equally to each rate tier we adopt today, and may be charged
on top of the new, interim per-minute audio and video IPCS rate caps
adopted in this Order. Our adoption of this uniform additive is an
interim measure designed to provide greater certainty to IPCS providers
and correctional facilities in determining compensation for
correctional facilities for the costs they incur in allowing access to
IPCS while the Commission seeks comment on how to structure a permanent
rate additive in today's Further Notice.
 38. As an initial matter, we modify the IPCS rate structure to
create separate provider-related and facility-related cost recovery
components, as the Commission previously did in the 2021 ICS Order.
This rate structure more clearly delineates between provider-incurred
IPCS costs and IPCS costs incurred by correctional facilities.
Importantly, both rate elements are limited to the recovery of used and
useful expenses incurred in the provision of IPCS. Accordingly, we
modify the rate calculations used in the 2024 IPCS Order, which
included, based on the record before the Commission at that time, all
of the used and useful costs incurred in the provision of IPCS
regardless of whether such costs are incurred by IPCS providers or
correctional facilities. In this Order, we supersede that decision and
remove from our rate cap calculations the costs incurred by
correctional facilities in making IPCS available and allow recovery of
those costs through a separate rate additive for facility-related cost
recovery. Establishing separate provider-related and facility-related
rate components helps ensure our rate structure accounts for both
providers' and correctional facilities' used and useful costs.
 39. In the 2024 IPCS Order, the Commission established a framework
that aimed to account for, and to allow providers to reimburse
correctional facilities for the used and useful costs they incur in
allowing access to IPCS. To do so, the Commission incorporated its best
estimate of the costs correctional facilities incur into the zones of
reasonableness. Due to the lack of reliable correctional facility cost
data in the record, the Commission relied on the National Sheriffs'
Association's 2015 cost survey to incorporate $0.02 into the upper
bounds of the zones of reasonableness for all facilities. The
Commission explained that the ``$0.02 figure derives from the
Commission's prior analysis of the amount of used and useful
correctional facility costs the National Sheriffs' Association Cost
survey reasonably supported'' in the 2021 ICS Order. In the 2021 ICS
Order, the Commission stated that it relied on ``two separate
independent bases'' in adopting the $0.02 per minute facility rate
additive. The 2021 ICS Order first based the rate additive on the
Commission's analysis of the portion of site commissions that were
legitimately related to inmate calling services. That analysis included
site commission data submitted by prisons and jails and compared the
per-minute site commission costs between all facilities that paid site
commissions to all those that did not. Second, the Commission also
based its decision on survey data submitted by the National Sheriffs'
