FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Implementation of the National Suicide Hotline Act of 2018
Document number: 2025-17895
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 44564
Publication date: 2025-09-16

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 177 (Tuesday, September 16, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 177 (Tuesday, September 16, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 44564-44580]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2025-17895]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 52

[WC Docket No. 18-336; FCC 25-42; FR ID 313142]


Implementation of the National Suicide Hotline Act of 2018

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) adopts rules requiring covered text providers, including
wireless providers, to develop the capability to transmit georouting
data in a format that is compatible with the Lifeline's platform to
allow the routing of covered 988 text messages by the Lifeline
Administrator to the appropriate crisis center based on the texter's
general location, rather than area code; and to provide such georouting
data for covered 988 text messages, when available, to the Lifeline
Administrator. To protect the privacy of 988 texters, this document
defines ``georouting data'' as location data generated from a cell-
based location technology that is aggregated to a level that will not
identify the precise location of the handset, but only the general area
from which the text originated, thereby making local resources
available while protecting texters' identities.

DATES:
 Effective date: This rule is effective October 16, 2025.
 Compliance dates: Nationwide Commerical Mobile Radio Service (CMRS)
providers must comply with the addition of 47 CFR 52.203 by 18 months
after October 16, 2025. All covered text providers, including non-
nationwide CMRS providers, must comply with the addition of 47 CFR
52.203 by 36 months after October 16, 2025.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information, contact Merry
Wulff, Wireline Competition Bureau, Competition Policy Division, at
 [email protected] or (202) 418-1084.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Fourth
Report and Order in WC Docket No. 18-336, FCC 25-42, adopted on July
24, 2025 and released on July 25, 2025. The full text of the document
is available on the Commission's website at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-25-42A1.pdf . To request materials in accessible
formats for people with disabilities (e.g., braille, large print,
electronic files, audio format, etc.), send an email to [email protected]
or call the Consumer & Governmental Affairs bureau at (202) 418-0530
(voice).

Synopsis

I. Discussion

 1. In this Fourth Report and Order, we take further steps to
facilitate access to the 988 Lifeline's critical local support services
by requiring covered text providers to develop and implement georouting
solutions for 988 text messages. First, based on a review of the record
in the Implementation of the National Suicide Hotline Act of 2018,
Third Further notice of Proposed Rulemaking (988 Georouting Third
Further Notice), 89 FR 91636 (November 20, 2024) we find that
establishing georouting for 988 text messages is essential to ensure
that text users are routed to geographically appropriate crisis centers
and will provide important benefits to Lifeline users. Next, we define
``georouting data'' and other relevant terms for purposes of our rules,
and adopt a two-part requirement to delineate the scope of covered text
providers' obligations. Finally, in order to facilitate ongoing efforts
to develop 988 text georouting capabilities, we adopt an implementation
time frame of 18 months for nationwide providers, and 36 months for
non-nationwide providers.

A. Text-to-988 Georouting Will Improve Access and Efficiency of the
Lifeline

 2. Georouting refers to the technical solutions for directing calls
based on a geographic location of the originating call without
transmitting information about the handset's precise location.
Georouting is distinct from geolocation, which involves the
transmission of precise location information (e.g., street address)
often used to dispatch emergencies services. Today, in the absence of
georouting, providers route 988 text messages to the Lifeline's
centralized system. After a text message reaches 988, the Lifeline
Administrator is responsible for routing the text message to an
individual crisis center and currently does so based on the area code
associated with the text user's wireless device. This inhibits the
Lifeline's ability to provide access to more localized services when a
text user's area code does not correspond to their geographic location.
 Based on our review of the record, we find that requiring providers
to implement a georouting solution for 988 text messages is essential
to improving access to the Lifeline's critical mental health crisis and
suicide prevention services. The record overwhelmingly supports the
conclusion that georouting for 988 text messages will help connect
individuals with more geographically appropriate crisis centers that
should have a better understanding of available local resources and
unique community stressors. As Reimagine Crisis Response explains,
local crisis centers are better positioned to connect individuals
``with local mental health care, resources, and support that can help .
. . beyond the initial crisis.'' According to the current Lifeline
Administrator, many individuals that reach out to 988 need

[[Page 44565]]

resources for follow-up care, including referrals to mental health
resources within their current local communities. Several commenters
agree that georouting for 988 text messages will improve access to
referral and follow-up services that may reduce the risk of future
mental health and suicidal crises.
 Mental health and public safety commenters emphasize that
georouting for 988 text messages will improve access for youth and
young adults. Indeed, in response to the Implementation of the National
Suicide Hotline Act of 2018, Second Further Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (988 Georouting Second Further Notice), 89 FR 46340 (May 29,
2024), we received over 450 comments from American Foundation for
Suicide Prevention (AFSP) advocates expressing support for requiring
georouting for 988 text messages, all emphasizing the significant
benefits for children and young adults. As the current Lifeline
Administrator explains, georouting for 988 text messages will ``help
connect young people with counselors who may have a deeper insight into
the unique exacerbators within their local communities.'' AFSP further
notes that georouting is particularly important for ``college-aged
young adults [who] may be attending schools and universities . . . in
areas that do not correspond with their cell phones' area codes.''
 3. Many commenters also agree that georouting for 988 text messages
will enhance access to local resources and follow-up care services for
individuals with disabilities, including individuals who are deaf, hard
of hearing, or have a speech disability. As the Accessibility
Organizations explain, text messaging is ``a preferred or necessary
mode of communication, due to barriers to making voice calls,'' for
many individuals with disabilities. The record further indicates that
georouting for 988 text messages will provide benefits for other
disproportionately impacted populations, including older men, rural
communities, and individuals with low incomes or safety concerns.
 4. We also find georouting for 988 text messages will help ensure
that Americans in crisis have access to help, regardless of whether
they call or text the Lifeline. As the National Alliance on Mental
Illness (NAMI) asserts, implementing georouting for voice calls but not
for text messages may cause confusion and undermine trust in the 988
Lifeline. Additionally, as several commenters emphasize, achieving
routing parity with voice calls will help to minimize inconsistencies
in service quality that might otherwise discourage individuals from
seeking help, further increasing trust in the 988 Lifeline.

B. Definitions

 5. As proposed in the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice, for the
purposes of the rules we adopt today, we incorporate the definitions of
the terms ``covered 988 text message'' and ``covered text provider,''
as adopted in the Implementation of the National Suicide Hotline Act of
2018, Second Report and Order (Text-to-988 Second Report and Order), 89
FR 46340 (May 29, 2024). We similarly rely on the definitions of
``Commercial Mobile Radio Service (CMRS)'' and ``georouting data''
adopted by the Commission in the Implementation of the National Suicide
Hotline Act of 2018, Third Report and Order (988 Georouting Third
Report and Order), 89 FR 91636 (November 20, 2024). To preserve
consistency across the requirements for georouting 988 calls and
georouting text-to-988, we likewise use the definition of ``Lifeline
Administrator'' adopted by the 988 Georouting Third Report and Order.
No commenter opposed this approach. Although supportive of the
Commission's existing definitions for these terms, the Accessibility
Organizations urge the Commission to account for the accessibility
needs of individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing, or have a speech
or other disability that impacts communication in crafting rules for
988 text georouting. We find that georouting text-to-988 will have a
significant impact on connecting individuals, including those who are
deaf or hard of hearing, or have a speech or other disability that
impacts communication, to local resources and improve the accessibility
of lifesaving resources. We therefore adopt our proposal in the Further
Notice to incorporate the definitions adopted by the Commission in the
Text-to-988 Second Report and Order and 988 Georouting Third Report and
Order with our 988 text georouting rules. We find that relying on the
Commission's existing definitions will ensure technological neutrality
and regulatory consistency across our rules with respect to 988
georouting.
 6. Covered 988 Text Message. We apply our 988 text georouting
requirements to ``covered 988 text messages'' as that term is defined
in the Text-to-988 Second Report and Order (defining a ``[c]overed 988
text message'' as ``a 988 text message in SMS format and any other
format that the Wireline Competition Bureau has determined must be
supported by covered text providers''), thereby limiting our georouting
rules to ``988 text messages'' that are in an Short Message Service
(SMS) format. The record overwhelmingly supports limiting our
requirements to SMS messages at this stage, in order to conform with
the existing technical capabilities of the Lifeline, which can
currently only receive SMS texts. While Intrado Life & Safety (Intrado)
argues that the rules should obligate georouting of the text portion of
Multimedia Message Service (MMS), we find that limiting our georouting
rules to messages sent in SMS format will enable the 988 Lifeline to
leverage current technology while developing georouting solutions that
could adapt to messaging protocols such as MMS and Rich Communications
Service (RCS) if necessary in the future. In this Fourth Report and
Order, we use ``Intrado'' to refer to the entity previously referred to
in this proceeding as ``Intrado Life & Safety.'' For a full discussion
of the Intrado organization, see 988 Georouting Second Further Notice.
In the Text-to-988 Second Report and Order, the Commission delegated to
the Bureau the authority to make future determinations to require
covered text providers to support additional text formats, in the event
that the Lifeline developed the capability to receive such messages. In
connection with this delegated authority, the Commission directed the
Bureau to consult with the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA) on whether any text formats other than SMS are compatible with the
988 Lifeline. To the extent that SAMHSA is reorganized, dissolved, or
its responsibilities are transferred, all references to ``SAMHSA'' in
this Order shall be interpreted to include any successor agency or
entity that assumes authority for oversight of the 988 Lifeline, grants
administration, or coordination on technical implementation of 988
services. We further direct the Bureau to determine through its ongoing
consultation process with SAMHSA and the VA whether the 988 Lifeline
can accept georouting data with any newly identified text formats. In
the event that the 988 Lifeline becomes capable of accepting any
additional text formats, the Bureau shall seek comment on whether to
require providers to transmit georouting data for such text formats in
its annual public notice. We emphasize that this delegated authority is
limited in scope. The Bureau may incorporate additional text formats
into the Commission's rules if, and only if, the Lifeline becomes able
to receive such messages, in which case it must provide

[[Page 44566]]

notice and an opportunity for comment before adopting any new
requirements. The Bureau is also required to ``identify all
implementation deadlines with certainty (i.e., by a specified calendar
date)'' and in doing so, must ``assess factors such as technical and
financial challenges with respect to implementation, the status of the
Lifeline, and the public interest.''
 7. Covered Text Providers. We apply our 988 text georouting
requirements to ``Covered Text Providers,'' as defined in the Text-to-
988 Second Report and Order. Covered text providers include ``all
[Commercial Mobile Radio Service (CMRS)] providers, as well as all
providers of interconnected text messaging services that enable
consumers to send text messages to and receive text messages from all
or substantially all text-capable U.S. telephone numbers, including
through the use of applications downloaded or otherwise installed on
mobile phones.'' As noted above, our text georouting requirements are
limited to 988 text messages sent in SMS format and therefore do not
apply to over-the-top providers. An over-the-top provider refers to
services accessed through broadband connections obtained by the
consumer, or through public or private Wi-Fi connections that may not
access cellular networks.
 8. Georouting Data. For the purposes of these rules, we define
``georouting data'' to mean location data generated from cell-based
location technology that is aggregated to a level that will not
identify the location of the cell site or base station receiving the
988 text message or otherwise identify the precise location of the
handset. Vibrant initially raised concern that adopting this definition
of georouting data for text-to-988 was too broad, however, it later
indicated agreement with the proposed approach and ``recommend[ed] that
any proposed georouting solution should utilize cell tower data,
obtained from a carrier, to determine the geographic origin of 988
Lifeline text messages.'' We note that this definition, which is
consistent with that adopted in the 988 Georouting Third Report and
Order, precludes the transmission of more precise location data. The
definition of georouting data adopted in this Fourth Report and Order
is the same as that used for our georouting rules for 988 voice calls,
apart from its application to ``covered 988 text message[s],'' as
opposed to ``988 call[s].'' The 988 Georouting Third Report and Order
found that this approach would ``best identify a caller's location to
enable routing of 988 calls to geographically appropriate crisis
centers, while maintaining the privacy interests of callers'' and
``provid[ing] nationwide providers flexibility to deploy current
georouting solutions developed with the SAMHSA and the Lifeline
Administrator.'' As explained below, we find that these considerations
apply equally with respect to our text-to-988 georouting rules. Some
commenters assert that georouting based on the location of the tower in
which the contact was initiated does not provide sufficient granularity
to dispatch emergency services. As discussed in greater detail below,
we find that georouting based on aggregated, cell-based location
information best balances the benefits of location-based routing with
the privacy interests of 988 users.
 9. Commercial Mobile Radio Service. We also adopt our proposal to
revise Sec. 52.201(b) of the Commission's rules to read ``Commercial
Mobile Radio Service'' instead of ``Commercial Mobile Radio Services.''
This correction is necessary to align the rule with the Commission's
intent, as stated in the Text-to-988 Second Report and Order, to adopt
the well-established text-to-911 definition of ``covered text
provider.'' We note that no commenter questioned our proposal.

C. Scope of Text-to-988 Georouting Requirement

 10. In this Fourth Report and Order, we adopt general requirements
designed to enhance the Lifeline's ability to connect text users to
geographically appropriate crisis centers, while safeguarding the
critical privacy interests of individuals seeking life-saving
assistance. Specifically, we require covered text providers to: (1)
develop the capability to transmit georouting data in a format that is
compatible with the Lifeline's system to allow routing of covered 988
text messages by the Lifeline Administrator to the appropriate crisis
center based on the geographic area where the handset is located at the
time the text message is initiated; and (2) provide such georouting
data for 988 text messages, when available, to the Lifeline
Administrator. In adopting these rules, we support voluntary efforts to
identify and develop industry-based georouting solutions for 988 text
messages by providing a flexible, technology-neutral framework for our
requirements.
1. Capability To Provide Georouting Data
 11. Consistent with the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice, we
first require covered text providers to develop the capability to
transmit georouting data for 988 text messages in a format that is
compatible with the Lifeline's routing platform. We find that this
requirement is necessary to ensure that 988 text users receive the
benefits of georouting, regardless of the covered text providers'
network configurations. As with the other requirements we adopt today,
we give covered text providers the flexibility to use technically
feasible options that are best suited to their networks, provided that
the georouting solutions are compatible with the Lifeline's system. We
make clear that our rules create an ongoing obligation for covered text
providers to ensure that georouting data remains compatible with the
Lifeline's system, and we encourage stakeholders to collaborate in
developing and testing such solutions.
 12. The record strongly supports requiring any text-to-988
georouting solutions to be compatible with the Lifeline's system and
infrastructure. For example, CTIA argues that we should ``continue to
rely on technologies that are consistent with covered text providers'
and the Lifeline's system[] to facilitate prompt and seamless
implementation of new capabilities, including georouting.'' The
Accessibility Organizations add that this approach ``ensures
uniformity, reducing the chances of technical mismatches or delays in
delivering critical support.'' We therefore agree with the Lifeline
Administrator and T-Mobile that ``the best georouting solution will be
one that can integrate with the 988 Lifeline's current routing
network.'' And, as we have explained, we are adopting a rule that does
not mandate geolocation reporting and that defines georouting data
as``[l]ocation data generated from cell-based location technology that
is aggregated to a level that will not identify the location of the
cell site or base station receiving the covered 988 text message or
otherwise identify the precise location of the handset.''
 13. We recognize that our federal partners may choose to expand the
Lifeline's system to support a broader range of compatible text-to-988
georouting solutions. Accordingly, and similar to the Commission's
approach for voice-to-988 georouting, we direct the Bureau to routinely
consult with SAMHSA regarding the format of text-to-988 georouting data
that is compatible with the 988 Lifeline's system. We further direct
the Bureau to monitor the development of text-to-988 georouting
solutions and, if necessary, propose and seek comment on implementation
parameters for covered text providers for any compatible text-to-988
georouting data that is

[[Page 44567]]

substantially modified from the requirements adopted herein.
 14. Aggregation of Cell-Based Location Data. As numerous commenters
observe, the privacy interests of 988 text users are paramount. For
this reason, we require covered text providers to aggregate location
data generated from cell-based technology to a level that will not
identify the location of the cell site or base station receiving the
988 text or otherwise identify the precise location of the handset. The
rules we adopt today protect privacy interests by prohibiting the
transmission of more granular cell site data or the precise location of
the text user, while allowing covered text providers flexibility in
implementing technical solutions that use different granularity of
data, such as wire center or Federal Information Processing Series
(FIPS) code geographic boundaries. As with the Commission's approach
for voice-to-988 georouting, in adopting this requirement, we carefully
balance the importance of maintaining user privacy with the need to
expeditiously improve the routing of text messages to the Lifeline.
 15. The 988 Georouting Third Further Notice and 988 Text Georouting
Privacy Notice sought comment to determine the necessary granularity of
location data for text-to-988 georouting that protects the privacy
expectations of text users, while still facilitating access to more
localized services. In response, commenters generally argued that
covered text providers need flexibility to develop and implement text-
to-988 georouting solutions. To that end, rather than a prescriptive
rule, we establish a general requirement that allows covered text
providers flexibility to use technically feasible methods that are best
suited to their networks to aggregate location data.
 16. Based on our review of the record, we find that aggregating
location data to county-level or wire-center boundaries is sufficiently
general to protect text users' privacy while improving the routing of
988 text messages. The record indicates that the industry-based text
georouting solution currently under development by nationwide wireless
providers, the current Lifeline Administrator, and its vendor utilizes
county-level FIPS code boundaries based on cell tower information and
does not introduce precise location information into the 988 data flow.
The Federal Information Processing Series (FIPS) codes are maintained
and assigned by the Census Bureau to identify geographic areas. In its
comments, the Lifeline Administrator states that the ``solutions under
consideration will use county-level data,'' which ``minimizes user-
specific data to simply connect a help seeker to the nearest crisis
contact center based on cell phone tower data.'' We anticipate that our
broad definition of ``georouting data'' will give covered text
providers flexibility to implement technical solutions that use
different granularity of data, such as wire center or FIPS code
boundaries provided that such data does not reveal the precise location
of the handset.
 17. We disagree with the Boulder Regional Emergency Telephone
Service Authority's (BRETSA) contention that more precise location
information should be transmitted with 988 text messages. The record
reflects significant support for georouting solutions that provide
geographic routing information to the Lifeline without identifying a
text user's precise location. We are also persuaded by commenters that
988 text users have unique privacy expectations as compared to 911
users, and find that any text-to-988 georouting solution must maintain
text users' confidence that their precise location information will
remain confidential when communicating with the Lifeline. Additionally,
as discussed below, we decline to take specific action at this time to
extend text-to-988 georouting requirements to the Lifeline's
specialized service lines. We believe that this approach should
alleviate the concern raised by the Electronic Privacy Information
Center and Wildflower Alliance (EPIC-WA) that text users contacting the
Lifeline's specialized service lines may be at a greater risk of being
personally identified. While EPIC-WA provides a cautionary example of a
texter in a small county ``contacting a hotline focused on LGBTQ+
specific needs,'' we note that, as of July 17, 2025, the 988 Lifeline
``no longer silo[s] LGB+ youth services'' through a ``Press 3 option.''
 18. Although we agree with the Conservative Political Action
Conference Foundation's Center for Regulatory Freedom (CPAC) that
maintaining the privacy of 988 callers and text users has been integral
to the Lifeline's ability to serve as a ``safe and dependable
resource,'' the requirements we adopt today will not obligate covered
text providers to engage in ``approximate geolocation reporting'' or
undermine Americans' trust in the integrity of the Lifeline. The rules
we adopt today do not require covered text providers to transmit more
precise geolocation data with 988 text messages, but rather aggregated
location data, such as county-level information, that maintains text
users' privacy by not identifying the precise location of the text
users' handset.
 19. We also disagree with those commenters that argue georouting
data is not sufficiently granular to improve the routing of 988 text
messages. While some commenters identify alternatives to georouting
that may connect text users with local resources, we find that
generating aggregated location information using cell-based technology
will significantly improve the routing of 988 text messages and help
connect text users to local resources in a timely manner while
protecting user privacy. We disagree with BRETSA's inference that the
benefits of improved routing are limited to instances in which
individuals require emergency services intervention. As discussed
above, georouting provides numerous benefits to individuals contacting
988, including those that do not require dispatch of emergency
services. Likewise, we acknowledge CPAC's contention that geolocation
could alleviate routing errors more effectively than georouting data,
as well as its concerns about ``further regulations aimed at correcting
misrouting.'' As CPAC states, however, sharing a 988 text user's
precise location data raises significant privacy concerns. We agree,
and therefore the definition of georouting data we adopt today
precludes the transmission of more precise location data for 988 text
messages.
2. Providing Georouting Data
 20. We next adopt the Commission's proposal to require covered text
providers to provide georouting data, when available, to the Lifeline
Administrator, sufficient to allow routing of the message to the
appropriate crisis center based on the geographic area where the
handset is located at the time the covered 988 text message is
initiated. As discussed below, we find that this approach strikes the
right balance between ensuring that covered text providers support
georouting for 988 text messages and allowing sufficient flexibility to
develop and implement solutions that maximize their network
capabilities.
 21. Technical Considerations. To address technical limitations
raised by the record, we require covered text providers to provide
georouting data for 988 text messages to the Lifeline Administrator
only when such data is available. We agree with CTIA and Intrado that
limiting this requirement to providing georouting data ``when
available'' is necessary to account for technical challenges and to
enable

[[Page 44568]]

covered text providers to optimize their current technology and
networks. For instance, several commenters raise concerns about the
technical feasibility of transmitting georouting data with text
messages originated when a text user is roaming. While we acknowledge
the public benefits of supporting georouting for all 988 text messages,
we believe that limiting the requirement to providing georouting data
``when available'' strikes the appropriate balance between facilitating
access to the Lifeline's resources and allowing providers the
flexibility to address technical challenges.
 22. The record indicates that, in the event that georouting data is
unavailable, the Lifeline will route text messages based on the area
code of the user's device. We agree with CX360 that, while ``area code-
based routing is imperfect,'' this ``alternative routing'' process will
help ensure that text users receive assistance even if the closest
crisis center cannot be identified or reached. We believe that the
Lifeline's default routing mechanism also alleviates record concern
about incorporating ``fallback mechanisms or alternative data sources''
in our definition of georouting data. Additionally, we find that this
approach provides parity with the Commission's rules for voice-to-988
georouting, which helps minimize confusion for both providers and
individuals texting the 988 Lifeline. We also believe that this
approach alleviates record concern about scenarios where covered text
providers are incapable of providing georouting data.
 23. Supporting Industry Efforts To Implement Text-to-988
Georouting. The rules we adopt today provide a flexible, technology-
neutral framework that enables covered text providers to make industry-
based determinations on implementing georouting solutions for 988 text
messages. The record reflects that nationwide wireless providers, the
current Lifeline Administrator, and its vendors are actively
collaborating to develop georouting solutions for 988 text messages. As
the Lifeline Administrator notes, this process will help ``identify the
necessary routing requirements for text messaging and explore solutions
that protect the privacy of help-seekers.'' And, as CTIA observes,
aligning our requirements with industry-based solutions developed by
stakeholders and the Lifeline Administrator is integral to the
successful, timely implementation and ongoing improvement of the 988
Lifeline.
 24. We find that a flexible approach to 988 text georouting is
essential to support further innovation, as urged by many commenters in
this proceeding. As several commenters observe, allowing providers
flexibility to use technically feasible options that are compatible
with the Lifeline's system is ``appropriate, particularly given the
ongoing technological development in this area.'' The Competitive
Carriers Association (CCA) adds that a technology-neutral framework
``offers providers the flexibility to adopt the solutions that work
best for their networks and promote[s] the improvement of those
solutions over time.'' We also share concerns that setting prescriptive
requirements may compel providers to rely on underdeveloped solutions
and potentially discourage further innovation to improve georouting for
988 text messages. To further facilitate efforts to make an industry-
based determination, as discussed below, we provide a longer compliance
period for both nationwide and non-nationwide providers than proposed
in the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice. As such, we decline at this
time to adopt more prescriptive requirements for how covered text
providers must develop the capability and provide georouting data to
the Lifeline.
 25. We also agree with CCA that allowing ``robust industry-led
development of a standardized and scalable approach to georouting data
for text messages'' will better serve non-nationwide providers. The
compliance deadlines we adopt below provide ample time for both
nationwide and non-nationwide providers to implement and develop a
georouting solution for 988 text messages, thereby minimizing
compliance burdens. We strongly encourage non-nationwide covered text
providers to collaborate with SAMHSA and the Lifeline Administrator in
developing and testing georouting solutions for 988 text messages.
 26. We conclude, however, that purely voluntary implementation
undermines our goal of ensuring that the clear public benefits of
georouting for 988 text messages are realized in a timely manner. For
example, some wireless providers and industry commenters argue that
text-to-988 georouting requirements are unnecessary at this time
because national systems, rather than local crisis centers, handle most
988 text messages due to infrastructure limitations. We disagree. The
record demonstrates that a significant number of local crisis centers
are currently able to receive texts to 988. Moreover, the Lifeline
Administrator indicates that this number is likely to grow in the
future as more local crisis centers add text-to-988 capability. In any
event, text-to-988 capability does not need to be universally available
among the Lifeline's more than 200 local crisis centers in order to
realize the significant benefits of georouting for 988 text messages,
including improved access to local resources and counselors who may
better understand unique community stressors. Notably, the current
Lifeline Administrator does not dispute the need for us to adopt an
affirmative requirement at this time. We therefore find that the
benefits of georouting 988 text messages to those local crisis centers
that are capable of receiving such messages easily support the
commonsense, non-prescriptive requirements we adopt today.
 27. We also decline to adopt the Rural Wireless Association's (RWA)
suggestion to allow small rural non-nationwide providers to implement
georouting solutions for 988 text messages on a voluntary basis. While
we acknowledge that non-nationwide providers may face operational
limitations when implementing georouting solutions for 988 text
messages, we offer flexibility and additional compliance time to non-
nationwide providers to minimize such burdens. Additionally, several
commenters emphasize the importance of implementing georouting
solutions for 988 text messages to improve access to the Lifeline's
critical intervention services for rural Americans. We find the
benefits of ensuring that all Americans have improved access to the
Lifeline's lifesaving resources support applying our requirements to
all covered text providers, including small rural providers. Our
approach also promotes parity between 988 calls and texts, ensuring
consistent and predictable level of service across communication modes
while reducing potential confusion for individuals in distress.
 28. We are unpersuaded by CTIA's argument that we should not extend
georouting requirements to 988 text messages based on the Commission's
actions in the 911 LBR Report and Order. In the 911 LBR Report and
Order, the Commission declined to extend location-based routing (LBR)
requirements to 911 SMS text messages, both because the industry had
not yet developed standards for implementing location-based routing on
SMS networks and to avoid requiring providers to retrofit legacy SMS
networks. The Commission also noted that a number of Public Safety
Answering Points (PSAPs) were incapable of receiving texts and that the
volume of 911 text messages was far smaller than the volume of 911

[[Page 44569]]

voice calls. Although the record in this proceeding indicates that
georouting solutions for 988 text messages may require some network and
infrastructure changes, it does not raise the same concerns found in
the context of 911 location-based routing about extensively
retrofitting legacy SMS networks. The industry-based text-to-988
georouting solution endorsed by CX360 also supports the conclusion that
industry stakeholders have already developed some standards for
implementing text-to-988 georouting solutions. Further, georouting
solutions for 988 text messages and location-based routing for 911
require different granularity of location data, and different entities
perform the routing functions. Specifically, 911 location-based routing
uses precise location data on the user's device to route 911 calls to
the appropriate destination, whereas georouting solutions for 988 text
messages use less granular aggregated location data, such as county-
level FIPS codes or wire center boundaries. Moreover, in the context of
911, providers determine the routing destination based on the precise
location information of a device, whereas the Lifeline Administrator
retains responsibility for routing 988 text messages to individual
crisis centers using the georouting data provided by the covered text
providers. We therefore find that the technical differences between the
routing methodologies and the record received in this proceeding
distinguish 911 location-based routing requirements from georouting for
988 text messages.
 29. We also disagree with those commenters that argue it is
premature for the Commission to consider adopting text-to-988
georouting requirements. We believe that enabling georouting for 988
text messages to improve service for text users should not be unduly
delayed, and that the Commission's affirmative and timely decision to
require implementation (with flexible, technology-neutral parameters)
will minimize confusion for both providers and individuals texting 988.
Adopting rules will also provide clarity and regulatory certainty for
covered text providers, encouraging progress in developing and
implementing text-to-988 georouting solutions. Given the clear public
interest benefits of supporting georouting for 988 text messages, we
find that deployment and implementation of georouting solutions for 988
text messages should not be optional.
 30. Technological Feasibility. We find that implementing georouting
for 988 text messages is technologically feasible for nationwide and
non-nationwide covered text providers. In the 988 Georouting Third
Further Notice, the Commission sought comment on technical challenges
that may arise in providing georouting data with covered 988 text
messages, noting that there was disagreement in the record regarding
the difficulty of implementing text-to-988 georouting solutions. While
we recognize that there are technical differences between georouting
solutions for 988 calls and text messages, the record indicates that at
least one technically feasible approach exists today for text-to-988
georouting. Therefore, although the work to develop these solutions is
ongoing, we find that deploying georouting solutions for 988 text
messages is feasible for both nationwide and non-nationwide covered
text providers within the compliance time frames we adopt in this
Fourth Report and Order.
 31. As discussed above, the nationwide wireless providers, the
current Lifeline Administrator, and other industry stakeholders are
actively collaborating to develop an industry-based georouting solution
for 988 text messages that maintains text users' privacy. For instance,
under the approach endorsed by CX360, covered text providers route
covered text messages to the Lifeline as required under the
Commission's existing rules without georouting data. The Lifeline's
interactive voice response (IVR) system--which allows 988 callers and
text-users to select specialized service lines, such as the Veterans
Crisis Line--requests georouting data from the providers via a
``secure, industry-standard application programming interface'' only
when the 988 text user does not request specialized services. To
protect privacy, the covered text providers aggregate location data
using county-level FIPS code boundaries, which is similar to the
aggregation process used by some wireless providers for voice-to-988
georouting solutions. The record indicates that nationwide providers
are already offering and supporting the use of network application
programming interfaces. Moreover, while the ``discovery phase'' to
develop an industry-based georouting solution is ongoing, the Lifeline
Administrator ``anticipates that it is technologically feasible for
both nationwide and non-nationwide CMRS providers to identify
georouting solutions that work best with their existing networks.''
 32. We are not persuaded by the arguments advanced by Intrado that
the solution endorsed by CX360 raises privacy concerns due to the
Lifeline querying for location data. Intrado argues that text-to-988
georouting solutions must avoid designs that allow the Lifeline to
query providers for location information to protect text users'
privacy, adding that ``wireless providers should remain in full control
of user location information with a push of only coarse location.'' As
CX360 states, however, under its proposed approach, the Lifeline's
system would only have access to FIPS codes from wireless providers.
AT&T adds that the Lifeline Administrator prefers solutions that
provide georouting data only with a user's initial text message in a
single conversation series, and that such solutions will likely require
the Lifeline to query providers for georouting data. We also note that
there is support in the record for including georouting data with the
text user's initial message to protect privacy by avoiding the
transmission of precise location information to downstream parties.
Moreover, we require covered text providers to aggregate location data
in order to maintain the privacy interests of 988 text users. We thus
reject Intrado's inference that, under the approach suggested by CX360,
the ``Lifeline Administrator could have access to the location for
every device on the carrier's network.''
 33. Text-to-911-Based Georouting Solutions. We decline, at this
time, to expand the scope of our requirements to georouting solutions
that utilize Text Control Centers (TCC) as intermediaries between
covered text providers and the Lifeline, as proposed by some
commenters. A Text Control Center (TCC) is a controlling functional
element specified in a relevant standard for text-to-911. The TCC has
the responsibility to ``(1) convert various protocols and act as a
gateway; (2) request location that may be used for routing; (3) request
routing instructions; and (4) initiate a dialogue with the [Public
Safety Answering Point (PSAP)] through the appropriate interworking
function of the TCC. When the TCC receives an initial text message, it
obtains location from the [location server]. It then uses that location
to obtain routing instructions from the [routing server]. Then, the TCC
converts the text message to an appropriate protocol and initiates a
dialogue with the PSAP (via the emergency services network) through the
appropriate interworking function of the TCC.'' As the Commission
emphasized in the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice, SAMHSA, the
agency with oversight of the Lifeline Administrator, must ultimately
determine the routing data

[[Page 44570]]

that it will deem acceptable for the Lifeline's system to process. In
its comments, the current Lifeline Administrator strongly advises
against georouting solutions that leverage text-to-911 infrastructure
due to concerns about required modifications to the Lifeline's network
and unknown costs and implementation time.
 34. While several commenters argue that text-to-911-based
georouting solutions could provide benefits for text-to-988 georouting,
we are convinced by the record that adopting such proposals at this
time would be contrary to our goal of ensuring that georouting is
available for 988 text messages without delay. For example, AT&T and
CX360 argue that georouting solutions that utilize TCCs introduce an
unnecessary ``point of failure'' and require modifications of the
Lifeline's system. The record also raises concerns that using a system
designed for 911 in the context of 988 may have a chilling effect due
to differing privacy expectations. Several commenters also argue that
georouting solutions based on text-to-911 infrastructure may compromise
privacy due to access to, and potential inadvertent disclosure of,
precise location information. Based on our review of the record, and
given the concerns raised by commenters regarding implementation delays
and the potential chilling effects associated with using geolocation
data in the context of 988, we find that expanding our requirements to
allow text-to-911-based georouting solutions is unwarranted at this
time. Nevertheless, we encourage all industry stakeholders and the
Lifeline Administrator to actively collaborate on the development and
improvement of georouting solutions that protect privacy and are
compatible with the Lifeline's system.
 35. Direct Routing. We also decline to adopt proposals that would
bypass the Lifeline's initial direct and centralized routing platform.
CPAC recommends an alternative approach to georouting solutions that
focuses on providing local crisis centers with ``resources necessary to
allow them to welcome calls and texts directly,'' arguing that this
would improve the routing of 988 contacts while prioritizing
confidentiality. The Commission previously concluded that the
Lifeline's centralized routing process provides numerous benefits,
including faster implementation, reduced routing costs, and improved
service. In the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice, the Commission
also declined to seek comment on text-to-988 georouting solutions that
would bypass the Lifeline's centralized routing platform.
 36. The record reflects significant support for retaining the
Lifeline's existing centralized routing structure. In particular, we
are persuaded by commenters that the centralized routing system plays a
critical role in managing the capacity of crisis centers, routing text
messages to the national back-up center, and minimizing technical
burdens placed on crisis centers. As the Lifeline Administrator states,
the centralized structure facilitates network monitoring to resolve
``any potential issues that arise'' and helps ensure that text messages
are ``routed efficiently to the appropriate crisis contact center.''
CX360 adds that this structure allows the ``Lifeline Administrator to
balance text volumes within a certain geographic area to minimize
response times,'' helping to connect text users ``to the resources they
need . . . if a crisis center is particularly busy.'' CTIA and CX360
similarly agree that proposals to bypass the Lifeline's centralized
routing system ``should remain outside the scope of this proceeding.''
Based on our review of the record, and consistent with the Commission's
proposal and previous conclusions, we find that the benefits of
maintaining the Lifeline's centralized routing system greatly exceed
the costs of localized routing at this time.
 37. Specialized Service Lines. We decline to take specific action
to apply our text-to-988 georouting requirements to the Lifeline's
specialized service lines. Currently, when an individual texts 988 they
are provided options to redirect to specialized service lines, for
example, veterans and service members are redirected to text ``838255''
to reach the Veterans Crisis Line. Individuals may also text ``AYUDA''
to connect with a Spanish-speaking crisis counselor. The record
indicates that individual crisis centers have varying capacities to
provide specialized services, which complicates the Lifeline's ability
to consistently connect text users with an appropriate local crisis
center that handles specialized services. Moreover, we believe that our
federal partners at SAMHSA and the VA are best positioned to evaluate
the benefits and challenges of using georouting data for specialized
service lines.

D. Implementation Time Frame

 38. In order to support industry efforts to develop efficient and
effective text georouting solutions for the Lifeline, we grant
nationwide covered text providers a period of 18 months, and non-
nationwide covered text providers a period of 36 months, following the
effective date of this Fourth Report and Order in which to comply with
the rules we adopt today. We find that this compliance window
appropriately balances the need to expeditiously implement 988 text
georouting with the burdens on providers of developing the necessary
routing systems. In the 988 Georouting Third Further Notice, the
Commission proposed a uniform implementation deadline of six months
from the effective date of the rules. In response, a broad cross-
section of stakeholders submitted arguments that additional time would
be needed to sufficiently identify and implement georouting solutions
for text-to-988. Commenters emphasized that efforts to identify
georouting solutions for text-to-988 compatible with the Lifeline's
centralized routing system are in the early stages of development and
encourage the Commission to allow for its discovery phase, which could
take approximately six to 12 months, to develop without regulatory
impediment. The record indicates that the Lifeline Administrator plans
to conduct a ``discovery'' pilot with its vendor and nationwide
wireless providers in 2025 to identify, develop, and test text-to-988
georouting solutions, and that it expects the process to take
approximately six to 12 months. As such, we disagree with the assertion
by the Crisis Text Line that we should not adopt rules requiring text-
to-988 georouting because ``the length of time required to develop
[such] a georouting solution is [] unknown.'' The Lifeline
Administrator also expects to ``leverage its established relationship
with industry stakeholders to expedite the georouting process for text
messages.'' We anticipate that the flexible and technology-neutral
landscape that our rules provide will allow industry stakeholders
sufficient time to complete their collaborative efforts to identify an
industry-based consensus technical solution for text-to-988 georouting.
 39. We therefore agree with those commenters who argue that a
longer compliance period than that proposed in the 988 Georouting Third
Further Notice is warranted. In particular, we note that, at the time
the Commission adopted the 988 Georouting Third Report and Order, the
nationwide providers were nearing the end of their collaboration with
the Lifeline Administrator to develop and test voice georouting
solutions. The 988 Georouting Third Report and Order's expedited
implementation time frame for nationwide providers reflected this fact.
Here, however, the development of technical solutions for text-to-988
georouting remains in its early stages. We recognize the critical need
for time

[[Page 44571]]

and resources to develop and test solutions, and to account for on-
going collaboration amongst the Lifeline Administrator, SAMHSA,
providers, and 988 Lifeline vendors. The rules we adopt today allow for
this process to proceed while at the same time providing certainty that
providers should keep working toward a specific completion date. We
therefore grant an extended compliance time frame of 18 months for
nationwide providers to reflect the time necessary to complete the
discovery phase and subsequently implement its findings.
 40. Additionally, commenters called for additional time for non-
nationwide providers to account for the fact that the 988 Georouting
Third Report and Order grants those providers until December 2026 to
implement georouting for voice calls to 988. For instance, RWA and
Intrado emphasize the burden that imposing overlapping compliance
deadlines would have on small and rural service providers and recommend
the Commission impose a 36-month compliance time frame for non-
nationwide providers. We agree with these commenters that the
georouting text-to-988 requirement deadline should not be earlier than
the deadline for voice-to-988 georouting. Non-nationwide providers must
comply with the 988 Georouting Third Report and Order by December 14,
2026. To account for non-nationwide providers' on-going efforts to
comply with our voice-to-988 georouting implementation requirement, we
require non-nationwide providers to comply with our 988 text georouting
requirements within 36 months following the effective date of this
Fourth Report and Order, which, as RWA explains, should allow non-
nationwide providers a sufficient compliance period. Based on the
record, we are confident that our extended compliance deadline will
provide sufficient time for non-nationwide service providers to
implement 988 text georouting solutions. We decline a request by CTIA
that we ``delegate authority to the Wireline Competition Bureau to
waive or stay the implementation deadlines'' we adopt in this item.
CTIA states that it is ``hopeful that the 18-month timeline for
nationwide providers [to implement text georouting solutions] will be
sufficient'' but requests a provision under which the Bureau would
monitor the development process and provide additional time for
compliance, if warranted. As discussed above, we find that the 18- and
36-month deadlines we adopt today will provide ample time for
nationwide and non-nationwide providers, respectively, to develop and
deploy text-to-988 georouting solutions. Nevertheless, we note that
providers may seek a waiver of these deadlines, if necessary, under the
Commission's existing rules.
 41. We recognize that the effectiveness of text-to-988 georouting
benefits from public awareness. To support this, we encourage all
stakeholders involved in the delivery and operation of 988 text
georouting to engage in outreach that informs the public about the
availability and purpose of georouting solutions. Additionally, we
direct the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, in coordination
with the Bureau and our federal partners at SAMHSA and the VA, to
develop and publish a consumer-facing guide promoting awareness around
988 and access to local crisis services, and what consumers should
expect when utilizing text messaging to reach the 988 Lifeline.
