FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Cable Television Rate Regulations
Document number: 2025-13107
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 31145
Publication date: 2025-07-14

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 132 (Monday, July 14, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 132 (Monday, July 14, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 31145-31157]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2025-13107]


[[Page 31145]]

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 1 and 76

[MB Docket Nos. 02-144; MM Docket Nos. 92-266, 93-215; CS Docket No.
94-28; FCC 25-33; FR ID 301311]


Cable Television Rate Regulations

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
eliminates unnecessary cable rate regulation forms and rules;
deregulates cable equipment not used exclusively to receive the basic
cable service tier; deregulates small cable systems serving 15,000 or
fewer subscribers that are owned by small cable companies serving
400,000 or fewer subscribers; declines to extend rate regulation to
commercial establishments; and modifies rules to account for the sunset
of CPST regulation and clarifies their application. This action is
necessary because many of the FCC's rules governing cable rate
regulation have been rendered obsolete or unworkable due to the sunset
of cable programming service tier (CPST) rate regulation and the
passage of time. In addition, in this document, the FCC closes several
moot proceedings and dockets which are either resolved by this document
or have become obsolete or irrelevant due to regulatory updates,
technology advances, marketplace changes, or have been addressed in
other FCC orders. The actions taken in this document by the FCC will
have the effect of streamlining the cable television rate regulations,
unleashing prosperity through deregulation, and reducing the
administrative burdens on the cable industry, franchising authorities,
and the FCC, while continuing to fulfill the statutory obligation to
subscribers to ensure reasonable rates for cable service and equipment.

DATES: Effective August 13, 2025, except the amendments to Sec. Sec.
1.1204 (amendatory instruction 2), 1.1206 (amendatory instruction 3),
76.911 (amendatory instruction 5), 76.922 (amendatory instruction 6),
76.923 (amendatory instruction 7), 76.934 (amendatory instruction 10),
76.944 (amendatory instruction 15), and 76.990 (amendatory instruction
21), which are delayed. The FCC will publish a document in the Federal
Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, contact Katie Costello, Policy Division, Media Bureau at
 [email protected] or (202) 418-2233.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order, in MB Docket Nos. 02-144; MM Docket Nos. 92-266, 93-215; CS
Docket No. 94-28; FCC 25-33, adopted on June 26, 2025 and released on
June 27, 2025. The full text of this document is available via FCC
website at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-25-33A1.pdf . The
full text of this document will also be available via ECFS https://www.fcc.gov/cgb/ecfs/ ). (Documents will be available electronically in
ASCII, Word, and/or Adobe Acrobat.) To request these documents in
accessible formats for people with disabilities, send an email to
 [email protected] or call the Commission's Consumer and Governmental
Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530 (voice), (202) 418-0432 (TTY).

Synopsis

 Introduction. This Report and Order streamlines the cable
television rate regulations in Part 76 of the FCC rules. Many of the
FCC's rules governing cable rate regulation have been rendered obsolete
or unworkable due to the sunset of CPST rate regulation and the passage
of time. In 2018, the FCC initiated a rulemaking to review and update
its rate regulations, 83 FR 60804. This Report and Order deregulates
cable equipment not used exclusively to receive the BST; deregulates
small cable systems serving 15,000 or fewer subscribers that are owned
by small cable companies serving 400,000 or fewer subscribers; declines
to extend rate regulation to commercial establishments; modifies
Sec. Sec. 76.980 and 76.984 of the FCC's rules to acknowledge the
sunset of CPST regulation; revises and simplifies the process for cable
operators to establish an initial regulated rate after becoming subject
to regulation; modifies and simplifies the inter-tier channel movement
rules to account for the sunset of CPST regulation; clarifies the
instructions for calculating interest in Module H of Form 1240; and
eliminates unnecessary forms and rules and terminates several open
dockets.
 Background. Section 623 of the Communications Act of 1934, as
amended, 47 U.S.C. 543 (the Act), requires the FCC to ensure that rates
for the basic service tier (BST) are reasonable and that regulations
are implemented to achieve the goal of protecting subscribers of any
cable system that is not subject to effective competition. Section 623
also requires the FCC to establish rate regulations for the
installation and lease of equipment used to receive the BST on the
basis of actual cost. For cable systems that are not subject to
effective competition, section 623 permits local franchising
authorities (LFAs) to apply the FCC's rules to regulate the charges for
the BST and the installation and lease of cable customer premises
equipment used by subscribers to receive the BST. To implement section
623, the FCC adopted rate regulation rules, beginning in 1992, that
continue to serve three basic functions: setting initial BST rates,
updating those rates, and setting equipment rates. The FCC developed a
common set of tier-neutral benchmarks and regulations so that the same
methodology was to be used to set rates for BST and the CPST. However,
in 1996, Congress added a sunset provision applicable to the regulation
of all tiers of cable service except the BST.
 Equipment Regulation. This Report and Order updates FCC rules to
limit cable equipment rate regulation to equipment that is used by BST-
only subscribers to receive the regulated BST and any additional per
channel or per program services, but that is not used for any
unregulated tiers of cable service. The FCC retains the requirement to
apply the actual cost standard to equipment used to receive the BST,
but the FCC no longer believes the statute supports continued rate
regulation of equipment used by subscribers to receive CPSTs, in light
of the statutorily mandated sunset of CPST regulation, which includes
equipment used to receive a CPST by definition. The result is that BST-
only subscribers will continue to pay a regulated price for equipment
whereas subscribers to the non-regulated CPST will receive an
unregulated price for equipment.
 Small System Deregulation. This Report and Order exempts from rate
regulation small cable systems serving 15,000 or fewer subscribers that
are owned by small cable companies serving 400,000 or fewer
subscribers. Consequently, the Report and Order eliminates rules
establishing alternate methodologies for small systems as well as the
Form 1230. The FCC previously identified unique qualitative
characteristics of small systems owned by small cable companies that
differed from larger systems, and found that the larger cable companies
had higher revenue and a greater number of subscribers per mile, making
it easier to attract the financing and investment necessary to maintain
and improve service. The larger systems also were better able to absorb
the costs and

[[Page 31146]]

burdens of regulation due to their expanded administrative and
technical resources. The Report and Order finds that the benefits of
regulating small systems owned by small cable companies do not outweigh
the potential of placing an inordinate hardship upon smaller cable
companies in terms of labor and other resources that must be devoted to
ensuring compliance. The FCC thinks consumers will benefit from
deregulation by allowing these small systems to better attract the
financing and investment necessary to maintain and improve service. The
FCC agrees that it has ample legal authority to grant relief to small
systems. The Report and Order is consistent with the Act, including
section 623(i), which requires the FCC to reduce the administrative
burdens and costs of compliance for small cable systems, and also
section 623(m). This action will encourage investment in small
companies, rely on the marketplace for setting rates for small systems
owned by small cable companies for the foreseeable future, and ensure
small systems owned by small cable companies will be able to fully
recoup investment in expanding their systems. Thus, exemption from rate
regulation for these small systems, and elimination of associated
forms, provides needed regulatory certainty and reduces potential
significant administrative costs.
 Non-Residential Service Regulation. The Report and Order concludes
that the FCC's rate regulation rules apply only to residential
customers. Thus, cable services offered to non-residential subscribers,
such as retail stores and restaurants, are not subject to the FCC's
rate regulations. In limiting rate regulation to cable service and
equipment provided to subscribers in households and not non-residential
establishments, the Report and Order notes that the FCC, in applying
the test for effective competition, has determined that the term
household means occupied housing units. The Report and Order finds that
using the term occupied housing unit, as the FCC has interpreted it in
the effective competition context, to distinguish residential from non-
residential subscribers provides a bright line and allows a clear
distinction between regulated and unregulated services. The Report and
Order defines residential subscribers as subscribers residing in an
occupied housing unit, such as a house, an apartment, a mobile home or
trailer, a group of rooms, or a single room occupied as separate living
quarters.
 Modification of Section 76.980. The Report and Order modifies Sec.
76.980, which limits charges cable operators may impose when a customer
changes its service tier subscription, adopted pursuant to section
623(b)(5)(C) of the Act, which requires that the FCC impose standards
and procedures to prevent unreasonable charges for changes in the
subscriber's selection of services or equipment. Given the language of
the statute and the section's placement and purpose in the statutory
scheme, the FCC believes the best reading of section 623(b)(5)(C) is
that it was intended to ensure that the rates of the BST are
reasonable. Accordingly, the Report and Order finds that Sec. 76.980,
which was adopted pursuant to this statutory section, is not required
to sunset along with other CPST regulations. The Report and Order
modifies Sec. 76.980 so that it applies only to changes in service
tiers that result in a selection of a BST-only service. Section 76.980
will continue to protect subscribers from being penalized for
downgrading their service to a BST-only tier, which is particularly
important for subscribers who are facing financial challenges.
 Modification of Section 76.984. The Report and Order modifies Sec.
76.984, which requires uniformity of rates throughout a franchise area,
to reflect the sunset of CPST rate regulation. This rule was adopted
pursuant to section 623(d) of the Act to prohibit cable operators from
selling the same cable service at different prices in different parts
of a given franchise area unless the franchise area as a whole faces
effective competition. In light of the congressional intent not to
apply the uniform rate requirement to unregulated services, the Report
and Order concludes that the statutory provision no longer applies to
the CPST and eliminates the reference to CPST in Sec. 76.984 of the
FCC rules. The FCC rule will continue to prevent discriminatory and
anti-competitive behavior and promote competition in areas where the
cable system is not subject to effective competition, but will be
limited to rate-regulated BST services and equipment.
 Establishing Initial Rates. The Report and Oder revises the FCC
methodology for newly regulated cable operators to establish initial
regulated BST rates. Specifically, the Report and Order requires a
cable operator to use, as its initial regulated BST rate, the BST rate
in effect 60 days prior to the date an LFA files its certification to
regulate BST rates. This methodology replaces the existing methodology
that requires initial rates to be calculated using historical financial
and rate data from the 1990s, when the FCC adopted rules establishing
initial rates. The Report and Order modifies the FCC transition rules
for entities losing their rate regulation exemption status to conform
with the rules for other newly regulated operators. Under the FCC's
existing rate regulation rules, the process for setting an initial BST
rate when a cable system becomes regulated is complicated and requires
using data from as far back as 1992. After LFAs and cable operators set
initial regulated rates, increases are governed on a going-forward
basis by a price cap mechanism, which permits periodic adjustments for
inflation, changes in the number of regulated channels on tiers, and
changes in external costs. Regulated rates are expected to allow cable
operators to recover their costs and obtain a reasonable profit. Under
the FCC's current rules, a newly regulated cable operator choosing the
benchmark methodology must use Form 1200 to calculate its initial
regulated rates and Form 1240 to justify subsequent rate increases. The
revisions today will eliminate the Form 1200 calculation and change the
starting rate entered on the Form 1240. Choosing the cable operator's
actual unregulated rate as a starting point presumes that an operator
has set its unregulated rates to sufficiently recover its costs and
earn a reasonable profit. In light of the fact that the FCC's current
system is based on data collected in 1992 and requires detailed back-up
on rates and channel line-up changes made years or even decades earlier
(often by a prior system owners), the Report and Order finds that
basing initial regulated rates on unregulated rates in effect 60 days
prior to the date an LFA files its certification to regulate the BST is
a reasonable update consistent with the FCC's statutory requirements. A
regulated cable operator will identify to the LFA its BST rate that was
in effect 60 days prior to the date the LFA filed its certification to
regulate BST rates and file supporting documentation such as a rate
card. This rate will be inserted as the Current Maximum Permitted Rate
on Line A1 of operator's initial Form 1240 when justifying a subsequent
rate increase. This rate will include the entire amount charged for the
BST, whether or not an operator has broken out individual components of
the rate as separate line items on its subscribers' bills. It will not
include promotional or discount rates nor include charges for equipment
used to receive the BST. After this initial rate is entered on the Form
1240, the Form 1240 will be used to account for subsequent changes in
external costs and inflation and changes in the number of channels on
the BST that have occurred since the operator

[[Page 31147]]

implemented its most recent unregulated BST rate or subsequent
regulated BST rates. The BST rate in effect 60 days prior to the LFA's
certification filing date will be deemed reasonable and will be used as
the initial regulated rate and the starting rate for future rate
increases that are subject to regulation. In the interest of uniformity
and consistency, the Report and Order modifies the three-month period
that applies to small cable operators who lose their deregulatory
status to conform with the new 60 day rule applicable to other newly
regulated operators. Under the FCC's existing rules, if a small cable
operator subsequently becomes ineligible for small operator status, the
operator may maintain the rates it charged prior to losing small cable
operator status if such rates were in effect for the three months
preceding the loss of small cable operator status. The revised rule now
states that upon regulation, actual rates and subsequent rate increases
will be subject to generally applicable regulations governing rates and
rate increases, which includes the newly adopted 60 day rule. The
Report and Order notes that the date used for establishing the initial
regulated rate and the effective date of regulation are not the same.
The Report and Order uses the date 60 days before an LFA files its
certification to establish initial regulated rates. However, the
effective date of regulation is the date an LFA notifies a cable
operator that it has been certified and adopted regulations. For
purposes of refund liability, the Report and Order simplifies the
refund rule so that a cable operator's liability for refunds runs from
the effective date of regulation until the operator reduces its rate in
compliance with an LFA order. The effective date of regulation for a
cable operator remains the date that an LFA notifies the cable operator
that the BST is subject to regulation; a cable operator will not be
required to refund overcharges prior to that date.
 Channel Movement Calculation. The Report and Order modifies the
FCC's channel movement rules to account for the sunset of CPST
regulation and to simplify the process. When the FCC adopted rules
pertaining to the addition and deletion of channels from a regulated
tier of service, or channel movement, both the BST and CPST were
subject to rate regulation, and the FCC indicated its intention to
provide a rate adjustment mechanism for channel movement between
regulated BST and CPST tiers.
 Channel Number Component. The Report and Order eliminates the
requirement that rates be adjusted based on changes in the total number
of regulated channels on the system when channels are added to or
deleted from the BST. The rate regulation rules currently allow for a
rate adjustment based on changes in the total number of channels on all
regulated tiers. This per channel adjustment factor is calculated using
a markup table, which is premised on having a regulated CPST and a
system with fewer than 100 channels. Because the table calculation
includes now-deregulated CPST channels, and the table maxes out at 99.5
channels with a rate adjustment of one cent for each additional
channel, an updated table would likely have no effect on maximum
permitted rates, let alone actual rates, which are generally lower than
the calculated maximum permitted rates. The Report and Order eliminates
this adjustment and the accompanying table. Regulated BST rates will no
longer include adjustments based solely on a change in the total number
of regulated channels.
 Residual Component. The Report and Order simplifies the FCC's
methodology to account for a reduction in BST channels. The residual
amount can be roughly analogized to the cost of providing and
maintaining the network and offering the service. Under the FCC's
current rules, when a channel is removed from the CPST or BST, a per
channel residual amount is removed as well and moves with the channel
to its new tier location. Now that the CPST is no longer regulated,
there is not a regulated residual calculation available to move with a
channel that is moved to the BST from a CPST. However, when a channel
is removed from the BST, the FCC's current rules continue to require
the removal of the per channel share of the residual portion of the BST
permitted charge. Without a regulated CPST, this sets up an imbalance
between the tiers because a regulated per channel residual can no
longer move from the CPST to the BST. The FCC proposed to simplify the
rule so that no per channel residual is moved to the BST when the cable
operator moves a CPST channel to the BST, and no per channel residual
is removed from the BST when a channel is removed from the BST, unless
the total number of channels on the BST falls below the total number of
channels included in the initial regulated BST rate, in which case the
residual is removed. The Report and Order adopts the proposed solution,
which addresses the sunset of CPST regulation while seeking to maintain
the integrity of the process for determining reasonable maximum
permitted BST rates in regulated communities. The Report and Order
adopts the proposed changes to the process for calculating and removing
the per channel residual component from the BST. The per channel
residual is the permitted charge for the BST, minus the external costs,
divided by the total number of channels on the BST. Rather than
requiring cable operators to complete the existing complicated and
time-consuming worksheets, cable operators will be required to simply
record the number of channels included on the BST at the time the
initial regulated rate was established (Initial Channel Count) and at
each Form 1240 update. If the total number of channels on the BST falls
below the Initial Channel Count, then the cable operator should perform
the residual calculation and remove the residual amount associated with
the number of removed channels from the BST rate. Any other channel
movement to or from the BST that does not cause a drop in channels
below the Initial Channel Count will not require the removal of any
residual or otherwise change the Initial Channel Count. This updated
methodology is both simple and equitable, and will ensure that
unregulated CPST residual amounts are not added to the BST and that
excessive amounts of residual are not removed from the BST. The Report
and Order notes that cable operators and LFAs have the flexibility to
agree that a residual for a small number of channels would be so
insignificant that its removal should be waived. In those cases, the
FCC will defer to their judgment and waive the requirement to remove
the residual component. Overall, the modifications adopted today will
greatly simplify and balance the channel movement rules.
 Form 1240 True-Up Accrual of Interest. The Report and Order
clarifies the FCC's Form 1240 instructions to prevent cable operators
from accruing interest on costs not passed through to subscribers when
they are first entitled to recover those costs. The Form 1240 allows an
operator to calculate a maximum permitted rate using projected costs.
The operator is then required to true up its rate by comparing the
projected costs with actual costs once they are known. The operator is
not required to pass through all of its costs to subscribers in the
rate it chooses to implement but may accrue costs to pass through at a
later date. When interest continues to accrue on these costs, it can
result in excessive maximum permitted rates calculated on the Form
1240. The FCC has stated in numerous decisions, and our rules state,
that interest should not continue to

[[Page 31148]]

accrue on these unrecovered costs. The Report and Order supplements the
FCC's Form 1240, Module H instructions as follows: when calculating
interest in Module H of Form 1240, operators will not include
unrecovered costs for which interest has previously been calculated.
This will prevent cable operators from using the form to continue to
accrue interest on costs not passed through to subscribers when they
are first entitled to recover those costs. The Report and Order finds
that this clarification is consistent with the FCC's prior conclusion
that if an operator elects not to recover its accrued costs with
interest on the date the operator is entitled to make its annual rate
adjustment, the interest will cease to accrue. The Report and Order
notes that this clarification does not take away an operator's ability
to recover accrued costs and allowable accrued interest at a later
date.
 Elimination of Unnecessary Forms and Rules. The Report and Order
eliminates or updates certain forms and rules that have become obsolete
due to the FCC's action today or to previous FCC action and are no
longer necessary. These include forms and rules related to the FCC's
now obsolete benchmark methodology for establishing initial rates,
forms and rules related to the FCC's now obsolete cost of service
alternative methodologies, and forms and rules that have simply become
unnecessary due to the passage of time and the sunset of CPST
regulation.
 Initial rate-setting forms and rules. As a consequence of the FCC
decision today to use an operator's BST rate in effect 60 days prior to
the date an LFA files its certification to regulate BST rates for the
initial regulated rate, the Report and Order eliminates Form 1200
(Setting Maximum Permitted Rates for Regulated Cable Systems for First
Time Filers) and its related rules, including Sec. 76.922(f)(4) which
addresses adjustments for increases in external costs incurred during
the period between September 1992 and the initial date of regulation;
any references in the FCC's rules to the Form 393, the predecessor form
to the Form 1200; Sec. Sec. 76.911(b)(3) (refers to the simplified
refund rule); 76.922 (incorporates changes to the rate calculations,
removes references to the CPST and obsolete forms and methodologies);
76.923 (limits equipment regulation); 76.924 (removes references to the
CPST, 1993 accounting practices and small system regulation); 76.930
(refers to the new 60 day rule); 76.933 (streamlines the process for
LFA review of rate filings); 76.934 (adds deregulation of small systems
owned by small cable companies and removes alternative methodologies);
76.935 (removes references to obsolete time periods for rate review by
LFAs); 76.937 (removes reference to cost of service methodology);
76.938 (removes references to obsolete forms); 76.939 (removes
references to obsolete forms); 76.942 (streamlines refund rules);
76.944 (conforms citation to revised 76.922); 76.945 (removes reference
to cost of service); 76.963 (removes rule only applicable to CPST);
76.980 (limits rule to BST); 76.982 (removes rule applicable to pre-
1990 agreements); 76.984 (removes reference to CPST); 76.990 (conforms
to 60 day rule); and 76.1805 (removes the provision regarding
alternative agreements based on deregulation of small systems owned by
small cable companies).
 Cost of service forms and rules. The Report an Order eliminates the
labor-intensive and infrequently used Form 1220 (Cost of Service Filing
for Regulated Cable Systems) and the concomitant cost of service
methodology, which is an alternative means to the Form 1200 for setting
initial regulated rates. The cost of service methodology was adopted as
a safety valve for high cost systems that might not receive an adequate
rate of return using the benchmark system methodology to establish
initial rates. Now that initial rates will be determined based on the
BST rate in effect 60 days prior to the date an LFA files its
certification to regulate BST rates, which the Report and Order
presumes cable operators set to recover costs and earn a reasonable
profit when not rate regulated, there is no longer a need to provide
this under-utilized safety valve. For these reasons, the Report and
Order eliminates Form 1220 and accompanying rules. Likewise, instead of
adopting the changes to Form 1235 (Abbreviated Cost of Service Filing
for Cable Network Upgrades), the FCC is persuaded by the record to
eliminate the form altogether. Under FCC's existing rules, cable
operators may recover significant network upgrade costs through a
surcharge on regulated rates, by filing a Form 1235 with LFAs. Cable
operators, who are the beneficiaries of the Form 1235 abbreviated cost
of service methodology and associated rules, proposed eliminating the
form. The Form 1235 benefits cable operators by allowing them to
justify rate increases for system upgrades without having to file a
full cost of service showing. The Report and Order finds no
justification to retain this form. Its beneficiaries find it to be
unnecessary and, as with the FCC's other cost of service alternatives,
the FCC can assume that unregulated rates are set to include a return
adequate for system upgrades. The Report and Order eliminates Form 1235
and its accompanying rules. Cable operators sought to reaffirm their
ability to seek redress if facing severe economic hardship as a result
of compliance with the FCC's rules. Because of the greater flexibility
cable operators now have in setting rates for cable services, the FCC
is skeptical that such redress will be necessary. However, the Report
and Order reiterates that a cable television system operator may file a
petition asking the FCC to find it in the public interest to waive any
provision of part 76 of the FCC's rules or impose additional or
different requirements.
 Miscellaneous obsolete forms and rules. The Report and Order
eliminates other inactive or obsolete rate forms and delete references
to them in the FCC's rules. The eliminated forms are: FCC Form 1210
(Updating Maximum Permitted Rates for Regulated Cable Systems); Form
1211 (a small system alternative to FCC Form 1210); Form 1215 (a la
carte channel offerings); Form 1225 (a small systems cost of service
form); and Form 329 (an obsolete CPST complaint form). We eliminate
rules that are obsolete due to the sunset of CPST regulation, including
Sec. 76.922(e)(2)(iii)(C) (allows an adjustment to the CPST and BST of
single-tier systems); Sec. 76.982 (refers to agreements pre-dating the
1990 rule changes and is not needed to implement section 623(j) of the
Act); and Sec. 76.963 (applies to CPST complaints). Section 76.963 was
adopted to limit the FCC's existing forfeiture authority from being
applied to FCC orders resolving complaints regarding CPST service and
equipment rates, and is no longer necessary. The Report and Order
deletes references to the Form 329 contained in our practice and
procedure rules, 1.1204(b)(6) and 1.1206(a)(11).
 Closing of Proceedings. The Report and Order closes MB Docket No.
02-144, which includes the FCC's notice of proposed rulemaking, 67 FR
56882, initiated to resolve open issues related to the sunset of CPST
regulation and the experience gained with the application of the FCC's
rate regulations. The Report and Order closes MM Docket No. 92-266, the
original Report and Order implementing the statutory scheme for rate
regulation. The Report and Order closes MM Docket No. 93-215 and CS
Docket No. 94-28, the dockets addressing cost of service alternatives,
and terminates the FCC's 1996 further notice of proposed rulemaking in
those dockets and dismisses the various pending petitions for
reconsideration in

[[Page 31149]]

those dockets, which are rendered moot. The FCC closes the above-
captioned proceedings with this Report and Order because any open
issues raised therein are resolved by this Report and Order, have
become obsolete or irrelevant due to regulatory updates, technology
advances, or marketplace changes, or have been addressed in other FCC
orders and no longer need to be resolved.
 Regulatory Flexibility Act. As required by the Regulatory
Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), the FCC incorporated an
Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) in the Further Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, Revisions to Cable Television Rate Regulations, 83
FR 60804 (2018 FNPRM). The FCC sought written public comment on the
proposals in the 2018 FNPRM, including comment on the IRFA. No comments
were filed addressing the IRFA. This Final Regulatory Flexibility
Analysis (FRFA) conforms to the RFA.
 Need for, and Objectives of, the Rules. The Report and Order makes
changes to remove rule sections and eliminate rate calculation forms
that are obsolete due to the sunset of CPST rate regulation. In the
past, the FCC developed rules and forms for the regulation of cable
television rates when both the BST and the CPST were subject to rate
regulation. In the Report and Order, the FCC updates rules and rate
forms to reflect the March 1999 sunset of CPST rate regulation pursuant
to the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and to address issues which have
arisen over time. The Report and Order updates and streamlines the
cable rate regulations in Part 76 of the FCC's rules governing
multichannel video and cable television service. The Report and Order
also streamlines the initial rate-setting methodology, clarifies how
cable operators may adjust their rates every year, eliminates rate
regulation of some equipment used to receive cable signals, and
eliminates rate regulation of small systems owned by small cable
companies. Further, the Report and Order eliminates rate forms that are
no longer necessary. These changes relieve regulatory burdens for small
and other cable operators, modernize and streamline cable rate
regulations, and update regulations to account for the deregulation of
cable programming service tier rates. For cable systems in general,
including small cable systems, all of these changes have the effect of
eliminating or reducing regulatory burdens.
 Summary of Significant Issues Raised by Public Comments in Response
to the IRFA. There were no comments filed that specifically addressed
the proposed rules and policies presented in the IRFA. However, there
were comments regarding the impact of the rule on small entities
stating that the administrative burdens faced by small cable operators
are greater than those of larger operators that have more
administrative and technical resources. These comments favored the
FCC's proposal to deregulate small cable systems serving 15,000 or
fewer subscribers, that are owned by small cable companies serving
400,000 or fewer subscribers. In the Report and Order, the FCC finds
that the benefits of regulating small systems owned by small cable
companies do not outweigh the potential hardship of regulatory
compliance for small entities. The FCC's action will allow small
systems to better attract the financing and investment necessary to
maintain and improve service.
 Response to Comments by the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small
Business Administration. Pursuant to the Small Business Jobs Act of
2010, which amended the RFA, the FCC is required to respond to any
comments filed by the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business
Administration (SBA), and provide a detailed statement of any change
made to the proposed rules as a result of those comments. The Chief
Counsel did not file any comments in response to the proposed rules in
this proceeding.
 Description and Estimate of the Number of Small Entities to Which
the Rules Will Apply. The RFA directs agencies to provide a description
of, and where feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities
that may be affected by the rules adopted herein. The RFA generally
defines the term small entity as having the same meaning as the terms
small business, small organization, and small governmental
jurisdiction. In addition, the term small business has the same meaning
as the term small business concern under the Small Business Act. A
small business concern is one which: (1) is independently owned and
operated; (2) is not dominant in its field of operation; and (3)
satisfies any additional criteria established by the SBA.
 Cable Companies and Systems (Rate Regulation). The FCC has
developed its own small business size standard for the purpose of cable
rate regulation. Under the FCC's rules, a small cable company is one
serving 400,000 or fewer subscribers nationwide. Based on industry
data, there are about 420 cable companies in the U.S. Of these, only
seven have more than 400,000 subscribers. In addition, under the FCC's
rules, a small system is a cable system serving 15,000 or fewer
subscribers. Based on industry data, there are about 4,139 cable
systems (headends) in the U.S. Of these, about 639 have more than
15,000 subscribers. Accordingly, the FCC estimates that the majority of
cable companies and cable systems are small.
 Cable System Operators (Telecom Act Standard). The Communications
Act of 1934, as amended, contains a size standard for a small cable
operator, which is a cable operator that, directly or through an
affiliate, serves in the aggregate fewer than one percent of all
subscribers in the United States and is not affiliated with any entity
or entities whose gross annual revenues in the aggregate exceed
$250,000,000. For purposes of the Telecom Act Standard, the FCC
determined that a cable system operator that serves fewer than 498,000
subscribers, either directly or through affiliates, will meet the
definition of a small cable operator. Based on industry data, only six
cable system operators have more than 498,000 subscribers. Accordingly,
the FCC estimates that the majority of cable system operators are small
under this size standard. We note however, that the FCC neither
requests nor collects information on whether cable system operators are
affiliated with entities whose gross annual revenues exceed $250
million. Therefore, we are unable at this time to estimate with greater
precision the number of cable system operators that would qualify as
small cable operators under the definition in the Communications Act.
 Small Governmental Jurisdictions. The small entity described as a
small governmental jurisdiction is defined generally as governments of
cities, counties, towns, townships, villages, school districts, or
special districts, with a population of less than fifty thousand. U.S.
Census Bureau data from the 2022 Census of Governments indicate there
were 90,837 local governmental jurisdictions consisting of general
purpose governments and special purpose governments in the United
States. Of this number there were 36,845 general purpose governments
(county, municipal and town or township) with populations of less than
50,000 and 11,879 special purpose governments (independent school
districts) with enrollment populations of less than 50,000.
Accordingly, based on the 2022 U.S. Census of Governments data, we
estimate that at least 48,724 entities fall into the category of small
governmental jurisdictions. As noted in the Report and Order, nearly
all, if not all, cable operators now face effective competition

[[Page 31150]]

and are not subject to rate regulation. This means that few, if any,
local governments, including small governmental jurisdictions, are
certified to regulate rates at this time. Therefore, we expect the
number of small governmental jurisdictions, to which these rule changes
would apply at this time, to be negligible.
 Description of Economic Impact and Projected Reporting,
Recordkeeping and Other Compliance Requirements for Small Entities. The
RFA directs agencies to provide a description of the projected
reporting, recordkeeping and other compliance requirements of the
proposed rule, including an estimate of the classes of small entities
which will be subject to the requirement and the type of professional
skills necessary for preparation of the report or record. The Report
and Order updates and streamlines the cable rate regulations in Part 76
of the FCC's rules governing multichannel video and cable television
service. All of the rule changes are either neutral or reduce existing
reporting, recordkeeping, or other compliance requirements for small
and other entities. Specifically, the Report and Order exempts systems
serving 15,000 or fewer subscribers that are owned by small cable
companies of 400,000 or fewer subscribers from all rate regulation. The
Report and Order also limits cable equipment regulation to equipment
that is used by BST-only subscribers to receive the BST and additional
per channel or per program services. Further, it streamlines the
process for establishing initial regulated rates by updating the
methodology for newly regulated cable operators to establish initial
BST rates using the BST rate in effect 60 days prior to the date a
local franchising authority (LFA) files its certification to regulate
BST rates. In addition, the Report and Order sunsets the unabbreviated
and abbreviated cost of service methodologies and clarifies and or
eliminates obsolete rules and forms. These changes are necessary to
relieve regulatory burdens, modernize and streamline cable rate
regulations, and update regulations to account for the deregulation of
CPST rates. No increase in the regulatory burden on small systems or
small governmental entities is expected to result from this proceeding.
 Discussion of Steps Taken to Minimize the Significant Economic
Impact on Small Entities, and Significant Alternatives Considered. The
RFA requires an agency to provide a description of the steps the agency
has taken to minimize the significant economic impact on small
entities, including a statement of the factual, policy, and legal
reasons for selecting the alternative adopted in the final rule and why
each one of the other significant alternatives to the rule considered
by the agency which affect the impact on small entities was rejected.
The Report and Order updates and streamlines the cable rate regulations
in Part 76 of the FCC's rules governing multichannel video and cable
television service. This includes streamlining channel addition and
deletion rules and the process for establishing initial regulated
rates, the further deregulation of small entities, and the elimination
of obsolete rules and forms. Many of the alternatives considered in the
Report and Order relieve regulatory burdens for small and other cable
operators, modernize and streamline cable rate regulations, and update
regulations to account for the deregulation of CPST rates. For example,
there were comments in favor of the FCC's proposal to eliminate
administrative burdens for small cable systems serving 15,000 or fewer
subscribers that are owned by small cable companies of 400,000 or fewer
subscribers, because those burdens would discourage investment in
services by these cable systems. In considering whether to adopt this
alternative, the FCC finds these assertions to be persuasive. These
changes do not increase the regulatory burden small systems face as a
result of rate regulation. Instead, they lessen it by reducing the
amount of information required to be reported. The Report and Order
also considered whether to extend rate regulation beyond residential
customers, but instead, considering the language of the Act and FCC
precedent, decided not to include non-residential subscribers, such as
retail stores and restaurants. Additionally, the FCC modified the
three-month period for cable operators that lose their status as small
operators to now conform with the new 60 day rule for other operators
subject to these regulations.
 Report to Congress. The FCC will send a copy of the Report and
Order, including this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, in a
report to Congress pursuant to the Congressional Review Act. In
addition, the FCC will send a copy of the Report and Order, including
this Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, to the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy of the SBA.
 Paperwork Reduction Act. This document may contain new or modified
information collections subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
(PRA), 44 U.S.C. 3501-3521. All such new or modified information
collections will be submitted to the Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) for review under section 3507(d) of the PRA. OMB, the general
public, and other Federal agencies will be invited to comment on any
new or modified information collections contained in this proceeding.
In addition, we note that pursuant to the Small Business Paperwork
Relief Act of 2002, 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4), we previously sought specific
comment on how the Commission might further reduce the information
collection burden for small business concerns with fewer than 25
employees. In this present document, we have assessed the effects of
our rule modifications, including streamlining the initial rate-setting
methodology, eliminating rate regulation of some equipment used to
receive cable signals, and eliminating rate regulation of small systems
owned by small cable companies, and find that all of these changes have
the effect of eliminating or reducing regulatory burdens for all cable
systems, including small business concerns. Additionally, this document
may contain non-substantive modifications to approved information
collections. Any such modifications will be submitted to OMB for review
pursuant to OMB's non-substantive modification process.
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is ``non-
major'' under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The
Commission will send a copy of this Report and Order to Congress and
the Government Accountability Office pursuant to the Congressional
Review Act, see 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
 Accordingly, it is ordered that, pursuant to the authority found in
sections 1, 2(a), 3, 4(i), 4(j), 303(r), 601(3), 602, and 623 of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. 151, 152(a), 153,
154(i), 154(j), 303(r), 521, 522, 543, this Report and Order is
adopted.
 It is further ordered that, pursuant to the authority found in
sections 1, 2(a), 3, 4(i), 4(j), 303(r), 601(3), 602, and 623 of the
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. 151, 152(a), 153,
154(i), 154(j), 303(r), 521, 522, 543, the FCC's rules are amended as
set forth below.
 It is further ordered that this Report and Order shall be effective
30 days after publication in the Federal Register, except that the
amendments to Sec. Sec. 1.1204, 1.1206, 76.911, 76.922, 76.923,
76.934, 76.944, 76.990, 47 CFR

[[Page 31151]]

1.1204, 1.1206, 76.911, 76.922, 76.923, 76.934, 76.944, 76.990, which
may contain new or modified information collections, will not become
effective until the Office of Management and Budget completes review of
any information collections that the Bureau determines is required
under the Paperwork Reduction Act. The FCC directs the Bureau to
announce the effective date for Sec. Sec. 1.1204. 1.1206, 76.911,
76.922, 76.923, 76.934, 76.944, 76.990 by notice in the Federal
Register and by subsequent Public Notice.
 It is further ordered that the Commission's Office of the
Secretary, shall send a copy of this Report and Order, including the
Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis, to the Chief Counsel for
Advocacy of the Small Business Administration.
 It is further ordered that the Office of the Managing Director,
Performance Program Management, shall send a copy of this Report and
Order in a report to be sent to Congress and the Government
Accountability Office pursuant to the Congressional Review Act, see 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
 It is further ordered that should no petitions for reconsideration
or petitions for judicial review be timely filed, MB Docket No. 02-144,
MM Docket Nos. 92-266 and 93-215, and CS Docket No. 94-28 shall be
terminated, and their dockets closed.
 It is further ordered that the FNPRM in Dockets MM 93-215 and CS
94-28, FCC 95-502, 11 FCC Rcd 2220 (1996), is terminated and any
pending petitions for reconsideration of Report and Order, FCC 95-502,
11 FCC Rcd 2220 (1996), are dismissed.

List of Subjects

47 CFR Part 1

 Administrative practice and procedure.

47 CFR Part 76

 Television.

Federal Communications Commission.
Marlene Dortch,
Secretary.

Final Rules

 For the reasons discussed in the preamble, the Federal
Communications Commission amends 47 CFR parts 1 and 76 as follows:

PART 1--PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE

0
1. The authority citation for part 1 continues to read as follows:

 Authority: 47 U.S.C. chs. 2, 5, 9, 13; 28 U.S.C. 2461 note; 47
U.S.C. 1754, unless otherwise noted.


Sec. 1.1204 [Amended]

0
2. Delayed indefinitely, amend Sec. 1.1204 by:
0
a. Adding ``and'' at the end of paragraph (b)(4);
0
b. Removing ``; and'' at the end of paragraph (b)(5) and adding a
period in its place; and
0
c. Removing paragraph (b)(6).


Sec. 1.1206 [Amended]

0
3. Delayed indefinitely, amend Sec. 1.1206 by removing and reserving
paragraph (a)(11).

PART 76--MULTICHANNEL VIDEO AND CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE

0
4. The authority citation for part 76 continues to read as follows:

 Authority: 47 U.S.C. 151, 152, 153, 154, 301, 302, 302a, 303,
303a, 307, 308, 309, 312, 315, 317, 325, 335, 338, 339, 340, 341,
503, 521, 522, 531, 532, 534, 535, 536, 537, 543, 544, 544a, 545,
548, 549, 552, 554, 556, 558, 560, 561, 562, 571, 572, 573.
