FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Lower 37 GHz Band and Use of Spectrum Bands Above 24 GHz for Mobile Radio Service
Document number: 2025-10476
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 24749
Publication date: 2025-06-12

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 112 (Thursday, June 12, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 112 (Thursday, June 12, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 24749-24764]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2025-10476]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 1 and 30

[WT Docket No. 24-243, GN Docket No. 14-177; FCC 25-24; FR ID 293183]


Lower 37 GHz Band and Use of Spectrum Bands Above 24 GHz for
Mobile Radio Service

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) makes available 600 megahertz of high-frequency spectrum
for flexible fixed and mobile use by establishing a mechanism for
access to the 37-37.6 GHz band (Lower 37 GHz band). This spectrum,
which is shared between non-Federal and Federal operators, can be used
for fixed wireless broadband, Internet of Things (IoT), or other
innovative services. Crafted in collaboration with the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) and with input
from the Department of Defense (DoD), this new regime provides access
to a block of millimeter wave spectrum with low barriers to entry.

DATES: Effective July 14, 2025, except for amendatory instructions 11
(adding Sec. 30.501) and 12 (adding Sec. 30.503), which are delayed
indefinitely. The Commission will publish a document in the Federal
Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Catherine Schroeder, Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau, Broadband Division, at
 [email protected] or (202) 418-1956.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report

[[Page 24750]]

and Order and Sixth Report and Order in WT Docket No. 24-243 and GN
Docket No. 14-177; FCC 25-24, adopted on April 28, 2025, and released
on April 29, 2025. A Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (FNPRM)
relating to the Report and Order and Sixth Report and Order will be
published in the Proposed Rule section of the Federal Register on the
same date as this summary. The full text of the document is available
at https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-clears-way-wireless-innovation-lower-37-ghz-band-0 .

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires
that an agency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice-
and-comment rulemakings, unless the agency certifies that ``the rule
will not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has
prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the
possible impact of the rule changes contained in the Report and Order
on small entities. The FRFA is set forth section IV.

Paperwork Reduction Act

 The Report and Order and Sixth Report and Order contains new
information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction
Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-13. It will be submitted to the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for review under section 3507(d)
of the PRA. OMB, the general public, and other Federal agencies will be
invited to comment on the new or modified information collection
requirements contained in this proceeding. In addition, the Commission
note that pursuant to the Small Business Paperwork Relief Act of 2002,
Public Law 107-198, see 44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(4), the Commission previously
sought specific comment on how the Commission might further reduce the
information collection burden for small business concerns with fewer
than 25 employees.
 In this present document, the Commission has assessed the effects
of requiring entities interested in operating in the Lower 37 GHz band
to submit applications for nationwide, non-exclusive licenses and to
coordinate their proposed operations with other operators. It finds
that such requirements are necessary to comply with statutory
requirements and to avoid interference. The proposed information
collection requirements would apply equally to small and large
entities.

Congressional Review Act

 The Commission will submit the Report and Order and Sixth Report
and Order to the Administrator of the Office of Information and
Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, for concurrence as
to whether this rule is ``major'' or ``non-major'' under the
Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a
copy of the Report and Order and Sixth Report and Order to Congress and
the Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

I. Introduction

 1. This item builds on the Commission's longstanding work to enable
greater and more intensive use of spectrum. Specifically, it
establishes a framework to share the Lower 37 GHz band among Federal
and non-Federal users. This framework will allow the Lower 37 GHz band
to be used for a range of services through rules designed to
accommodate a variety of use cases--including backhaul and backbone
links; fixed wireless broadband systems; Internet of IoT-type systems;
and supplemental capacity for mobile systems. The Commission also
adopts an initial mechanism for coordinating co-primary shared Federal
and non-Federal uses of the band, developed jointly with NTIA with
input from DoD and other interested Federal and non-Federal
stakeholders.
 2. The Report and Order and Sixth Report and Order is the next step
in the Commission's efforts to make millimeter wave (mmW) spectrum
available for intensive use, and to ensure continued American
leadership in wireless services. Such leadership is critical for
economic growth, job creation, public safety, and global
competitiveness. The framework the Commission sets for the Lower 37 GHz
band will allow for co-primary spectrum sharing between Federal and
non-Federal users in the same spectrum band by offering site-based
authorizations capable of accommodating systems that do not require
geographic area licenses. By developing a framework that makes 600
megahertz of additional millimeter wave spectrum available for
commercial and for government use, the Commission takes another
critical step towards providing opportunities for more robust spectrum-
based services that serve the nation's interests.

II. Background

 3. Lower 37 GHz Allocations. The entire 37 GHz band (37-38.6 GHz)
is allocated to the fixed and mobile services on a primary basis for
Federal and non-Federal use. Portions of the 37 GHz band are also
allocated to the Space Research Service (SRS) (space-to-Earth) on a
primary basis for Federal use (37-38 GHz), and to the Fixed-Satellite
Service (FSS) (space-to-Earth) on a primary basis for non-Federal use
(37.5-38.6 GHz). The use of this FSS downlink allocation is limited to
individually-licensed earth stations, and is also subject to other
limitations. In addition, the 37 GHz band is adjacent to the 36-37 GHz
band, where passive sensors in the Earth Exploration Satellite Service
(EESS) and SRS are located.
 4. In 2016, the Commission adopted rules to permit fixed and mobile
terrestrial operation in the 37 GHz band (2016 Order, 81 FR 79894). The
Commission adopted a licensing regime for the 37.6-38.6 GHz portion of
the band (Upper 37 GHz band), and made the Lower 37 GHz band available
for coordinated co-primary sharing between Federal and non-Federal
users, in which users have a right to interference protection, but no
right to exclude other users. It explained that Federal and non-Federal
users would access the Lower 37 GHz band through a coordination
mechanism, which would be developed more fully through an accompanying
FNPRM and Federal agency/industry collaboration. The Commission adopted
the same technical rules for the Lower 37 GHz band and the Upper 37 GHz
band.
 5. In the accompanying 2016 FNPRM (81 FR 58270), the Commission
sought comment on a proposal under which Federal and non-Federal fixed
and mobile users would access the Lower 37 GHz band by registering
individual sites through a coordination mechanism. Under the proposal,
the coordination mechanism would facilitate coordinated access by
authorizing a particular user to use a particular bandwidth of spectrum
at a particular location. The Commission sought comment on the
coordination mechanism and the functions that it should be able to
perform.\1\ The Commission also sought comment on other aspects of the
Lower 37 GHz band regime, including whether a portion of the lower band
segment should be made available for priority

[[Page 24751]]

access by Federal users; whether an enforcement mechanism in the Lower
37 GHz band is necessary to help identify and rectify interference
events; and whether and how to apply secondary market rules to the
Lower 37 GHz band.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \1\ As proposed, the coordination mechanism would: (1) be able
to obtain information about the type of equipment used, the signal
contour from the coordinated location, and the bandwidth requested
compared with the bandwidth available; (2) be capable of regularly
updating the status of a coordinated location (on/off or authorized/
unauthorized); and (3) be able to incorporate this type of
information for both Federal and non-Federal fixed and mobile uses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 6. In 2018, the Commission denied petitions for reconsideration
asking that it adopt exclusive area licensing in the Lower 37 GHz band,
and that it not allow Federal entities to have expansion rights in that
band (83 FR 34478, corrected 84 FR 17360). Instead, the Commission
affirmed its prior conclusion that ``[a]llowing part of the band to be
made available on a non-exclusive, shared basis will promote access to
spectrum by a wide variety of entities, support innovative uses of the
band, and help ensure that spectrum is widely utilized.'' In an
accompanying FNPRM, the Commission also sought comment on how to
coordinate operations under a non-exclusive licensing regime that could
be used to share spectrum either between non-Federal entities or
between Federal and non-Federal entities (2018 FNPRM, 83 FR 34520). The
Commission sought comment on a first-come-first-served licensing or
registration scheme. It further sought comment on three types of non-
Federal licenses for the Lower 37 GHz band: point-to-point licenses;
base station licenses; and ``site-cluster licenses,'' in which the
applicant would license a larger non-exclusive point-radius license
within which it could register individual base stations and/or point-
to-point links. It also sought comment on using the notice and response
rules applicable to part 101 microwave operations to coordinate
operations, as well as a proposal by Starry, Inc. to require use of a
third-party coordinator. The Commission also asked commenters to
address how to prevent ``warehousing,'' whereby a licensee preserves
its spectrum usage rights without providing actual service.
 7. In the 2018 FNPRM, the Commission also recognized the importance
of the Lower 37 GHz band to future Federal operations, and stated its
intent to work in partnership with NTIA, DoD, and other Federal
agencies to develop a sharing approach that allows for robust Federal
and non-Federal use in the Lower 37 GHz band. The Commission proposed
to require non-Federal users to work with Federal users in good faith
to coordinate any new system Federal users might seek to deploy. At the
same time, it anticipated that non-Federal users would not be required
to agree to coordination requests that would carry a significant risk
of harmful interference, and it sought comment on the best means of
coordinating with Federal operations. To the extent that the solution
to preserving a Federal entity's options may be to reserve a part of
the band for its priority use, the Commission asked how to define such
priority rights.
 8. The Commission received fifteen comments and eight reply
comments to the 2018 FNPRM that addressed the Lower 37 GHz band.
Commenters express a variety of views on licensing the band. Some
commenters continued to urge the Commission to adopt geographic area
licensing despite the Commission's prior decisions not to use
geographic area licensing in the Lower 37 GHz band. Other commenters
offered general principles the Commission should use but do not discuss
specific licensing mechanisms. Several commenters suggested the
Commission base its rules on those adopted for the 71-76 GHz and 81-86
GHz bands (70/80 GHz bands). Other commenters proposed that indoor use
be authorized on a licensed-by-rule basis. Additionally, in 2023, some
interested parties provided comments on sharing in the Lower 37 GHz
band in response to the Commission's 42 GHz NPRM (88 FR 49423).
 9. Subsequently, in 2023, the National Spectrum Strategy (NSS),
adopted under the prior Administration, identified the Lower 37 GHz
band for further study ``to implement a co-equal, shared-use framework
allowing Federal and non-Federal users to deploy operations in the
band.''
 10. To aid in the study of the band, the Commission's Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau (WTB) issued a Public Notice seeking further
development of the record relating to the Lower 37 GHz band (2024
Public Notice; 89 FR 68610). The 2024 Public Notice specifically
solicited further information on: (i) potential uses of the Lower 37
GHz band; (ii) a two-phase coordination framework; (iii) adjacent band
protections, including whether additional measures are needed to
protect spaceborne remote passive sensors in the 36-37 GHz band; (iv) a
licensing process, which would involve two steps for non-Federal
operations; and (v) priority access for DoD and military agency
departments in the 37-37.2 GHz portion of the band. It also sought
general input on a means of ensuring widespread access to Lower 37 GHz
spectrum. The Commission received thirteen comments and four ex parte
filings in response to the 2024 Public Notice.
 11. On November 29, 2024, DoD and NTIA released a report
recommending adoption of the coordination framework described in the
2024 Public Notice; establishing priority access for DoD in the 37-37.2
GHz portion of the band while retaining co-equal access for Federal and
non-Federal users in the 37.2-37.6 GHz portion of the band; and
establishing stricter out-of-band emission limits than the Commission
previously adopted in 2016 in order to protect adjacent band operations
in the 36-37 GHz band.

III. Report and Order and Sixth Report and Order

 12. As previously decided, the Lower 37 GHz band will be made
available for Federal and non-Federal use on a co-primary, shared
basis. Under this sharing framework licensees with operations have a
right to interference protection, but no right to exclude other users.
In the Report and Order, the Commission adopts a licensing framework
that requires non-Federal users first to obtain a nationwide non-
exclusive license. Next, users would coordinate their proposed site-
based operations with other potentially affected operators using a two-
phase interference coordination process. Following successful
coordination, licensees would register their proposed sites pursuant to
procedures to be established by WTB. The Commission also adopts
interference protection criteria to govern the coordination process and
facilitate sharing between and among Federal and non-Federal users.
 13. In addition, the Commission adopts rules that grant a priority
to military systems operating in the 37-37.2 GHz portion of the band.
The Commission also sets forth construction requirements for non-
Federal users in the band and adopt more stringent requirements during
the initial site registration round to ensure efficient and effective
spectrum use and prevent spectrum warehousing. Finally, the Commission
declines to adopt secondary market rules given the licensing framework
it adopts herein.

A. Licensing Framework

 14. The Commission adopts a two-step non-Federal licensing
framework under which a non-Federal entity seeking to operate in the
Lower 37 GHz band first obtains a nationwide non-exclusive license
covering all the frequencies in the Lower 37 GHz band, and then applies
for site-based registrations. Nationwide non-exclusive licenses best
serve the public interest based on this band's specific characteristics
(including propagation), and the characteristics of the contemplated
technologies and use

[[Page 24752]]

cases.\2\ The Commission also notes that, given the characteristics of
the Lower 37 GHz band and services, a nationwide, non-exclusive
approach will serve the public interest by permitting a range of users
to obtain a license and explore the opportunities the band provides.
The straightforward approach offers would-be entrants operational
flexibility by requiring them to provide site-specific information only
after sites are successfully coordinated and registered. There is no
limit on the number of non-exclusive nationwide licenses that may be
granted for Lower 37 GHz, as these licenses serve only as a
prerequisite for coordinating and registering individual point-to-point
links and base stations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \2\ The Commission notes that it also has proposed and adopted
similar nationwide non-exclusive licensing regimes in other spectrum
bands based on the factors presented in those proceedings. See,
e.g., Allocations and Service Rules for the 71-76 GHz, 81-86 GHz and
92-95 GHz Bands et al., WT Docket No. 02-146, RM-10288, Report and
Order, 18 FCC Rcd 23318 (2003) (69 FR 3257); Allocation of Spectrum
for Non-Federal Space Launch Operations et al., ET Docket No. 13-
115, RM-11341, Second Report and Order and Second Further Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking, 38 FCC Rcd 9029, 9053-58 paras. 66-77 (2023)
(89 FR 63296 and 88 FR 6488); Wireless Operations in the 3650-3700
MHz Band et al., ET Docket No. 04-151 et al., Report and Order and
Memorandum Opinion and Order, 20 FCC Rcd 6502, 6512-13 paras. 25-27
(2005) (70 FR 24712).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 15. The Commission declines to reconsider adoption of a geographic
area licensing regime, as some commenters have recommended. The
Commission previously rejected the use of geographic area licensing in
the Lower 37 GHz band, and revisiting the Commission's framework for
sharing the 37 GHz band would delay the ability to bring this spectrum
to market expeditiously.
 16. The Commission also rejects the ``Property Zone'' license area
concept proposed by Intel and Cisco, because the Commission finds that
adopting a special category of license is unnecessary. As proposed by
Intel and Cisco, a Property Zone license would be a form of geographic
area license issued to a property owner and defined by the boundary of
the real property in question. As Intel and Cisco state, ``under the
rules already adopted, a real property owner would be able to register
and operate a site defined by its property boundary even if the
[Property Zone] license category did not exist.'' The Commission
agrees. The Commission disagrees with Intel and Cisco, however, that
the creation of Property Zone licenses ``has advantages in the
operational efficiency of the sharing framework.'' On the contrary, the
Commission finds that the simplified licensing framework the Commission
adopts allow property owners to register their operations using the
same straightforward framework as every other non-Federal licensee in
the Lower 37 GHz band.

B. Coordination Process

 17. Background. In the 2016 FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on
the most appropriate coordination mechanism for the Lower 37 GHz band.
In 2018, the Commission noted that the Lower 37 GHz band would
accommodate a variety of use cases and sought comment on utilizing a
third-party coordinator or, alternatively, implementing a coordination
model similar to that used in part 101 point-to-point bands.
 18. Commenters on the 2016 FNPRM and 2018 FNPRM largely do not
discuss or propose any coordination mechanisms or specific parameters.
Several commenters suggest the Commission base its rules on those
adopted for the 71-76 GHz and 81-86 GHz bands (70/80 GHz band). Other
commenters propose that indoor use be authorized on a licensed-by-rule
basis.
 19. In 2020 the Commission began collaborating with NTIA and DoD to
further define and develop a possible coordination mechanism that would
permit the innovative type of Federal/non-Federal spectrum sharing
envisioned for the Lower 37 GHz band. These conversations focused on
balancing the desire to make this spectrum available expeditiously for
deployment with the need to protect both Federal and non-Federal
operations in the band from harmful interference. In the 2024 Public
Notice, WTB described this potential coordination mechanism, including
the technical details of its interference analysis. This two-phase
framework was developed to ensure meaningful access to spectrum by
later entrants, including Federal entrants, while also ensuring
adequate protection from harmful interference for the operations of
incumbents and earlier applicants, and the ability to register and
deploy sites quickly and efficiently.
 20. The Commission received a range of comments discussing this
coordination mechanism. One group of commenters supports the Phase One/
Phase Two approach described in the 2024 Public Notice, while another
group favors the use of a dynamic spectrum management system (DSMS).
Some commenters suggest that the coordination mechanism would benefit
from further development, specifically by or in conjunction with
commercial entities. Multiple commenters suggest specific requirements
for Phase Two coordination with Federal entities, including a shot
clock or specific requirements on information disclosure.
 21. Discussion. The Commission adopts a two-phase coordination
framework, as described in the 2024 Public Notice. This framework will
allow coordination to proceed efficiently while maintaining
interference protection for previously registered sites.
 22. In the first phase of coordination, licensees will use certain
technical parameters of their proposed site registration to generate an
interference contour for the proposed site.\3\ For a point-to-point
link, the parameters will include transmitter location (latitude and
longitude), equivalent isotropic radiated power (EIRP), transmitter
antenna height, receiver antenna height, and antenna azimuth angle. A
point-to-multipoint or base-to-mobile site will also require submitting
these parameters except for receiver antenna height and antenna azimuth
angle. The applicant will use the required parameters, together with a
propagation model that takes into account propagation loss due to
terrain, to generate an interference contour for the proposed site. It
will then compare its contour with the contours of non-Federal sites
that previously have been registered in the database designated by WTB
and Federal sites that have previously been authorized by NTIA. If this
interference contour does not overlap with the contour for any
previously registered site, then coordination is successful, and the
licensee may proceed to register its proposed site, pursuant to
procedures to be established by WTB. Further, the Commission
anticipates that third party coordinators might offer services to
licensees that draw these contours and compare for overlap with
incumbent operator areas. Nonetheless, the Commission recognizes that
the development of a portal that would automate the creation and
comparison of Phase One contours could be useful to licensees, and the
Commission directs FCC staff to collaborate with NTIA staff on the
development of such a portal.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \3\ As noted in the DoD/NTIA Report: ``NTIA will implement the
database for coordination between Federal and non-Federal systems,
as it does now for the 70/80/90 GHz coordination portal.''
Additional implementation details about this process will be
provided.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 23. If the first phase of coordination indicates an overlap between
the interference contours of the proposed site and a previously
registered site or authorized non-Federal site, then coordination is
not yet successful, and will proceed instead to Phase Two

[[Page 24753]]

coordination. In this phase, the licensee of the proposed site will
directly contact the operator(s) of the existing site(s). Non-Federal
operators' contact information will available to the public pursuant to
procedures to be established by WTB; Federal operators' contact
information will be provided by NTIA. The licensee of the proposed site
will provide additional technical details of the site to the other
operators. Under the rules the Commission adopts herein, non-Federal
operators will have fifteen business days to respond with the technical
details of their existing sites. The subsequent Phase Two coordination
discussions would then explore whether and under what circumstances a
placement inside the relevant interference contours might be feasible,
such as with the use of more advanced interference mitigation
techniques including antenna directivity, polarization, or shielding.
Operators, including Federal operators and the licensee of the
prospective site, will negotiate and cooperate in good faith to
determine whether coexistence would be possible. The Commission
anticipates that operators will work expeditiously to identify
solutions for co-existence. If the operators reach an agreement, then
coordination is successful and the licensee may register the
prospective site pursuant to procedures to be established by WTB.
 24. Though the Commission does not find it necessary at this time
to mandate the use of a third-party coordinator or database
administrator, as requested by Comsearch and NCTA, it does emphasize
that, under the coordination mechanism adopted herein, applicants have
the flexibility to use a third-party coordinator for any of the Phase
One and Phase Two functions. Ultimately, in order to preserve
interference protection for site-specific locations, licensees must
ensure that these locations are registered pursuant to procedures to be
established by WTB.
 25. A dispute resolution process will be established to resolve
disputes that arise during the coordination process. In the case of a
dispute between non-Federal entities, this process will be overseen by
the Commission; disputes between non-Federal and Federal entities will
be overseen jointly by the Commission and NTIA.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \4\ DoD and NTIA explain that they expect that Federal or non-
Federal entities operating or seeking to operate in the Lower 37 GHz
band ``may request that NTIA and FCC establish a process to resolve
the dispute'' and propose that ``NTIA and the FCC will initiate the
dispute resolution process within 30 days'' after receiving a
written request for assistance and the requested technical data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 26. The Commission directs WTB to work with NTIA and relevant
Federal agencies to work out the details of how the coordination
process, including the dispute resolution process, will be implemented,
consistent with the rules and principles adopted herein. The Commission
also directs WTB to provide licensees with appropriate notifications
and instructions concerning the coordination process.
 27. The Commission acknowledges the suggestions of some commenters
that a DSMS could provide a more efficient solution for spectrum
sharing in this band. However, at this time the record does not support
one specific DSMS model nor identify the parameters that would be
required to implement a DSMS. In the interest of moving expeditiously
toward deployment in this band, the Commission adopts the Phase One/
Phase Two framework for which the Commission have established technical
parameters and which the Commission are confident will be sufficient to
protect Federal and non-Federal operations. In addition, as some
commenters note, adoption of this approach does not necessarily
foreclose the later adoption of a DSMS. By registering a site,
licensees are not granted a right to exclude others from their
registration area but are protected against actual interference by
later-registered sites. Therefore, a DSMS would potentially be
compatible with existing deployments and registrations in the band, and
the Commission seeks comment elsewhere on whether to pursue this
approach in the future.
 28. Additional Coordination Requirement for Operations in 37.5-37.6
GHz. The 37.5-37.6 GHz sub-band is shared with the Fixed-Satellite
Service. Licensees seeking to operate in the 37.5-37.6 GHz portion of
the band must therefore also obtain the consent of licensees of co-
channel Fixed-Satellite Service earth stations before registering site-
specific locations located within the protection zone established under
Sec. 25.136(b) and (c) of the Commission's rules.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \5\ To avoid confusion, the Commission provides an explanation
of how this will work in practice: New terrestrial operations will
have to avoid any existing exclusion zone established around an
already licensed earth station or coordinate with the earth station
operator to be within the zone. Applicants for new earth stations
will be required to coordinate with already existing terrestrial
operations within the zone pursuant to 47 CFR 25.136. If a new earth
station is licensed, then future terrestrial operations will be
precluded from the exclusion zone absent successful coordination
with the earth station.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 29. Indoor-Only GAA Operations. The Commission declines to allow
indoor-only operations on an uncoordinated or General Authorized Access
(GAA) basis, as proposed by the Digital Services Act (DSA) and New
America/Open Technology Institute (OTI). While certain building
materials effectively block millimeter wave signals, that is not true
for certain types of glass or other materials. Given the wide variety
of operations that may co-exist in the Lower 37 GHz band, the
Commission believe that it is prudent for all proposed operations to
coordinate and register their operations.

C. Interference Protection Criteria

 30. As noted above, in the 2016 Order the Commission adopted the
same technical rules for the Lower 37 GHz band and the Upper 37 GHz
band. Currently, the Commission's rules apply the same field strength
limits throughout the 28 GHz, 37 GHz, and 39 GHz bands, including in
the Lower 37 GHz band. Licensees may not exceed a power flux density
(PFD) level of -76 dBm/m\2\/MHz at the geographical border of their
license area, unless the adjacent affected service area licensee agrees
to a different PFD.
 31. The site registration scheme the Commission adopts herein
defines registered sites by calculation from the specifics of the
site's transmitter and the surrounding terrain, rather than using a
defined geographic area or radius. Accordingly, the field strength
limit in Sec. 30.204 will be inapplicable to sites in the Lower 37 GHz
band, and the Commission amends that rule to exclude the Lower 37 GHz
band.
 32. Instead of a market boundary limit, the coordination mechanism
the Commission adopt for this band requires a coordination trigger: the
field strength level at which the interference contour is set. Appendix
A to the 2024 Public Notice specified the coordination trigger as a
power spectral density threshold (PSDT) of -110 dBm/100 MHz. Ericsson
supports this coordination trigger, while NCTA opposes it as too
conservative, especially given that the proposed propagation model does
not incorporate clutter or the highly focused nature of the
transmission beams in this band. While this is a more conservative
threshold than the market boundary limit discussed above, it is
appropriate here given its different function; deployments within this
contour are not precluded, but instead require further coordination.
Accordingly, the Commission adopts a coordination trigger of a power
spectral density threshold (PSDT) of -110 dBm/100 MHz for the purposes
of the Phase One coordination mechanism in this band.

[[Page 24754]]

 33. Regarding clutter, the Commission notes that it can make a
significant difference in interference potential and can make
propagation modeling substantially more accurate and allow for more
intensive use of the band. At this time, the Commission does not have a
sufficient record to incorporate clutter into the Phase One
calculations. The Commission separately seeks to develop a record that
would allow it to incorporate clutter into the Phase One calculations.
 34. Some commenters have raised the issue of adjacent channel
interference between Upper 37 GHz and Lower 37 GHz licensees in the top
100 MHz channel of the Lower 37 GHz band (37.5-37.6 GHz). This concern
is addressed by the out-of-band emission limits already present in the
Commission's rules, which apply to licensees in all Upper Microwave
Flexible Use Service (UMFUS) bands, including the Lower 37 GHz band.
The interference potential between stations in the Lower 37 GHz band
and adjacent channel stations in the Upper 37 GHz band is no greater
than the existing interference potential between adjacent channel
stations within the Upper 37 GHz band. Because the Commission's part 30
rules already address this issue, the Commission do not adopt any
further limits or restrictions for the Lower 37 GHz band specifically.

D. Site Registration

 35. An operator seeking to register sites for non-Federal
operations must first obtain a non-exclusive nationwide license, and
then successfully coordinate each proposed site with all relevant
Federal and non-Federal incumbent operators. After completing those
steps, a licensee must register individual site locations. Verizon,
Ericsson, and NCTA support the site registration requirement.
Registration should provide all required technical information on the
proposed operations and sufficient evidence of successful coordination,
such as a ``green light'' result from a third-party coordinator. The
specific requirements for registration applications, and the dates of
the initial registration filing window, will be announced by WTB in a
future public notice.
 36. The Commission proposed to allow point-to-point and point-
radius site registrations. The Commission adopt this proposal in a
modified form. Point-to-point and point-to-multipoint site
registrations will both be accepted; however, point-to-multipoint sites
will not be associated with a specified radius, which in the
Commission's previous proposal functioned as a type of exclusion zone.
Instead, all sites will have an associated interference contour that
will be used in the coordination process but not separately represented
in the database of record, although it may be calculated based on the
parameters available in a site's entry in the database. Point-to-
multipoint user stations at fixed locations, deployed in conjunction
with a registered base station site and transmitting at or under the
+75 dBm/100 MHz EIRP limit applicable to fixed stations, need not be
individually coordinated, but may operate under the coordination of the
base station(s) they are communicating with.
 37. The Commission declines to adopt its proposal to implement
site-cluster licenses. Without any support in the record for this
proposal, the Commission finds that site-cluster licenses are not
necessary to promote the efficient deployment of the Lower 37 GHz band.
Licensees may still deploy networks by individually registering
multiple sites to create a network.
 38. Initial Site Registration Round. Following the application
window for nationwide licenses, WTB will open an initial window for
site registrations (``initial site registration round''). Because there
will be no non-Federal UMFUS operations in the band when this initial
window is opened, licensees will not be required to coordinate with
other UMFUS licensees prior to filing registrations during this initial
site registration round only, though they will need to coordinate with
Federal operators through procedures to be developed by NTIA and the
Commission and subsequently announced. Site registrations will be
processed in order of receipt unless a later-filed registrant provides
evidence that it completed coordination prior to the other registrant.
Using a first-in-time approach will simplify processing of
registrations and help eliminate the possibility of mutually exclusive
registrations. Priority will be awarded to site registrations on a
first-in-time basis, according to the timestamp on the complete,
accepted site registration application. Later-filed applications that
conflict with priority registrations will be dismissed without
prejudice and may be refiled after coordinating with existing
registrants. After registrations in the initial site registration round
are processed, registrations will be accepted on an ongoing basis,
subject to compliance with the coordination rules.
 39. Additional Steps Towards Implementation of the Licensing
Framework. As noted in various sections above, there are a number of
actions that will be taken before the initial registration round will
begin. WTB will develop procedures for filing applications for
nationwide non-exclusive licenses and will announce these procedures in
a Public Notice that establishes the application filing window. WTB
also will determine the appropriate procedures for registering non-
Federal sites, taking into account determinations that NTIA will make
about how information about Federal sites will be made available to
Commission licensees, and systems work will be done to make information
available. WTB and NTIA will work together to develop additional
coordination procedures, including a dispute resolution process, after
required or appropriate notice and comment, consistent with the rules
and principles adopted herein. Guidance regarding the coordination
process and registration procedures will be announced by WTB in a
Public Notice that establishes the filing window for site
registrations. Entities that wish to begin operations prior to the
establishment of the site registration window may apply for temporary
authority, on a non-interference basis, through the Commission's
established procedures; the Commission expects that such authority will
terminate prior to the initial site registration round. The Commission
will elsewhere consider additional issues regarding potential changes
in the unwanted emission limit for mobile stations in the Lower 37 GHz
band, possible improvements in the Phase One coordination process, and
potential paths towards DSMS. Licensees that initiate service in the
band will be subject to any future rule changes.

E. Priority for Military Systems in the 37-37.2 GHz Band

 40. Background. Although the Lower 37 GHz band will be a co-
primary, shared use band among Federal and non-Federal users, the
Commission is cognizant that military deployments are often on longer
timescales than commercial deployments, and consequently that these
military deployments may require priority access to ensure they are not
precluded from accessing the band. At the same time, the Commission
recognizes that non-Federal deployment under certain conditions may be
necessary to prevent any such priority access spectrum from being
underutilized. As such, the 2024 Public Notice sought input on
implementing priority access for the DoD and military agencies in the
lower 200 megahertz portion of the band (37-37.2 GHz) and sought input
on the conditions under which non-Federal

[[Page 24755]]

users could operate in this portion of the band while maintaining
flexibility for military deployments Specifically, the 2024 Public
Notice sought input on allowing non-Federal users to register and
deploy sites in the 37-37.2 GHz portion of the band immediately,
subject to the conditions that they modify or cease operations in the
future if those operations conflict with subsequent military
deployments--and that non-Federal operators would not be protected from
harmful interference from subsequent military deployments.
 41. No commenters in response to the 2024 Public Notice oppose
reserving the lower 200 megahertz of the band for priority access for
the DoD and military agencies, so long as the Commission allow non-
Federal operations in the lower 200 megahertz segment in areas where
DoD is not using the spectrum. Ericsson, however, urges the Commission
to limit Federal priority access to outdoor operations only, arguing
that the anticipated non-Federal indoor operations use cases are
unlikely to pose interference to Federal operations and should be
coordinated and protected on a first-come, first-served basis. NCTA
argues that under its alternative coordination mechanism priority
access would not be necessary. If, however, the Commission was to adopt
the proposed two-phase coordination mechanism, NCTA acknowledges that
priority access may be reasonable. All commenters oppose the lower 200
megahertz being set aside exclusively for military operations, instead
preferring that non-Federal operations be permitted to operate in the
lower portion of the band subject to the condition that they modify or
potentially cease operations if the non-Federal operations conflict
with military operations that are subsequently deployed.
 42. Discussion. The Commission adopts priority access for Federal
military operations in the 37-37.2 GHz sub-band. The Commission
believes that establishing priority access strikes the right balance
between enabling military operations to deploy in the band despite
having longer timescales than non-Federal operations and permitting
non-Federal operations to make the most efficient use of the spectrum.
Non-Federal operators can register and deploy sites immediately in the
lower 200 megahertz, but must modify or cease operations in the future
if those operations conflict with subsequent military operations, and
non-Federal operators will not be protected from harmful interference
from subsequent military deployments in this portion of the band. The
Commission rejects Ericsson's suggestion to limit priority access to
outdoor operations on the grounds that, as discussed above, the
Commission is not excepting indoor operations.
 43. In the DoD/NTIA Report, DoD and NTIA describe when and how they
would invoke priority access and the anticipated process for resolving
potential interference concerns. DoD and NTIA envision invoking
priority access when the incoming military operations' Phase One
conduit's overlap with deployed non-Federal operations in the 37-37.2
GHz portion of the band. Once priority access is invoked, DoD and NTIA
recommend that DoD would subsequently work in good faith with the non-
Federal operator over a set time period (i.e., 30 days) to resolve the
interference concerns. In that regard, the DoD/NTIA Report recommends
that the [non-Federal] operator either modify its service to be
consistent with DoD operations or shut down if coexistence is not
possible. Upon notification that DoD is beginning construction of its
facilities, the non-Federal operator must modify or cease any
overlapping operations. One of the rules adopted in this item imposes
that requirement. DoD and NTIA support a limited transition period of
compliance for non-Federal incumbents following this notification. The
decision whether to allow a transition period in a particular case is
within the discretion of DoD.

F. Construction Requirements

 44. Background. To prevent warehousing of spectrum and to promote
rapid deployment of new technologies and services to the benefit of
consumers, the Commission adopts buildout requirements as discussed
below. In the 2024 Public Notice, WTB sought input on adopting buildout
requirements that would require non-Federal operators to finish
construction and begin operation within 120 days of the date the site
registration is granted, or the registration would be cancelled, and
the licensee would forfeit its interference protection priority.
 45. Two commenters to the 2024 Public Notice address the
Commission's 120-day buildout proposal. NCTA cautions that finishing
construction within 120 days will be onerous in many circumstances,
while Verizon argues that Federal and non-Federal operators should be
subject to the same 120-day buildout deadline to ensure that both
deploy promptly and make efficient use of the band. In the DoD/NTIA
Report, DoD and NTIA contend that a disparity between Federal and non-
Federal operators' buildout requirements is appropriate ``in order to
account for Congressional appropriations and acquisitions timelines
that are typical of Federal operations.'' They further indicate that
``NTIA intends to target Federal operations to complete construction
and begin operations within 24-months of clearing a proposed site
through the coordination process.''
 46. Discussion. The Commission adopts a two-phase construction
requirement, which consists of an accelerated timeframe for the initial
site registration round and a different timeframe for subsequent site
registrations. As explained below, in the initial site registration
round the Commission adopts an accelerated buildout deadline of 120
days from when the registration is granted to combat the heightened
risk among early entrants of speculative registrations, spectrum
warehousing, and the possibility of crowding out later entrants. An
operator that registers its site after the initial site registration
round must construct and start its registered operations within 12
months of the date the registration is granted for that site. Although
NTIA indicates that it is targeting a 24-month buildout deadline for
Federal operators, and Verizon argues that Federal and non-Federal
operators should be subject to the same buildout requirements, the
Commission declines to adopt a 24-month deadline for non-Federal
operators merely for the sake of uniformity. The Commission believes
that its twin goals of preventing spectrum warehousing and promoting
widespread deployment are best met by applying the more stringent 12-
month buildout deadline for non-Federal operators. The buildout clock
will start as soon as a registration is granted in the Universal
Licensing System (ULS). Although first-in-time rights will be afforded
once a site is successfully coordinated and registered, they will be
lost if facilities are not built out. Failure to meet the construction
deadline will result in the forfeiture of first-in-time protection and
result in automatic termination of the registration. The licensee will
also be prohibited from filing new site registration applications for
that site (or any site whose interference contour would overlap with
the interference contour for the terminated registration) for 12 months
from the date the registration automatically terminated (i.e., a period
of 12 months after the construction deadline).

G. Initial Site Registration Round

 47. Background. Due to the limited number of channels in the Lower
37

[[Page 24756]]

GHz band, the variety of anticipated use cases, and the fact that both
Federal and non-Federal operators can deploy in the band, initial
demand for the band may exceed the available supply of channels in some
areas. There is a risk that operators may be incentivized to file a
large number of registrations as soon as site registration becomes
available. In order to avoid speculative registrations and to ensure
future entrants are not precluded from accessing the band, the 2024
Public Notice sought input on applying special rules to the initial
site registration round. Specifically, the 2024 Public Notice sought
input on limiting applicants to a single 100-megahertz channel per
site, establishing accelerated buildout deadlines (e.g., 60 or 90
days), and reserving the right for the Commission to grant an applicant
a different 100-megahertz channel in the event that multiple applicants
seek to register the same channel.
 48. All commenters addressing the issue oppose limiting applicants
in the initial site registration round to a single 100-megahertz
channel. Starry and INCOMPAS argue that they require at least 200
megahertz of spectrum to provide quality service. NCTA, Federated
Wireless, and Joint Commenters, on the other hand, argue that
applicants should be permitted to register multiple 100-megahertz
channels per site, but only the first 100-megahertz channel should
receive first-in-time prioritization. NCTA explains that limiting
operators to a single 100-megahertz channel is ``inefficient and will
leave channels in many areas unused.'' Joint Commenters adds that
spectrum should be put to use in the present rather than reserved for
some unknown future user and that Federal access to the band in the
future is already preserved through priority access rules. INCOMPAS
suggests a similar arrangement where an applicant would be permitted to
register multiple 200-megahertz channels per site, but only the first
200-megahertz channel would receive first-in-time prioritization.
 49. With respect to an accelerated buildout deadline in the initial
site registration round, Starry supports establishing such a time
period, while NCTA does not. Starry suggests, however, that a window
longer than 90 days is necessary. NCTA argues that a shorter deadline
than the proposed 120-day buildout deadline should not be necessary in
the initial site registration round, particularly if applicants are
entitled to first-in-time priority only in a single channel. Verizon
urges that any accelerated deadlines should apply to both Federal and
non-Federal operations to ensure all operators deploy promptly and do
not delay construction. Lastly, regarding the Commission reserving the
right to grant a channel different than the one the applicant
requested, Verizon agrees that the Commission should reserve the right
to do so, particularly if it facilitates spectrum contiguity while CTIA
asks for additional detail around how the Commission would resolve
situations where mutually exclusive applications are filed
simultaneously beyond offering an alternate 100-megahertz channel and
what the Commission would do if there is not an alternate channel
available.
 50. Discussion. In order to better facilitate access to the band in
the initial site registration round, the Commission adopts a 200-
megahertz (two 100-megahertz channels) limit per site and an
accelerated buildout deadline of 120 days. The Commission declines to
adopt the approach suggested by NCTA, Federated Wireless, Joint
Commenters, and INCOMPAS in response to the 2024 Public Notice (wherein
operators would be permitted to register multiple channels, but only
the first registered channel would receive first-in-time protections).
The Commission finds that assigning different rights to channels in the
initial site registration round will unnecessarily complicate the
registration and coordination process. Moreover, permitting operators
to register up to 200 megahertz of spectrum as opposed to 100 megahertz
should facilitate the ability of applicants to acquire sufficient
spectrum to deploy their operations while ensuring the spectrum is put
to use to protect later entrants' access to the band. Further, in order
to streamline the process, in the initial site registration round. The
Commission will process applications in sequence based on the time
stamp indicating when the application was filed, and will consider
applications only for the specific frequency requested. Giving first-
in-time rights to the earlier-filed applications will prevent any
mutual exclusivity concerns, such as those raised by CTIA. The
Commission also declines to extend the initial site registration round
buildout deadline beyond 120 days because if operators cannot meet the
stringent initial buildout deadline, they can register their sites
after the initial site registration round. The accelerated buildout
deadline is designed to limit the initial number of registrations and
prevent spectrum warehousing by ensuring only operators who are ready
to construct and commence operations right away are incentivized to
register a site. Finally, the Commission reserves the right to assign a
different channel to an applicant than the channel requested in the
application. The Commission agrees with Verizon that allowing such a
change could facilitate the benefits of spectrum contiguity.
