FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Spectrum Rules and Policies for the Operation of Unmanned Aircraft Systems
Document number: 2024-29967
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
Federal Register citation: 90 FR 1380
Publication date: 2025-01-08

Federal Register, Volume 90 Issue 5 (Wednesday, January 8, 2025)


[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 5 (Wednesday, January 8, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 1380-1400]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-29967]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 0, 1, 2, 87, 88 and 95

[WT Docket No. 22-323; FCC 24-91; FR ID 255475]


Spectrum Rules and Policies for the Operation of Unmanned
Aircraft Systems

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC
or Commission) enables Uncrewed Aircraft System (UAS) operators to
access dedicated spectrum for control-related communications.
Specifically, this

[[Page 1381]]

document adopts service rules under new rule part 88 that provide
operators the ability to obtain direct frequency assignments in a
portion of the 5030-5091 MHz band for non-networked operation. Under
these rules, one or more dynamic frequency management systems (DFMSs)
will manage and coordinate access to the spectrum and enable its safe
and efficient use, by providing requesting operators with temporary
frequency assignments to support UAS control link communications with a
level of reliability suitable for operations in controlled airspace and
other safety-critical circumstances. To address concerns regarding the
impact of these aeronautical operations on adjacent services, this
document locates these operations, for now, in the central part of the
band, with substantial separation from the bands adjacent to the 5030-
5091 MHz band.

DATES: The rules are effective February 7, 2025, except for Sec. Sec.
88.27, 88.31, 88.33, 88.35, 88.111, 88.113, 88.115, 88.135, 88.137, and
88.141, which are delayed. The Federal Communications Commission will
publish a document in the Federal Register announcing the effective
date. The incorporation by reference of material listed in Sec. 88.117
is approved by the Director of the Federal Register as of February 7,
2025.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, contact Peter Trachtenberg of the Mobility Division,
Wireless Telecommunications Bureau, at [email protected] or
(202) 418-7369. For information regarding the Paperwork Reduction Act
of 1995 (PRA) information collection requirements contained in this
document, contact Cathy Williams, Office of Managing Director, at (202)
418-2918 or [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order in WT Docket No. 22-323; FCC 24-91, adopted on August 21,
2024, and released on August 29, 2024. The full text of this document
is available for public inspection online at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-91A1.pdf . To request materials in accessible
formats for people with disabilities (braille, large print, electronic
files, audio format), send an email to [email protected] or call the
Consumer & Governmental Affairs Bureau at 202-418-0530 (voice), 202-
418-0432 (TTY).

Synopsis

 Achieving the extraordinary potential of UAS technology will
require integrating UAS operations into the National Airspace System
(NAS), including in the controlled airspace in which commercial
passenger flights operate and in circumstances with heightened risk,
such as flights involving large aircraft or carrying passengers or
flights beyond line of sight of the remote pilot. To ensure that these
flights are sufficiently safe for routine operation, highly reliable
wireless two-way communications for flight control and telemetry are
required. In a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, WT Docket No. 22-323, FCC
22-101, 88 FR 7910 (February 7, 2023) (UAS NPRM), the Commission
proposed rules for the 5030-5091 MHz band to help address these
spectrum needs.

Background

 In the Report and Order, the Commission now takes an initial step
to enable UAS operators to access dedicated spectrum in the 5030-5091
MHz band for control-related communications with the required
reliability. Specifically, the Commission adopts new UAS service rules
under new rule part 88 that provide operators the ability to obtain
direct frequency assignments in a portion of the 5030-5091 MHz band for
non-networked operation. The Commission finds wide support for enabling
early, direct access to a portion of the band for protected assignments
under DFMS coordination, and anticipates that such access will
facilitate the safe integration of UAS operations into the NAS so that
the United States can realize the enormous potential benefits that UAS
operations can provide.

Discussion

A. Non-Networked Access (NNA) Service Rules

1. Definitions and Designation of Sub-Band for NNA Operations
 In the UAS NPRM, the Commission proposed to adopt certain band and
service rule definitions, including definitions for unmanned aircraft
systems and unmanned aircraft, as well as other terms, including non-
networked access operations, and control and non-payload
communications. Noting consistency with FAA definitions, the Commission
proposed to define an unmanned aircraft system as ``an unmanned
aircraft (UA) and its associated elements (including communication
links and the components that control the UA) that are required for the
safe and efficient operation of the UA in the airspace of the United
States,'' and an unmanned aircraft as ``an aircraft operated without
the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the
aircraft.'' The Commission adopts these definitions as proposed, but
finds it in the public interest to revise the terminology. It finds
that the term ``uncrewed'' is more inclusive and could better reflect
future use cases for the spectrum, such as uncrewed passenger flights,
and thus find that it is appropriate to substitute ``uncrewed'' in
place of ``unmanned.'' Specifically, it adopts the use of ``uncrewed
aircraft system'' and ``uncrewed aircraft'' in place of ``unmanned
aircraft system'' and ``unmanned aircraft,'' respectively.
 In the UAS NPRM, the Commission also identified two broad use cases
for determining the appropriate band plan and service rules: non-
networked operations, or those communications occurring within radio
line of sight, and network-supported services, which rely on network
infrastructure to go beyond radio line of sight of the operator. The
Commission proposed establishing the term Non-Networked Access (NNA) to
``indicate spectrum or licenses (e.g., NNA blocks) that would be
governed by service rules appropriate to support non-networked
communications.'' The UAS NPRM further proposed the use of ``Network-
Supported Services'' (NSS) to indicate that the relevant spectrum or
licenses would be governed by service rules appropriate to support the
provision of networked-based services. The Commission also proposed to
use NNA and NSS in the rules to designate the spectrum allocated for
non-networked and network-supported use cases, respectively. In the
Report and Order, the Commission adopts the NNA and NSS terms as
discussed above.
 NNA Block Configuration. Although the Commission finds that it is
premature to establish a permanent band plan in light of continuing
developments and evolution of the industry, there is sufficient record
support and basis to establish rules to allow early access for non-
networked, direct link operations without compromising any future
action the Commission may take with respect to UAS operations in the
5030-5091 MHz band. The Commission thus establishes a temporary
placement for NNA operation--with a permanent band plan, including
final locations for NNA and NSS as well as potential provisions for
opportunistic use by NNA users or NSS licensees, to be resolved in the
future.
 Specifically, the Commission allots 10 megahertz for near-term NNA
access. The Commission finds that, until it makes a determination
regarding a permanent band plan, it is appropriate

[[Page 1382]]

to locate the 10 megahertz NNA block at 5040-5050 MHz. As discussed
below, the Commission is adopting an interim access mechanism (IAM) to
enable NNA entities to begin operations in the band during the interim
period before a DFMS is operational. Because it will be challenging to
effectively manage and coordinate operator use of the NNA spectrum
during this period, the Commission will allow access to additional
spectrum beyond the 10 megahertz to facilitate the management and
deconfliction of NNA operations during this period. Accordingly, during
the IAM period, NNA entities may access to 20 megahertz of the band, at
5040-5060 MHz. The Wireless Telecommunications Bureau (WTB) will
announce the dates operators may begin to access the NNA block using
the IAM process, as well as the date on which a DFMS becomes
operational and the IAM period ends. Once a DFMS becomes operational,
the NNA operations will be limited to the 10 megahertz at 5040-5050
MHz.
2. Scope of Permissible Uses
 The Commission limits the scope of NNA communications in the 5030-
5091 MHz band to Control and Non-payload Communications (CNPC), defined
as any transmission that is sent between the UA component and the UAS
ground station of the UAS and that supports the safety or regularity of
the UA's flight. This approach is in the public interest and is well-
supported by the record.
 Mobile and fixed NNA operations. The Commission provides that the
use of both fixed and mobile ground stations for NNA operations is
permissible so long as they are not in motion during operation and
operations are limited to the location associated with the specific
frequency assignment. The adopted NNA rules do not set specific limits
as to the use of multiple fixed stations to achieve a single NNA
operation, and multi-station operations, whether involving multiple
connected or non-connected stations, are permitted by the NNA rules.
Thus, UAS operators might choose to access NNA spectrum using limited
infrastructure deployment, such as a string of ground stations deployed
over a particular and frequently used flight path.
3. Licensing Stations by Rule
 The Commission adopts licensing-by-rule for both NNA ground and
aircraft stations, pursuant to section 307(e) of the Act, as amended.
See 47 U.S.C. 307(e). Section 307(e)(1) limits the Commission's
authority to adopt a license-by-rule approach to certain specific
categories of service, including the ``citizens band radio service.''
Section 307(e)(3) in turn provides that ``citizens band radio service''
shall have the meaning given to it by the Commission by rule. As
defined in the Commission's rules, the ``citizens band radio service''
encompasses ``any radio service or other specific classification of
radio stations used primarily for wireless telecommunications for which
the FCC has determined that it serves the public interest, convenience,
and necessity to authorize by rule the operation of radio stations in
that service or class, without individual licenses, pursuant to 47
U.S.C. 307(e)(1).'' The Commission finds that licensing NNA stations by
rule will serve the public interest, convenience, and necessity.
 Under the license-by-rule framework, to obtain Commission
authorization to use the NNA spectrum, NNA users must use certified,
Commission-approved NNA stations, and comply with the applicable NNA
rules, but need not obtain individual spectrum licenses from the
Commission. Because a license-by-rule approach will serve the public
interest, convenience, and necessity, NNA stations are appropriately
classified as part of the citizens band radio services. This
classification reflects only the Commission's determination that the
NNA service should be licensed by rule as the Commission has used that
construct pursuant to its section 307(e)(1) authority, and not a
determination that it should be more generally be regulated in similar
fashion to other services that are classified under the citizens band
radio services category, such as those in part 95 or part 96 of the
Commission's rules.
4. Eligibility
 Given the limited discussion of the issues raised by foreign
ownership of stations in a license-by-rule service, the Commission is
guided by the approach that it took in the 3.5 GHz Citizens Broadband
Radio Service (CBRS) rules to eligibility for users of CBRS General
Authorized Access (GAA) stations, which, like NNA stations, are
licensed by rule. In relevant part, section 96.5 of the Commission's
rules establishes that any entity, other than those precluded by
section 310, that otherwise meets the technical, financial, character,
and citizenship qualifications that the Commission may require in
accordance with such Act, is eligible to be a General Authorized Access
(GAA) user. The Commission finds that it will serve the public interest
to adopt a similar eligibility rule for NNA users.
5. Creation of a New Part 88
 The Commission will include UAS-related rules for the 5030-5091 MHz
band in a single rule part and place such rules in a new part 88,
rather than placing the new rules in part 87. Establishing a new part
88 will promote ``clarity and ease of reference'' regarding the rules
applicable to UAS operations in the 5030-5091 MHz band. The Commission
also makes the new part 88 subject to rules under part 1, subpart F of
the Commission's rules governing ``Wireless Radio Service''
applications and proceedings.
6. Technical Requirements
 The RTCA DO-362A Standard. The Commission finds it in the public
interest to incorporate by reference the standard RTCA, Command and
Control (C2) Data Link Minimum Operational Performance Standards (MOPS)
(Terrestrial), RTCA-DO-362A (2020) (RTCA DO-362A) and to adopt certain
technical requirements in our new UAS rules based on this standard.
Taking this approach is appropriate at this time, particularly given
today's incremental steps toward facilitating UAS operations, which
provides a path in the 5030-5091 MHz band for authorization of NNA
equipment and operations through shared use, while deferring for
further consideration and study potential approaches to exclusive
licensing for NSS operations.
 The Commission will incorporate by reference into its technical
rules the specific sections of the RTCA DO-362A standard applicable to
transmitter output power, emissions bandwidth, out-of-band emission
limits, emission mask and time division duplexing. To provide
stakeholders increased flexibility, and in lieu of mandating use of
specific emission designators, an applicant seeking equipment
certification may specify the emission designator appropriate to its
equipment design and proposed operation, provided it meets the
technical requirements governing NNA equipment and operations.
 To facilitate expedited updates to its technical rules based on
evolving technical standards, the Commission delegates joint rulemaking
authority to WTB and OET to incorporate into the Commission's rules,
after notice and an opportunity for public comment if necessary or
appropriate, any updated version of a previously incorporated technical
standard applicable to UAS operations in the 5030-5091 MHz band. This
delegation will help ensure that key technical updates relevant to
requirements for authorization of UAS

[[Page 1383]]

equipment and operations can be incorporated without unnecessary
administrative delay.
7. Equipment Authorization
 To promote reliability and safety, the Commission will require
transmitters to be certified for use in this new part 88 service
through compliance with Office of Engineering and Technology (OET)
procedures for equipment authorization under part 2, subpart J of the
Commission's rules. The Commission will also require that the
applicant, when filing the requisite application for equipment
certification, notify the FAA of the identity of the equipment
manufacturer. This approach will ensure that necessary coordination
occurs with the FAA, given its responsibility for ensuring aviation
safety in the NAS, and will prevent harmful interference through NNA
equipment compliance with the relevant technical requirements.

B. Dynamic Frequency Management System

 The Commission will require parties seeking to use or using the NNA
spectrum to be registered with a DFMS and to transmit in the 5030-5091
MHz band only pursuant to and consistent with the terms of a frequency
assignment from a Commission-approved DFMS. The Commission defines a
DFMS as ``a frequency coordination system operating in the 5030-5091
MHz band that (1) is highly automated and capable of providing rapid
responses to frequency assignment requests from registered NNA
operators, and (2) in response to such requests, is capable of
assigning to the requesting operator temporary protected use of certain
frequencies for a particular geographic area and time period tailored
to the operator's submitted operation, to the extent such frequencies
are available.''
 The Commission will approve any DFMS that can meet its
requirements, including approving multiple DFMSs if each of them meets
the requirements. Each approved DFMS will be required to provide access
to frequencies nationwide, and to communicate and coordinate with the
other approved DFMSs as necessary to ensure that their assignments are
consistent. Below, the Commission establishes requirements to govern
the DFMS and DFMS administrator and the process by which DFMSs and DFMS
administrators will be approved, as well as certain rules governing the
request and assignment process.
1. DFMS Requirements
 In the UAS NPRM, the Commission proposed certain high level
requirements to be codified in proposed section 88.135 of the
Commission's rules. Among these requirements, the Commission proposed
that:
 A DFMS must provide a process for NNA users to register
with the system for the purpose of submitting frequency assignment
requests and obtaining frequency assignments.
 A DFMS must be capable of responding to frequency
assignment requests nationwide and across the entire 5030-5091 MHz
band. However, a DFMS may only make assignments for spectrum within
those frequencies in which NNA operations are permitted.
 In response to frequency assignment requests from a
registered NNA user, a DFMS shall determine and provide, through an
automated (non-manual) process, a frequency assignment for a particular
geographic area and time period tailored to the NNA user's submitted
flight plan, to the extent that frequencies are available to meet the
request and the assignment is otherwise consistent with this part.
Assignments must provide protected access to frequencies over a
duration and geographic area sufficient to cover the entire submitted
flight plan.
 Assignments must account for the need to protect other
authorized operations.
 The Commission adopts these requirements largely as proposed, but
modifies the proposed requirements to clarify that it will not mandate
that NNA users submit a ``flight plan'' in connection with their
requests. It will still require, however, that requests be for spectrum
to support a single UAS flight, which should help to ensure that
parties reserve spectrum only for those times that they actually need
the assignment, and to maximize the usage of the NNA spectrum and the
resulting benefits. To reflect these determinations, the Commission
modifies the proposed requirements to use the term ``UAS flight''
instead of ``flight plan'' (e.g., requiring that a DFMS provide a
frequency assignment for a particular geographic area and time period
tailored to the NNA user's submitted UAS flight).
 Interference modeling. While the Commission does not adopt any
detailed requirements regarding the methodology or modeling for
interference calculations, it agree with commenters that models and
methodologies for interference determinations should be both effective
in avoiding harmful interference and consistent between different
DFMSs. Accordingly, it adopts these high level requirements.
 FAA authorizations. The Commission will require a DFMS to confirm
through certifications in the frequency assignment request process that
the requesting party has flight authorization from the FAA to cover the
flight associated with the assignment request, and that the flight will
only be piloted by parties that have the necessary FAA remote pilot
authorization. While the Commission will have primary responsibility
for the enforcement of this Commission requirement, the Commission will
coordinate with the FAA as necessary to ensure that oversight and
enforcement is effective. In particular, compliance questions regarding
the underlying FAA requirements should generally be determined with FAA
input. Therefore, the Commission will require anyone challenging a DFMS
action with regard to this requirement or otherwise seeking a
Commission determination regarding a party's FAA authorization in this
context to submit, with its filing to the Commission, a determination
from the FAA regarding whether the party in question has the relevant
authorization under FAA rules and requirements.
 In-flight revisions. The Commission further adds a requirement that
a DFMS be capable of responding to in-flight revision requests. The
capacity to revise an assignment during a flight will help to address
circumstances in which the planned area or duration of operations must
be altered during the flight, including NPSTC's concern that,
responding to an emergency, public safety operators will have
difficulty predicting up front the duration of their need for the
assignment.
 Communications between DFMS and NNA stations. The Commission also
adds certain requirements for communications between a DFMS and NNA
stations to better ensure compliance with DFMS assignments. The
Commission is concerned that an approach in which a DFMS merely reviews
requests and transmits approved assignments to operators, without any
further mechanism or requirement to promote user compliance, will lead
to a higher probability of communications occurring outside of
authorized parameters, either by intention or accident, and will not
achieve the high level of safety and reliability intended for this
band. Accordingly, a DFMS is required to be able to communicate
directly with a ground station operating in the NNA spectrum, or proxy
software acting on its behalf, to achieve the

[[Page 1384]]

following: (1) ensure that all NNA stations used in the operation,
including any ground or airborne stations, are programmed to limit
communications in the 5030-5091 MHz band, during the period of the
frequency assignment, to the specific frequencies assigned by the DFMS
and in accordance with the other terms of the assignment; and (2)
receive updates on flight status when a UA has launched and when it has
landed. NNA ground stations are similarly required to be capable of
communicating with a DFMS as necessary to achieve these functions.
 Limits on requests. The Commission generally provides flexibility
to DFMSs to determine the parameters of the frequency assignment
necessary to support the UAS flight, including specific frequencies,
bandwidth, maximum transmit power, amount of time, and coverage area.
As discussed above, DFMS assignments must provide protected access over
a duration and geographic area sufficient to cover the entire submitted
UAS flight, but the Commission does not mandate that a DFMS frequency
assignment have the specific terms requested.
 Two specific restrictions on permissible requests are warranted to
prevent monopolization and facilitate broader access to NNA spectrum.
First, requests may only be approved for an operation lasting no more
than 24 hours. This restriction is consistent with the intention that
assignments provide support for only a single flight. Second, requests
may not be approved for periods commencing more than seven calendar
days after the submission of the request, except to the extent that
lack of frequency availability in that time frame justifies a later
assignment. Seven calendar days strikes an appropriate balance between
preventing parties from engaging in long term reservation of the
spectrum and permitting reservations in advance to provide greater
certainty to parties planning their operations. These two limitations
are based on predictive judgments regarding the extent and nature of
uses of the spectrum and the Commission may modify the specific values
as it develops more experience. A DFMS should be capable of
implementing such changes to the rules.
 Coordination requirements. It will be critical, in the event there
are multiple DFMSs, that they actively coordinate their assignments to
avoid conflicts. Accordingly, the Commission adopts a requirement that
a DFMS communicate and coordinate with other DFMSs as necessary to
ensure consistent data and assignments, the safe and robust operation
of authorized services, and compliance with the rules.
 Information submitted with registration and requests. Beyond
requiring that registration information include the registrant's legal
name and contact information, and that requests must address and be
limited to the frequencies, duration, and geographic coverage necessary
to support a single submitted UAS flight, the Commission does not
define the specific information that a party must submit with a
frequency assignment request or with registration. It delegates
authority to WTB, however, to impose additional specific requirements,
after notice and an opportunity for public comment if it deems
necessary or appropriate, regarding information that a DFMS must
collect regarding registrants or frequency requests, such as the
manufacturer, producer, make, or model of the equipment used, that WTB
determines will promote the robust and safe use of the band or
otherwise address security concerns regarding the use of the band, and
the DFMS must have the capability to collect such additional
information if required by WTB or the Commission. Further, to
facilitate inter-DFMS coordination, the Commission will mandate that
each of the DFMSs require the same registration and request
information, and will require that information submitted to the DFMS be
accurate, complete, and made in good faith. In addition, consistent
with determinations above, the Commission modifies the language in
proposed section 88.31(a) to clarify that it does not mandate that
assignment requests necessarily must include specific flight plans. It
will further require operators to keep any registration information up
to date and keep any request information up to date through the
scheduled end of the assignment. It will also require that a DFMS
maintain all records for at least 60 months.
 Security. Given the limited record on specific security
requirements, however, the Commission adopts a minimum set of high
level requirements to address security concerns: (1) a DFMS must employ
protocols and procedures to ensure that all communications between the
DFMS and users or NNA stations in connection with a DFMS's NNA
functions are secure and that unauthorized parties cannot access, shut
down, or alter the DFMS or its stored information; (2) communications
between users and a DFMS, and between different DFMSs, must be secure
to prevent corruption or unauthorized interception of data, and a DFMS
must be protected from unauthorized data input or alteration of stored
data; and (3) a DFMS must verify that the NNA stations to be used in
operations are part 88 FCC-certified devices and must not provide
assignments to any other device. In addition, similar to a measure
adopted in connection with an internet-of-Things cybersecurity labeling
program, the Commission delegates authority to WTB in coordination
with, at a minimum, the Office of the Managing Director (OMD)
(specifically the Office of the Chief Information Officer) and, to the
extent necessary, the Office of General Counsel (OGC) (specifically the
Senior Agency Official for Privacy) to identify and impose on the DFMS
any applicable security or privacy requirements arising from Federal
law or Federal guidance.
 Protection of other services. The Commission includes certain
requirements regarding the protection of certain non-UAS services,
discussed further below. In addition to these, it adopts a general
requirement that a DFMS be capable of receiving reports of interference
and requests for additional protection from Microwave Landing System
(MLS) users in the 5030-5091 MHz band or authorized users in adjacent
bands and promptly address interference issues.
 Non-discrimination. The Commission adopts a requirement that
frequency assignment functions be performed in a non-discriminatory
manner, and specifically requires that assignment requests generally be
granted in a first-come-first-served manner subject only to the
priorities specified in the rules.
 Prioritization. The Commission adopts two high-level requirements
regarding the prioritization of requests. First, in the event of
emergencies, a DFMS should, to the extent feasible and consistent with
the interests of aviation safety, prioritize requests from public
safety entities. The Commission does not permit prioritization in a way
that would terminate or modify an NNA user's assignment while the
assignments are in use during a UAS flight. As between the many other
important private sector uses and critical infrastructure, the non-
discrimination principle should apply. Second, the Commission adopts a
requirement that, in extended periods of congestion, the DFMS
prioritize requests involving flights relying on a single ground
station over requests that rely on multiple stations, to the extent
feasible and consistent with the interests of aviation safety. This
prioritization will still permit operations involving multiple ground
stations, while ensuring that the NNA spectrum serves its intended

[[Page 1385]]

purpose. To the extent that both of the adopted priorities come into
play, the public safety priority should take precedence.
2. DFMS Administrator Requirements
 In the UAS NPRM, the Commission also proposed requirements for DFMS
administrators. Specifically, it proposed to require that
administrators:
 Operate a DFMS consistent with the rules.
 Establish and follow protocols and procedures to ensure
compliance with the rules.
 Provide service for a ten-year term. This term may be
renewed at the Commission's discretion.
 Securely transfer all the information in the DFMS to
another approved entity in the event it does not continue as the DFMS
Administrator at the end of its term. It may charge a reasonable price
for such conveyance.
 Develop a standardized process with other DFMS
Administrators for coordinating operations with other approved DFMSs,
avoiding any conflicting assignments, and maximizing shared use of
available frequencies.
 Coordinate with other DFMS Administrators including, to
the extent possible, sharing assignment and other information,
facilitating non-interference to and from operations relying on
assignments from other DFMSs, and other functions necessary to ensure
that use of available spectrum is safe and efficient and consistent
with this part.
 Ensure that the DFMS shall be available at all times to
immediately respond to requests from authorized Commission personnel
for any and all information stored or retained by the DFMS.
 Establish and follow protocols to comply with enforcement
instructions from the Commission.
 The Commission largely adopts these as proposed. Given the critical
importance of inter-DFMS coordination to the safety and reliability of
the system, it modifies the coordination requirement to reflect that
the specified coordination is mandatory rather than a ``best efforts''
requirement. Further, in addition to the limits it adopts above on
requests to prevent monopolization of the NNA spectrum, the Commission
also expressly authorizes DFMS administrators to adopt additional
reasonable limits as necessary to address similar concerns.
Specifically, it provides that the DFMS administrator may implement
such reasonable limits on requests as are necessary to prevent the
hoarding, warehousing, monopolization, or otherwise excessive
reservation of NNA spectrum by a particular party.
 As an additional mechanism to assist the Commission in its
enforcement responsibilities, DFMS administrators are required to
establish and follow protocols to comply with enforcement instructions
from the Commission. The Commission expects detailed enforcement
mechanisms and procedures employed by DFMSs to be developed during the
approval process described below, including mechanisms and procedures
to address unauthorized use of the spectrum, and that most issues will
be addressed through these mechanisms and procedures. However, the
Commission retains the ultimate responsibility for and authority over
NNA operations in the band. In the event that the DFMS is unable to
resolve disputes or identify and address the sources of harmful
interference or unauthorized or otherwise unlawful operations in the
band, these issues may be addressed by the Commission.
 The Commission requires a DFMS to immediately respond to requests
from authorized Commission personnel for any and all information stored
or retained by the DFMS. It also anticipates that other Federal
agencies may have important interests in obtaining DFMS information,
particularly related to the coordination and protection of Federal UAS
operations in the band. Accordingly, it delegates authority to WTB, in
consultation with NTIA, to establish a process, as needed, for direct
access by Federal agencies to information stored or retained by the
DFMS, including the scope and terms of such access, through regulation,
guidance, or agreement, as appropriate.
 Fees. The Commission authorizes administrators to charge reasonable
fees for registration, assignments, and other services, including
reasonable usage-based fees. DFMS fees will not only be necessary to
fund the development and operation of a DFMS, but can provide UAS
operators with important incentives to use the limited NNA spectrum
efficiently and discourage monopolization, warehousing, or hoarding.
3. DFMS and DFMS Administrator Approval Process
 The Commission adopts an approach for review and approval of DFMS
and DFMS administrators similar to the Commission's process for
selection of Spectrum Access Systems (SASs) and SAS administrators, and
delegates authority jointly to WTB and OET to administer this process
in close consultation at all stages of the process with the FAA and
NTIA, as well as other administrative authority over the DFMS
comparable to the delegation granted to WTB and OET to administer the
SASs. It further delegates authority jointly to WTB and the Office of
the Managing Director (OMD) to determine fees, if any, in connection
with the filing of a petition to be a DFMS administrator. It also
direct WTB to obtain Office of Management and Budget review of all
information collections associated with this process as required under
the Paperwork Reduction Act.
4. Obtaining an Assignment From a DFMS
 In the UAS NPRM, the Commission proposed rules governing the
process by which parties would obtain an NNA frequency assignment from
a DFMS. Among these, it proposed that NNA users registered with a DFMS
may submit a request for temporary frequency assignment for CNPC
limited to the duration and geographic coverage necessary to support a
single submitted UAS flight plan. It further proposed that requests may
be made either prior to an operation or submitted during the relevant
operation to modify the assignment, and that modification requests must
be made to the same DFMS responsible for the original assignment. In
addition, it proposed that, if frequencies meeting the request are
available, the DFMS would assign them on an exclusive but temporary
basis, with the scope of the assignment tailored in both duration and
geographic coverage to ensure interference-free communications for the
entire submitted UAS flight plan. It also proposed that, when using the
services of a DFMS, an NNA user shall comply with all instructions of
the DFMS Administrator, including those regarding registration,
requests and other submissions to the DFMS, and operational use of NNA
assignments.
 Consistent with actions discussed above, instead of requiring
submission of a ``flight plan,'' the Commission establishes a more
flexible requirement to submit a ``UAS flight.'' Otherwise, it adopt
these provisions substantially as proposed.
5. Interim Access Mechanism
 The Commission establishes an interim access mechanism (IAM) to
provide access to the 5030-5091 MHz band during the provisional period
before a DFMS is operational. Specifically, the IAM will be available
to all eligible NNA operators licensed by rule, and will allow limited,
short-term access to 20 megahertz of spectrum in

[[Page 1386]]

the 5040-5060 MHz band of frequencies. The initial access will only be
suitable for NNA operations, which are typically single flights or
events. In order for NNA operators to gain access and begin
transmission in the 5040-5060 MHz block, they must complete a two-step
process, including FAA coordination and FCC registration.
 Transition to DFMS Management of NNA Spectrum. When a DFMS is first
granted final approval, as discussed above, WTB will issue a public
notice establishing the date on which the DFMS may begin operations,
after which parties seeking access to NNA spectrum must request a
frequency assignment from the DFMS. For the DFMS assignment process to
reliably determine interference impacts, it is critical that all UAS
operations have gone through a DFMS. Accordingly, after the date on
which a DFMS first begins operation, parties may not seek or use
assignments from the IAM. After such date, the spectrum available for
NNA operations will be restricted to 10 megahertz, as discussed above.
If WTB finds it appropriate to help ensure a smooth transition, it may
establish and announce by public notice a date prior to final approval
of a DFMS after which requests will no longer be processed through IAM,
but no earlier than the date of the first DFMS conditional approval.
Further, WTB is authorized to take any other necessary steps to ensure
a smooth transition to the DFMS management of the NNA spectrum,
including setting the date for a DFMS to begin operations a sufficient
period after the date of final approval to permit all or most of the
outstanding IAM approvals to expire.

C. Compatibility With Other Services

1. Microwave Landing Systems
 Given that there are no non-Federal Microwave Landing System (MLS)
stations in the band, and that the Commission does not anticipate
licensing any future MLS systems, it adopts no measures to protect such
operations. Because it anticipates continued use of Federal MLS by the
Air Force, the Commission will establish exclusion zones to protect
such systems. Further, it will require the DFMS to retain information
on, and enforce, the zones sufficient to protect any Federal MLS
stations in the 5030-5091 MHz band. The Commission will coordinate with
NTIA to identify both the current locations of Federal MLS and the
appropriate exclusion zones, after which the exclusion zones will be
identified by Public Notice. To the extent that these locations change,
such changes can be addressed through a similar process. The Commission
delegates authority to WTB to issue the public notice identifying any
initial MLS exclusion zones as well and any subsequent public notices
necessary to identify changes.
2. Radionavigation-Satellite Service and AeroMACS
 The Commission concludes that the technical requirements applicable
to NNA combined with the frequency separation between the NNA spectrum
and the 5010-5030 MHz band will be sufficient to provide compatibility
between NNA operations and Radionavigation-satellite Service (RNSS) in
the 5010-5030 MHz band. The Commission similarly concludes that the
adopted technical requirements, combined with the frequency separation,
will be adequate regulatory measures to provide compatibility between
NNA operations and AeroMACS in the upper and lower bands adjacent to
the 5030-5091 MHz band.
3. Aeronautical Mobile Telemetry
 The Commission finds that the limits adopted through incorporation
by reference to provisions of RTCA DO-362A are also sufficient to
protect Aeronautical Mobile Telemetry (AMT) in the 5091-5150 MHz band.
Accordingly, it declines to require NNA operations to also comply with
the criteria of ITU-R M.1459.
4. Mobile Satellite Service Feeder Links
 The Commission does not anticipate that rule-compliant fixed earth
stations in the 5091-5250 MHz band will cause harmful interference to
NNA operations in the 5030-5091 MHz band. Nevertheless, to address the
unlikely possibility of interference to UAS operations, the Commission
clarifies that a Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) feeder link licensee in
the 5091-5250 MHz band will only be responsible for curing harmful
interference from its earth station to NNA operations in the
neighboring 5030-5091 MHz band to the extent such interference is the
result of the licensee's non-compliance with applicable license or
regulatory requirements.
5. Radio Astronomy
 National Radio Quiet Zone (NRQZ). The Commission requires
coordination within the NRQZ. As described in detail below, the
coordination requirements are modeled after the NRQZ coordination
procedures applicable to other services under section 1.924(a) of the
Commission's rules. Because these procedures assume that a station
license application is being submitted to the Commission, however, the
Commission modifies them to work with the instant context in which a
frequency assignment request will be submitted instead to a DFMS.
Specifically, it provide that parties planning to operate an NNA
station at locations within the NRQZ must notify the National Radio
Quiet Zone Administrator (NRQZ Administrator) in writing in advance or
simultaneously with the filing of the request. Although section
1.924(a) procedures are limited to fixed permanent stations, the
Commission finds that procedures for NNA operations in the 5030-5091
MHz band should apply more broadly. Given the inherently short-term
nature of NNA operations, such operations are likely to often rely on
temporary stations. Limiting coordination to permanent stations,
particularly with the aeronautical focus of the service, might
therefore not provide adequate coordination. The Commission also
adopts, however, two measures to reduce the burden of coordinating
short term operations. First, it provides that the NRQZ Administrator
may provide safe harbors for NNA operations in the NRQZ that do not
require notification, but a party submitting a frequency assignment
request under this exception must certify that their request meets the
criteria for a safe harbor and provide any additional supporting
documentation required by the DFMS. Further, if a party's operation or
revision of an operation is within the scope of an approval previously
granted to the party by the NRQZ Administrator, including any time
limits on the approval, altitude limits, or other applicable
conditions, the party need not provide notification of the operation or
revision to the NRQZ Administrator, but must submit the approval with
its assignment request.
 CORF recommends that the coordination notice should be sent to
 [email protected] . The Commission adopts the same mailing address specified
in section 1.924(a) and applicable to every other service as the
initial point of contact, but also permits notification to be sent by
electronic mail to [email protected] , which should facilitate a more rapid
coordination. The coordination process based on this notification will
largely follow the procedures under section 1.924(a), with appropriate
changes made to reflect the role of the DFMS. Thus, when a request for
frequency assignment is filed with the DFMS, the notification may be
submitted prior to or simultaneously

[[Page 1387]]

with the request. After receipt, the DFMS will allow a period of 20
days for objections. If a DFMS determines that a request is subject to
one of the two exceptions to notification discussed above, it shall
process the request without waiting the 20-day period.
 If a DFMS receives an NRQZ Administrator approval of operations
that includes the operation associated with the request, if the request
is within the scope of a safe harbor established by the NRQZ
Administrator, or if the 20-day period passes without objection, the
DFMS shall process the request under normal procedures, except with
regard to the restriction established above that requests may not be
granted more than seven calendar days in advance. To accommodate the
20-day period for objections, the Commission provides that, when this
period is applicable, requests may be approved for periods commencing
more than seven calendar days after the submission of the request, but
no more than seven calendar days after the date of DFMS decision. If
objections are received in the 20-day period, the DFMS administrator
will forward the record, including the frequency request, to the
Commission. After consideration of the record, the Commission will take
whatever action is deemed appropriate, including, potentially,
providing direction to the relevant DFMS administrator regarding
resolution of the request.
 RAS Outside the NRQZ. With regard to radio astronomy observations
in the adjacent 4990-5000 MHz band, the Commission confirms, as
recommended by NTIA and other commenters, that NNA operations remain
subject to footnote US211 of the Table of Allocations. The Commission
declines to adopt CORF's proposal for exclusion zones to protect
observations at sites in both the 4990-5000 MHz band and inside the
5030-5091 MHz band. To facilitate operation of both UAS systems and
radio astronomy systems, however, it will require a DFMS to immediately
notify the National Science Foundation, Division of Astronomical
Sciences, Electromagnetic Spectrum Management Unit, by email of any
assignments that it approves for UAS operations in the vicinity of the
radio astronomy facilities identified in footnote US385 of the Table of
Allocations, which identifies the sites at which radio astronomy
observations are performed in 4990-5000 MHz. Further, for clarity, the
Commission will list these facilities in the relevant part 88 rule.
6. Canadian and Mexican Coordination
 The Commission does not adopt any measure at this time to address
operations near the border. Instead, DFMS administrators will be
required to demonstrate that their systems can and will enforce
agreements between the U.S., Canadian, and Mexican governments
regarding commercial operations in the 5030-5091 MHz Band. The specific
methods of enforcement will be determined and implemented by DFMS
administrators, with appropriate Commission oversight, after such
agreements are in place.

Procedural Matters

 Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,
as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a regulatory
flexibility analysis for notice and comment rulemakings, unless the
agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has prepared a Final Regulatory
Flexibility Analysis (FRFA), below, concerning rule and policy changes
in the Report and Order.
 Paperwork Reduction Act. The Report and Order contains new
information collection requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction
Act of 1995 (PRA), Public Law 104-13. All such new requirements will be
submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) for review under
section 3507(d) of the PRA. OMB, the general public, and other Federal
agencies will be invited to comment on any new or modified information
collection requirements contained in this proceeding. The Commission
will publish a separate document in the Federal Register at a later
date seeking these comments.
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, concurs, that this rule is non-major
under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission
will send a copy of the Report and Order to Congress and the Government
Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).
 Accessing Materials. The Office of Federal Register (OFR)
regulations require that agencies must discuss in the preamble to the
Federal Register summary of a final rule the ways that the materials
incorporated by reference are reasonably available to interested
parties and that interested parties can obtain the materials. In
addition, OFR regulations require that the preamble to the Federal
Register summary of a final rule summarize the material incorporated by
reference.
 Sections 88.101, 88.103, 88.105, 88.107, and 88.109 of the rules
adopted herein incorporate by reference certain requirements in
standards established by the RTCA Special Committee-228, referred to as
RTCA, Inc. Command and Control (C2) Data Link Minimum Operational
Performance Standards (MOPS) (Terrestrial), RTCA-DO-362A (December 17,
2020). These standards provide the technical requirements for equipment
manufacturers and operators of equipment used for UAS NNA operations in
the 5030-5091 MHz band. In particular, the standards provide
information regarding the following technical parameters: transmitter
output power, emissions bandwidth, out-of-band emissions, emission
mask, and the applicable time division duplexing frame rate. The text
of RTCA DO-362A is available online for a fee at https://my.rtca.org/productdetails?id=a1B1R00000LoYFZUA3 .

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended
(RFA), an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) was
incorporated in the Spectrum Rules and Policies for the Operation of
Unmanned Aircraft Systems; Petition of AIA for Rulemaking to Adopt
Service Rules for Unmanned Aircraft Systems Command and Control in the
5030-5091 MHz Band, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) released in
January 2023. The Federal Communications Commission (Commission) sought
written public comment on the proposals in the NPRM, including comments
on the IRFA. No comments were filed addressing the IRFA. This Final
Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) conforms to the RFA.

A. Need for, and Objectives of, the Report and Order

 In the Report and Order, the Commission takes significant action to
adopt initial service rules for uncrewed aircraft systems (UAS) in the
5030-5091 MHz band and enable UAS operators to access dedicated
spectrum with the required reliability to support safety-of-flight,
control-related communications while also allowing flexibility for the
industry to further develop. Specifically, the Commission adopts
service rules that provide operators the ability to obtain direct
frequency assignments in a portion of the 5030-5091 MHz band. These
service rules are necessary to provide a critical first step to promote
access by UAS operators to dedicated spectrum while also allowing a
consensus to emerge on key issues for
