FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Spectrum Sharing Rules for NGSO Fixed-Satellite Service Systems
Document number: 2024-28993
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Space Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 100898
Publication date: 2024-12-13

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 100898-100917]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-28993]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 25

[IB Docket No. 21-456; FCC 24-117; FR ID 265639]


Spectrum Sharing Rules for NGSO Fixed-Satellite Service Systems

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule; denial of reconsideration.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC
or Commission) clarifies the methodology to be used in compatibility
analyses by non-geostationary satellite orbit (NGSO) fixed-satellite
service (FSS) system licensees. The Second Report and Order adopts
specific degraded throughput methodology criteria that NGSO FSS systems
licensed in a later processing round must include in compatibility
analyses, in absence of a coordination agreement, to demonstrate that
they can operate compatibly with and protect NGSO FSS systems
authorized in earlier processing rounds. The Second Report and Order
clarifies these methodologies to promote market entry, regulatory
certainty, and spectrum efficiency through good-faith coordination. The
Commission also adopts an Order on Reconsideration dismissing in part
and, on alternative and independent grounds, denying a petition for
reconsideration.

DATES: Effective on January 13, 2025.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, contact Carolyn Mahoney, Satellite Programs and Policy
Division, Space Bureau, at (202) 418-7168 or [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's
Second Report and Order and Order on Reconsideration, in IB Docket No.
21-456, FCC 24-117, adopted on November 5, 2024 and released on
November 15, 2024. The full text of this document is available at
 https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-117A1.pdf .

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended (RFA), requires
that an agency prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis for notice and
comment rulemakings, unless the agency certifies that ``the rule will
not, if promulgated, have a significant economic impact on a
substantial number of small entities.'' Accordingly, the Commission has
prepared a Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the
potential impact of the rule changes contained in the Second Report and
Order and Order on Reconsideration. The FRFA is set forth in the
appendix of the document available at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-117A1.pdf and a summary is included in the
Procedural Matters section below.

Paperwork Reduction Act Analysis

 The Second Report and Order contains modified information
collection requirements subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
(PRA), Public Law 104-13. It will be submitted to the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) for review under Section 3507(d) of the
PRA. OMB, other Federal agencies, and the general public will be
invited to comment on the modified information collection requirements
contained in this document.
 The Commission assessed the effects of requiring later-round NGSO
FSS grantees to submit compatibility showings with respect to earlier-
round grantees with whom coordination has not yet been reached. The
Commission finds that doing so will serve the public interest and is
unlikely to directly affect businesses with fewer than 25 employees.

Congressional Review Act

 The Commission has determined, and the Administrator of the Office
of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget,
concurs that this rule is non-major under the Congressional Review Act,
5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a copy of the Second Report
and Order and Order on Reconsideration to Congress and the Government
Accountability Office pursuant to the Congressional Review Act, see 5
U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Synposis

I. Introduction

 In the Second Report and Order, the Commission continues to refine
the Commission's rules governing spectrum sharing among a new
generation of broadband satellite constellations to promote market
entry, regulatory certainty, and spectrum efficiency through good-faith
coordination. Specifically, the Commission clarifies certain details of
the degraded throughput methodology that, in the absence of a
coordination agreement, must be used in compatibility analyses by non-
geostationary satellite orbit, fixed-satellite service (NGSO FSS)
system licensees authorized through later processing rounds to show
they can operate compatibly with, and protect, NGSO FSS systems
authorized through earlier processing rounds. The Commission adopts a 3
percent time-weighted average throughput degradation as a long-term
interference protection criterion, a 0.4 percent absolute increase in
link unavailability as a short-term interference protection criterion,
and declines to adopt additional protection metrics or to adopt an
aggregate limit on interference from later-round NGSO FSS systems into
earlier-round NGSO FSS systems. In an accompanying Order on
Reconsideration, the Commission denies a Petition for Reconsideration
(88 FR 58540, August 28, 2023) of the Report and Order (88 FR 39783,
June 30, 2023). These actions continue the Commission's efforts to
promote development and competition in broadband NGSO satellite
services.

II. Background

 The Commission is committed to updating and refining its rules
governing NGSO FSS systems, at a time when these systems are being
deployed at unprecedented scale. NGSO FSS satellites traveling in low-
and medium-Earth orbit provide broadband services to industry,
enterprise, and residential customers with lower latency and wider
coverage than previously available by satellite.
 Processing Round Procedure Overview. Applications for NGSO FSS
system licenses and petitions for declaratory ruling seeking U.S.
market access for non-U.S.-licensed NGSO FSS systems are considered in
groups based on filing date, under a processing round procedure.
Pursuant to the Commission's rules, a license application for ``NGSO-
like'' satellite operation, including operation of an NGSO FSS system,
that satisfies the acceptability for filing requirements is reviewed to
determine whether it is a ``competing application'' or a ``lead
application.'' A competing application is one filed in response to a
public notice initiating a processing round. Any other application is a
lead application. The public notice for a lead application initiates a
processing round and establishes a cut-off date for competing NGSO-like
satellite system applications. After the close of the processing round,
the Commission grants all the applications for which the

[[Page 100899]]

Commission finds that the applicant is legally, technically, and
otherwise qualified, that the proposed facilities and operations comply
with all applicable rules, regulations, and policies, and that grant of
the application will serve the public interest, convenience and
necessity.
 NGSO FSS System Spectrum Sharing Overview. The Commission has
adopted rules for spectrum sharing among NGSO FSS systems. NGSO FSS
space station license applications granted with a condition to abide by
these sharing rules are exempt from frequency band segmentation
procedures that otherwise apply to applications for NGSO-like satellite
operation. Instead, NGSO FSS operators must coordinate with one another
in good faith the use of commonly authorized frequencies. If two or
more NGSO FSS satellite systems fail to complete coordination, a
default spectrum-splitting procedure using a [Delta]T/T of 6 percent
threshold applies, pursuant to Sec. 25.261(c) of the Commission's
rules. In the NGSO FSS Report and Order (82 FR 59972, December 18,
2017), the Commission stated that it would ``initially limit'' sharing
under the [Delta]T/T of 6 percent threshold to qualified applicants in
a processing round. The Commission explained that treatment of
applicants after a processing round would be on a case-by-case basis
and would consider both the need to protect existing expectations and
investments and the benefits of additional entry, as well as any
comments filed by incumbent operators and reasoning presented by the
new applicant.
 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. The NPRM (88 FR 39783, June 30,
2023) in this proceeding sought comment on potential rule changes to
clarify the relative obligations between NGSO FSS systems approved in
different processing rounds. Specifically, the Commission proposed to
limit the existing NGSO FSS spectrum-splitting procedure in Sec.
25.261(c) to those systems approved in the same processing round, and
to require systems approved in a later processing round to coordinate
with, or demonstrate they will protect, earlier-round systems. The
Commission invited comment on how to quantify inter-round protection
and whether it should sunset after a period of time. The Commission
also proposed to require all NGSO FSS grantees, regardless of their
processing round status, to coordinate with each other in good faith,
and sought comment on specific information sharing obligations that
could facilitate operator-to-operator coordination.
 Report and Order. In response to the record developed through the
NPRM, the Report and Order adopted rule changes designed to promote
market entry, regulatory certainty, and spectrum efficiency of NGSO FSS
systems. The Commission, for the first time, limited the default
spectrum-splitting procedure in Sec. 25.261(c) to NGSO FSS systems
approved in the same processing round and required NGSO FSS systems
approved in a later processing round to coordinate with, or demonstrate
they will protect, earlier-round systems, subject to a sunsetting
provision. The Commission also required all NGSO FSS grantees to
coordinate with each other in good faith. Regarding the technical
demonstrations of compatibility of later-round NGSO FSS systems with
earlier-round systems, the Commission concluded that an interference
analysis based on a degraded throughput methodology offered the most
technically promising path for NGSO FSS inter-round sharing and
required later-round systems to use such a methodology. In adopting a
sunsetting provision for the inter-round protection requirement, the
Commission concluded that protection of earlier-round NGSO FSS systems
must ensure a stable environment for continued service and investment
but should not hinder later-round systems indefinitely. The Commission
decided that NGSO FSS systems will be entitled to protection from
systems approved in a subsequent processing round until ten years after
the first authorization or market access grant in that subsequent
processing round. After that date, all systems in both processing
rounds will be treated on an equal basis with respect to spectrum
sharing in the absence of a coordination agreement, and the default
spectrum-splitting procedure in Sec. 25.261(c) will also apply between
systems in the two rounds. In sum, prior to commencing operations, an
NGSO FSS licensee or market access recipient must either certify it has
completed a coordination agreement with any operational NGSO FSS system
licensed or granted U.S. market access in an earlier processing round,
or submit a showing for Commission approval that it will not cause
harmful interference to any such system with which coordination has not
been completed using a degraded throughput methodology.
 Further Notice. In conjunction with the decision in the Report and
Order to adopt an inter-round protection requirement described above,
the Commission adopted the Further Notice (88 FR 40142, June 21, 2023)
to finalize the details of the degraded throughput methodology. The
Commission invited specific comment on the appropriate values and
assumptions to be used in this requirement, as well as on whether the
Commission should adopt a rule limiting aggregate interference from
later-round NGSO FSS systems into earlier-round systems. Ten comments,
eight reply comments, and several ex parte presentations were filed in
response to the Further Notice.
 Petition. On July 20, 2023, OneWeb filed a Petition for Partial
Reconsideration of the Report and Order concerning the sunset period
adopted with the new inter-round protection requirement. Kuiper opposed
the OneWeb Petition, SpaceX commented on it, and OneWeb replied to
Kuiper's opposition.

III. Discussion

1. Second Report and Order

 In this Second Report and Order, after review of the record, the
Commission clarifies certain details of the degraded throughput
methodology that, in the absence of a coordination agreement, must be
used in compatibility analyses by NGSO FSS system grantees, authorized
through later processing rounds, to show they can operate compatibly
with, and protect, NGSO FSS systems, authorized through earlier
processing rounds. Specifically, the Commission adopts a 3 percent
time-weighted average throughput degradation as a long-term
interference protection criterion and a 0.4 percent absolute increase
in link unavailability as a short-term interference protection
criterion. The Commission declines to adopt additional protection
metrics or to adopt an aggregate limit on interference from later-round
NGSO FSS systems into earlier-round NGSO FSS systems. The Commission's
decisions in the Second Report and Order rely on its predictive
judgment in the highly complex and dynamic area of spectrum sharing
among a new generation of innovative NGSO FSS systems. The Commission's
decisions strive to balance its competing goals of providing regulatory
certainty for, and adequate protection of, earlier round systems vis-a-
via later entrants while encouraging new entry and coordination among
NGSO FSS operators.
1. Long-Term Interference Metric
 Further Notice. In the Further Notice, the Commission outlined its
expected steps in a degraded throughput analysis and sought comment on
the proposed process. Specifically, noting that 3

[[Page 100900]]

percent had been suggested as an appropriate value for several aspects
of the degraded throughput analysis, including a long-term interference
limit based on reduction in time-weighted average throughput, the
Commission invited comment on the appropriate values for such a limit,
including technical justification.
 Comments. Four out of the five commenters proposing a specific
threshold value for degraded throughput support using the 3 percent
value noted in the Further Notice. Kuiper, for example, observes that a
3 percent throughput-degradation threshold has been adopted
internationally to protect V-band GSO networks from NGSO FSS systems
and argues that it provides a conservative measure of protection for
incumbent systems due, in part, to conservatism in the methodology a
new entrant must use to estimate interference. Viasat agrees that use
of the 3 percent threshold should adequately safeguard systems from
adverse performance degradation experienced over an extended period of
time. Telesat, while initially arguing that ``[t]he long-term criterion
is sufficiently stable and there is a sufficient record, including
through recent ITU studies, to support adopting a 3 percent degradation
limit,'' more recently concludes that specific degraded throughput
criteria should be left to coordination discussions among satellite
operators to determine. Telesat now believes that the record is
sufficiently complete to allow the Commission to adopt rules, endorsing
the 3 percent degraded throughput value for the long-term protection
criterion proposed by SpaceX. Intelsat initially indicated that further
study would be required before concluding upon a degraded throughput
value, but now supports the 3 percent value as well. TechFreedom argues
it is premature to adopt protection criteria. Public Knowledge and New
America Open Technology Institute also support adopting a 3 percent
degraded throughput threshold.
 SpaceX, which initially commented that a 3 percent degraded
throughput value required further study, subsequently submitted its own
spectrum sharing study evaluating the 3 percent limit. Using publicly
available information and reference standard antenna patterns, SpaceX
performed 123 dynamic (Monte Carlo) simulations of interference from
various 2020 processing-round NGSO systems into various 2016
processing-round NGSO systems. In 112 of the 123 studied cases,
degradation was below 3.12 percent, which SpaceX argues empirically
supports the Commission adopting a 3.0 percent degradation of average
spectral efficiency as a single-entry long-term interference criterion
for compatibility determinations.
 Only OneWeb proposes a long-term interference metric other than 3
percent, arguing that a 3 percent time-weighted average degraded
throughput limit will substantially harm NGSO FSS operators and
disincentivize coordination. OneWeb asserts that an aggregate
interference and rain fade criterion of no more than 10 percent
degradation in average throughput is appropriate for an NGSO FSS
system, that apportionment of this allowed percentage of interference
to other NGSO systems should be no more than 2.5 to 3.85 percent, and
that when accounting for the existence of multiple co-frequency NGSO
systems, the single-entry average degraded throughput should be less
than 1 percent for each individual NGSO system. OneWeb further claims
that if a 3 percent limit were adopted per system and six NGSO FSS
systems were operating co-frequency, then a 15 percent degradation in
average throughput would occur from the 5 interfering systems to the
victim system. No other commenter supports OneWeb's proposal; SpaceX,
Kuiper, and Telesat raise numerous technical concerns with it; and
commenters suggest alternative explanations for the results of OneWeb's
analysis.
 OneWeb also argues that SpaceX's study purporting to affirm the 3
percent metric relies on flawed assumptions that undermine its
conclusions. Specifically, OneWeb contends that the study fails to
accurately model system-specific details that could impact whether a
previous-round system may experience harmful interference. OneWeb's
analysis incorporating its revised assumptions argues that the 3
percent metric results in substantially higher levels of interference
than projected by both SpaceX and Kuiper, which could exceed 5 percent
when taking into account a small deployment of Kuiper customer
terminals without adding any contribution from the Viasat system. Thus,
OneWeb concludes that SpaceX's study fails to adequately predict the
interference levels prior-round NGSO systems would receive. OneWeb
further highlighted its support for a 1 percent or less average
degraded throughput as the long-term criterion that should be adopted.
 Decision. The Commission adopts a 3 percent time-weighted average
degraded throughput threshold as the long-term interference metric that
must be complied with in any inter-round compatibility showing
submitted by a later-round NGSO FSS grantee. The 3 percent time-
weighted average degraded throughput is calculated on a per link basis.
The Commission concludes that adopting this value best furthers its
goals of providing regulatory certainty for, and adequate protection
of, earlier-round NGSO FSS systems while allowing for new entry and
coordination among NGSO FSS operators. First, this value has been
developed and adopted internationally as sufficient for the protection
of GSO satellite networks using adaptive coding and modulation
techniques, which are also used by NGSO FSS systems. Second, the 3
percent throughput-degradation threshold limits the interference
allowed at any location, not the expected average of interference
across all locations. Since the worst-case locations will likely drive
the discussion of appropriate system parameters and any mitigation
measures, actual interference should be less than 3 percent in many
circumstances. Third, the Commission's technical review of the SpaceX
study on the record indicates that the study reliably supports the
conclusion that a 3 percent threshold is achievable by later-round
systems, and therefore encourages competitive new entry, by
demonstrating that the simulated degradation was near or below 3
percent in 112 of the 123 studied cases of later-round systems
protecting earlier-round systems.
 The Commission disagrees with OneWeb that a 3 percent degraded
throughput threshold would disincentivize coordination, for three
reasons. First, not all links considered in the SpaceX study meet this
degraded throughput threshold. Additional links or different assumed
parameters might also not meet the threshold, and therefore the 3
percent degraded throughput threshold would incentivize coordination or
require mitigation. Second, this protection requirement is unilateral,
and later-round systems will have an incentive to coordinate to receive
some accommodation, or protection from interference, from earlier-round
systems. And third, the 10-year sunset period ensures that earlier-
round systems and later-round systems will be treated on an equal basis
after the sunset, and any compatibility analyses will no longer permit
the later-round system to operate in cases where it would exceed the
default spectrum-splitting mechanism in Sec. 25.261(c).
 In contrast, a criterion of 1 percent or lower has not been
demonstrated to allow for competitive new entry by any study. The
Commission also finds the technical basis for this criterion to be

[[Page 100901]]

flawed. The Commission agrees with Telesat that OneWeb is incorrect in
claiming that Note 3 of Recommendation ITU-R S. 2131-1 provides a 10
percent limit on time-weighted average degraded throughput for an FSS
link employing adaptive coding and modulation (ACM). In addition, the
single-entry interference criterion proposed by OneWeb is based on an
isolated scenario that does not represent the broad variation of
throughput degradation that can occur due to rain fade. Further, the
single-entry throughput degradation values suggested by OneWeb are
based on arbitrary assumptions. And the idea conveyed by OneWeb that
the allowable degradation from one interference source should simply be
computed by considering the degradation allowance from all interference
sources and then dividing by the number of interference sources is
simply incorrect, because it does not take into account the manner in
which ACM is implemented in modern satellite links.
 On the other hand, declining to adopt any specific long-term
interference protection criterion could invite unnecessary and lengthy
debates among later-round operators submitting compatibility analyses
and earlier-round operators subject to those analyses with whom a
coordination agreement has not yet been reached. Instead, the
Commission concludes that establishing a specific long-term
interference protection metric, as technically supported on the record,
will provide a clear benchmark for new entrants, around which parties
may tailor any alternative long-term protections mutually agreed in
coordination.
2. Short-Term Interference Metric
i. Relative vs. Absolute Increase in Unavailability
 Further Notice. In addition to seeking comment on defining a long-
term interference metric in the degraded throughput analysis, the
Further Notice sought comment on setting a short-term interference
metric expressed as a change in the earlier-round system's link
unavailability time percentage. The Commission invited comment on the
appropriate value for this limit, including technical justification.
 Comments. On the issue of defining a short-term interference
metric, commenters differed on whether to use a relative change in link
unavailability, an absolute change in link unavailability, or both.
Ultimately, commenters on this issue support the use of an absolute
metric; no commenter opposes use of an absolute metric or only supports
use of a relative metric. SpaceX, for example, explains that because
next-generation satellite systems are designed to be resilient to
signal degradation, these systems frequently maintain a high degree of
link availability--typically in excess of 99 percent--despite varying
environmental effects and interference from other NGSO systems. This
equates to a typical baseline unavailability of less than 1 percent,
but with such levels of unavailability as the baseline, SpaceX states
that very small changes in link performance can trigger ``wild swings''
in a relative unavailability metric, even if the absolute level of link
availability remains close to its baseline value. O3b and Intelsat each
propose a formula to determine an absolute allowed increase in
unavailability that changes with the baseline availability, reflecting
concerns that a single value for increase in unavailability may not
adequately protect high availability links. OneWeb supports an absolute
increase in unavailability and supports O3b's proposal for a variable
absolute increase in unavailability based on the service requirements
of the link to cover a wider range of use cases.
 Decision. The Commission agrees with the general consensus among
commenters on this issue. The Commission concludes that the use of an
absolute increase in link unavailability as the short-term interference
metric provides a more reliable measure of short-term interference that
is not as susceptible to significant fluctuations as a relative
increase metric would be. The Commission therefore adopts an absolute
increase in link unavailability as the sole short-term interference
metric required in an inter-round compatibility showing submitted by a
later-round grantee. As discussed in greater detail below, the
Commission declines to adopt proposals for a formulaic approach for a
variable absolute increase in unavailability in establishing a short-
term interference metric.
ii. Value
 Further Notice. The Further Notice also invited specific comment on
the appropriate value for the short-term interference metric, with
accompanying technical justification.
 Comments. Commenters are divided on the appropriate value for the
short-term protection criterion. OneWeb asserts that if the Commission
adopts an absolute change in link unavailability as the short-term
metric, the single-entry limit should be ``substantially lower than''
0.01 percent to account for uses which may necessitate higher levels of
availability, such as links designed to meet a 99.99 percent
unavailability requirement. Viasat claims that a 0.05 percent tolerable
packet loss rate from all sources ``is the minimum necessary
requirement'' and states that a smaller value, such as 0.01 percent,
would provide a margin to allow for other sources of short-term packet
loss. Intelsat initially argued that further study would be required
before determining protection criteria values, although now supports an
absolute metric based on a sliding-scale formula, similar to O3b's, for
the short-term protection criterion. Similarly, Telesat had also
initially argued that no single short-term metric is appropriate for
all links in all coordinations based on its own study, but now agrees
that the SpaceX proposal strikes the right balance in protecting
incumbent NGSO systems while supporting the entry of new NGSO systems
and supports the 0.4 percent metric.
 SpaceX argues that its study of several 2016 processing-round and
2020 processing-round systems using 123 dynamic (Monte Carlo)
simulations establishes an ``empirical zone of reasonableness'' for the
values of the absolute change in link availability. The values in the
SpaceX study range from 0 to 0.382 percent at a carrier-to-noise (C/N)
threshold of 0 dB, and SpaceX states that the upper end of this range
is appropriate for both uplink and downlink. SpaceX therefore contends
that its study provides empirical support for short-term interference
up to approximately 0.4 percent absolute change in link availability at
a C/N threshold of 0 dB. SpaceX further argues that its conservative
use of a C/N threshold of 0 dB to assess changes in link availability
further supports allowing short-term interference up to 0.4 percent
absolute change. SpaceX suggests that setting such a value will
incentivize a later-round system to try to limit inline events to an
earlier-round system toward achieving this level of short-term
interference or if it cannot, to coordinate with the earlier-round
system to more efficiently use the shared spectrum. Telesat supports
the proposed SpaceX approach, noting that it is the only approach that
encourages coordination amongst operators by establishing a backstop
value to protect incumbent operators while also supporting good faith
coordination and promoting competition.
 Kuiper supports the proposed SpaceX 0.4 percent absolute increase
in unavailability metric as well. Kuiper initially proposed the
Commission adopt a 0.1 percent absolute increase in

[[Page 100902]]

link unavailability as a threshold for short-term interference, which
Kuiper argued would offer sufficient room for new entrants to bring
their systems into operation, even in drier climates, while being
highly protective to incumbents. Kuiper now urges the Commission to
adopt an absolute threshold in the range of 0.1 to 0.4 percent for
short-term protection as proposed by Kuiper and SpaceX, respectively,
arguing that this would incentivize both new entrants and incumbents to
negotiate in good faith while minimizing impacts on vulnerable links
and operations in both systems. Kuiper also explains that arguments
claiming that a short-term threshold in this range would discourage
coordination between incumbents and new entrants ignore the realities
of coordination, which occurs when both parties are incentivized to
negotiate a more mutually beneficial outcome than an alternative
compatibility showing scenario. Kuiper notes that even with
interference thresholds tilted in favor of new entrants, rather than
with a more balanced approach as proposed by Kuiper and SpaceX, new
entrants would retain these incentives and continue to coordinate with
incumbents. Regarding incumbents, Kuiper argues that while incumbents
have incentives to minimize potential impacts of new entrants, an
overly protective short-term threshold, like the O3b proposed formula,
would incentivize incumbents to make unreasonable coordination demands
and leverage those protections against new competition.
 O3b proposes the Commission use a formula, rather than a fixed
percentage value, to determine the allowed increase in unavailability
of an earlier-round system link. O3b proposes that the permitted
increase in unavailability = -0.12 * baseline availability + 12.02. O3b
argues that its formula appropriately adjusts protection levels to
service requirements and reflects a broad range of technical
characteristics and protection requirements. OneWeb agrees and argues
the SpaceX proposal would eliminate later round systems' incentive to
coordinate, unacceptably undermine established operators' service
quality, render it impossible for operators to guarantee a defined
quality of service to their customers, and subvert the purpose of the
processing round framework. OneWeb further asserts that a 0.4 percent
absolute increase is ``overly-relaxed'' and risks undermining U.S.
credibility as a stable investment environment and deterring
international coordination with U.S. systems. Intelsat supports O3b's
proposed formula approach and proposes the Commission adopt a slightly
modified version of the formula, increasing the minimum unavailability
degradation value. Intelsat proposes that the permitted increase in
unavailability = -0.12 * baseline availability + 12.05, modifying the
minimum unavailability degradation factor from 12.02 to 12.05 which
Intelsat argues allows for flexibility regarding the percent of link
unavailability for high availability links. OneWeb also supports
adopting O3b's proposed formula, should the Commission decline to issue
a further notice and comment. SpaceX and Kuiper oppose this approach,
arguing that O3b's formula is overly protective of earlier-round
systems and would incentivize those incumbents to leverage strict
limitations on later-round systems, thus discouraging market entry and
innovation and leading to inefficient spectrum sharing. Telesat also
raises concerns, flagging that the O3b formula has not been previously
considered by the Commission or ``related forums such as the ITU'' and
involves granular details that are better addressed in coordination
between parties than by the Commission.
 In the alternative, O3b and OneWeb suggest the Commission seek
further comment on an appropriate short-term interference criterion and
each of the corresponding proposals through a second further notice of
proposed rulemaking. O3b argues that the SpaceX and Kuiper proposals
are both untimely and warrant additional inquiry. SpaceX and Kuiper
argue that the record is complete with detailed analyses, and
demonstrates that parties have moved toward a consensus on values and
methodology, and encourage the Commission to move forward with a final
order. Telesat agrees, finding that the record is sufficiently complete
to allow the Commission to finalize the rules for spectrum sharing and
arguing that further delay will not lead to better rules, but rather,
foster lingering uncertainty as to the framework in which NGSO
operators coordinate their activities. Telesat additionally notes that
the record demonstrates that there may never be a perfect formula that
optimally addresses all possible NGSO system interactions which all
parties agree upon, given the nature of the complex analyses and
systems involved in developing specific metrics, and thus the
Commission is justified in moving forward with a final order.
 Decision. After review of the record, the Commission adopts a 0.4
percent absolute increase in link unavailability at a C/N threshold of
0 dB as the short-term interference metric to be used in inter-round
compatibility analyses. For the reasons discussed below, the Commission
concludes that this 0.4 percent value, more so than the 0.1 percent
value, 0.01 percent or less values, or the formulas proposed by O3b or
Intelsat on the record, most closely aligns with the Commission's goals
of providing regulatory certainty for and ensuring adequate protection
of earlier-round incumbents while offering the best opportunities for
later-round new entrants and competition and encouraging coordination.
 First, the Commission finds that this criterion will adequately
protect earlier-round NGSO FSS systems. Like the long-term interference
metric adopted above, this short-term interference metric will limit
the increase in link unavailability at any analyzed location. Since the
worst-case locations will likely drive operators' determinations of
appropriate system parameters and any mitigation measures, the actual
increase in unavailability will be less than 0.4 percent in many
circumstances. In addition, the use of a C/N threshold of 0 dB to
assess changes in link availability is at the upper end of the -3 dB to
0 dB range for C/N thresholds supported on the record for compatibility
analyses, and renders the 0.4 percent value more conservative. Because
the C/N threshold is intended to reflect the minimum carrier received
signal, relative to noise, necessary to maintain a link, real values
for the C/N threshold may be closer to -2 dB or -3 dB. At these lower
C/N thresholds, the absolute change in link availability is typically
lower than at the 0 dB threshold. Thus, using a 0 dB C/N threshold may
overestimate the interference from a later-round system to an earlier-
round system's link whose actual C/N threshold is lower. The Commission
further concludes this value will be sufficiently protective of
earlier-round systems because of the decisions below to use simplifying
assumptions in the analysis--such as modeling 50 percent or 100 percent
deployment of an incumbent system even if it has not yet deployed in
those numbers, or using an assumed satellite selection strategy when
the actual satellite selection strategy is not provided by the
incumbent--that may also tend to overestimate the actual interference
caused to an incumbent system by the later round system. These
simplifying assumptions in the analysis itself tend to offer incumbents
more protection. Therefore, the Commission considers the totality of
the analysis when deciding upon the likely real-world interference
caused by a later-

[[Page 100903]]

round system satisfying the 0.4 percent absolute increase in link
unavailability metric at a C/N threshold of 0 dB.
 Second, the Commission concludes that adopting a 0.4 percent
absolute increase in unavailability metric will simultaneously support
competitive new entry because it will accommodate several modeled
second-round systems, both uplinks and downlinks, per the 123 dynamic
(Monte Carlo) simulations in the SpaceX study, which the Commission
notes are a better representation of the dynamic nature of NGSO systems
than a static analysis would reflect. Further, the Commission has
reviewed the SpaceX study and find that the data, assumptions, and
methodology employed are reasonable for purposes of adopting a 0.4
percent short-term interference metric to be used in inter-round
compatibility analyses. To be sure, O3b argues that the study is too
limited in the operating metrics considered and is accordingly not
reflective of real-world parameters. Such individualized parameters
will be considered in individual compatibility analyses. In the event
that other system combinations, or the use of different assumed
parameters, result in exceedances of this short-term limit, this will
require mitigation measures to be applied by the later-round operator
or coordination with earlier round operators.
 Third, the Commission concludes that adopting this short-term
protection value will support competitive new entry while continuing to
encourage good-faith coordination among both incumbents and new
entrants, which offers the best avenue for efficient spectrum sharing
among NGSO FSS systems. Unlike the requirement for later-round systems
to protect earlier-round systems under the inter-round protection
requirement prior to the sunset period, incumbents have no
corresponding requirement to protect new entrants during this period,
and therefore an overly conservative protection requirement for the
benefit of incumbents may discourage incumbents from negotiating more
lenient limits for new entrants. On the other hand, permitting new
entrants to operate with an overly lenient limit may discourage them
from negotiating with incumbents for more restrictive protections for
the benefit of incumbents. The short-term interference metric the
Commission adopts here strikes the right balance to encourage
coordination among earlier and later-round systems. The Commission
disagrees with assertions that the 0.4 percent absolute increase will
risk investment in U.S. systems by discouraging international systems
from coordinating with U.S. systems. While it is unclear which specific
circumstances are in reference, the Commission reminds both incumbents
and new operators that coordination with the ITU is separate from
coordination within the U.S. and is required of all international
systems under the ITU Radio Regulations. The Commission's rules require
both parties to engage in good faith coordination. Providing an avenue
for meaningful competition by both incumbents and new entrants will
encourage both sides to agree upon any more specific, mutual protection
measures during coordination.
 The Commission is not persuaded by alternative proposals. The
Commission disagrees with the proposed 0.01 percent or lower threshold
advocated by Viasat. Unlike the 0.4 percent absolute increase in
unavailability metric, which the SpaceX Monte Carlo study in the record
indicates is achievable for several modeled second-round systems, there
is no evidence in the record from proponents of a 0.01 percent or lower
threshold showing that it is achievable and provides for competitive
new entry. And while a 0.1 percent limit would accommodate most second-
round system links analyzed in the SpaceX study, a 0.4 percent limit
will provide greater opportunities for new entry while still providing
adequate protection of incumbent systems due to the conservative
assumptions incorporated into the standard and the calculation of
increase in unavailability and at the same time providing incentives
for good faith coordination. Stricter limits for particular links can,
of course, be agreed in coordination. The SpaceX study indicates 0.4
percent to be the upper limit in the studied cases in both uplink and
downlink, and accommodates user terminals and gateway earth stations.
Indeed, the Commission notes that Kuiper's initial study, which
proposes the 0.1 percent limit, uses the SpaceX study as partial
justification for its chosen interference limit and nonetheless
acknowledges that ``SpaceX's justification for a higher [0.4 percent]
threshold has merit.'' Further, Kuiper has since advocated for the
Commission to adopt a threshold within the 0.1 and 0.4 percent range as
proposed by Kuiper and SpaceX, respectively, noting that these
proposals represent a reasonable range that balances competing
interests and incentives.
 The Commission also does not agree with O3b and Intelsat that their
proposals to create a variable, sliding-scale metric for absolute
increase in unavailability would better serve the Commission's goals
than the adoption of a 0.4 percent absolute increase in link
unavailability metric at a C/N threshold of 0 dB. As an initial matter,
both the O3b and Intelsat formulae appear to be based on the protection
of only a narrow set of systems. In addition, the Commission disagrees
with O3b's claim that the proposed formula would not impose additional
complications on operators compared to an established absolute
threshold value. Incorporating a variable, sliding-scale short-term
interference metric would be more burdensome for later round systems to
implement considering that detailed information of the incumbent
system, including the receiver characteristics, would be required in
order to calculate the baseline availability required by the sliding-
scale formula. Absent cooperation from the operator of the incumbent
system, it would be difficult to obtain this information, particularly
for new entrants. The Commission does not find the alleged benefits of
this approach as compared to a non-variable metric outweigh these
burdens. Given the conservative assumptions in the analysis itself, the
Commission is also concerned that O3b and Intelsat's more stringent
formulae may unnecessarily restrict competitive new entry. O3b and
Intelsat's principal objection to the use of a single 0.4 percent
absolute value is that it would create a more noticeable impact on
customers served by higher availability links than on those served by
lower availability links. However, it is precisely a concern about the
overprotection of high availability links that has driven the general
consensus on the record towards using an absolute metric of increase in
unavailability, rather than a relative metric.
 Moreover, O3b's assumed baseline availability rates of the
incumbent system may be higher on paper than in reality, to the extent
O3b excludes from the baseline the effects of other existing sources of
interference, such as interference from GSO networks, other NGSO
systems, and intra-system noise. Accordingly, the relative impact on
high availability links may be overstated. In addition, while O3b
argues that a 0.4 percent absolute increase in unavailability metric
would ``make it impossible for operators to guarantee a defined quality
of service to their customers'' because of the additive effect of
short-term interference from multiple later-round systems, the
potential for aggregate interference is not limited to the use of this
value and would exist under O3b's formula as well. Further, just as the
Commission expects the real-world impact of a later-round system
complying with the 0.4

[[Page 100904]]

percent increase in unavailability limit to be less than 0.4 percent in
many cases, given the conservative assumptions in the analysis noted
above, the Commission similarly expects that any cumulative, real-world
effects of two or more later-round systems will likely be less than a
simple multiplication of the 0.4 percent limit by the number of later-
round interferers that O3b assumes because it fails to account for
mitigation techniques or other spectrum-sharing measures that may be
applied by the NGSO FSS systems and reduce their overall aggregate
impact.
 While O3b also argues that a 0.4 percent increase in unavailability
limit would ``eliminate later round systems' incentive to coordinate''
because all links in the SpaceX study can be accommodated under this
short-term limit, other links or parameters not included in the SpaceX
study, some of which O3b points out, might exceed the 0.4 percent
short-term limit. In any event, O3b itself notes that not all links in
the SpaceX study meet the 3 percent degraded throughput long-term limit
the Commission adopts above. Cases where a later-round system cannot
meet either the short-term or long-term limit will encourage the later-
round operator to complete coordination with the incumbent operator.
Later-round operators will also be incentivized to coordinate in order
to potentially receive some protection, or accommodation, from earlier-
round operators. Further, the 10-year sunset period the Commission
adopted in the Report and Order ensures that earlier-round systems and
later-round systems will be treated on an equal basis after the sunset
period, and any compatibility analyses will no longer permit the later-
round system to operate in cases where it would exceed the default
spectrum-splitting mechanism in Sec. 25.261(c). Accordingly, later-
round system operators will have several incentives to complete
coordination with earlier-round operators. Moreover, Sec. 25.261(b) of
the Commission's rules requires NGSO FSS licensees and market access
recipients to coordinate in good faith the use of commonly authorized
frequencies regardless of their processing round status.
 To the extent an incumbent wishes to ensure the highest
availability for particular use cases, such as when offering its
services to government or enterprise customers, it may discuss such
particular uses during coordination with new entrants and new entrants
will have several incentives to complete the coordination. The
Commission has expressly recognized that the physical realities of
interference in spectrum-based services should guide both system design
and reasonable expectations of operation. The likelihood of harmful
interference should be assessed under a range of operating conditions.
Further, the Commission has encouraged operators, and specifically NGSO
FSS operators, to design systems for a shared and dynamic operating
environment and plan to manage potential interference in such dynamic
environments. Operators providing important communications with 99.5
percent or greater service availability require systems equipped with
redundancy to compensate for potential short-term impacts caused by
inline events. The Commission has detailed best practices for satellite
operator emergency planning and preparedness with specific
recommendations to determine system resiliency and redundancy. To the
extent operators have concerns about protecting particular types of
links operating in the non-federal FSS, such as those they may be
offering to government or enterprise customers, such concerns are best
addressed in coordination agreements rather than in a non-federal
spectrum sharing framework.
 In addition, the Commission does not agree with O3b that a 0.4
percent value ``subvert[s] the purpose of the processing round
framework'' because it is higher than the spectrum-splitting trigger,
which O3b calculates for its system would be between 0.01 and 0.04
percent absolute increase in unavailability. Although it is possible
for a very small number of links of the earlier-round systems in which
the [Delta]T/T of 6 percent (I/N of -12.2 dB) (the trigger for
coordination among systems in the same processing round) may be
exceeded, such exceedance would be limited in terms of the number of
links affected and the length of time. The Commission is not convinced
that such short-term impact would be significant on the earlier round
systems. The short-term protection criteria the Commission adopts here
is a unilateral protection of earlier-round systems by later-round
systems and does not require any reduction in spectrum usage or other
operational changes by the earlier-round system. In contrast, exceeding
the more sensitive trigger for spectrum-splitting in Sec. 25.261(c)
for systems approved in the same processing round creates a mutual
obligation for both systems to split their commonly authorized
frequencies for the duration of the potential interference event.
Nevertheless, for links of an earlier-round system in which the
[Delta]T/T is 6 percent or greater, later-round systems are required to
coordinate with the earlier-round systems of these links prior to
commencing operation.
 The Commission is further not persuaded by calls to seek comment on
the short-term interference metric through a second further notice of
proposed rulemaking. The Further Notice sought comment on setting a
short-term interference metric. In response to the Further Notice,
interested parties have had ample opportunity to comment on all
proposals, as illustrated by their record submissions. Adopting a
specific limit for increase in unavailability, rather than adopting no
limit or deferring the issue to a later time as some commenters
advocate, will result in a more complete set of required interference
metrics applicable to an inter-round compatibility analysis and
therefore will provide greater regulatory certainty to earlier-round
operators and later-round operators. Conversely, not adopting any
specific acceptable short-term interference threshold or deferring the
issue to a later time would deprive new entrants of the certainty that
they can provide some level of service without the agreement of an
earlier-round operator. The SpaceX study indicates 0.4 percent to be
the upper limit in the studied cases in both uplink and downlink, and
accommodates user terminals and gateway earth stations. Stricter limits
for particular links can, of course, be agreed in coordination.
 Therefore, the Commission concludes an absolute increase in
unavailability value of 0.4 percent at a C/N threshold of 0 dB will
appropriately balance the Commission's goals of providing regulatory
certainty for, and adequate protection of, incumbent systems while at
the same time ensuring competitive new entry and encouraging
coordination among NGSO FSS operators.
3. Minimum Link Availability
 Further Notice and Comments. In conjunction with the Commission's
consideration of long-term and short-term interference criteria,
SpaceX, on the basis of its study of several 2016 processing-round and
2020 processing-round systems, proposes that the Commission adopt a
99.0 percent link availability without the interferer at a C/N
threshold of 0 dB as a minimum benchmark for an earlier-round system to
show it merits the backstop levels of short-term and long-term
interference protection from a later-round system that the Commission
is considering. SpaceX states this minimum benchmark indicates a well-
designed, efficient

[[Page 100905]]

earlier-round NGSO system with a robust signal-to-noise ratio and that
all first-round links studied by SpaceX achieved this minimum
benchmark, except one link at 98.7 percent. Requiring a minimum 99.0
percent link availability, SpaceX argues, would prevent an incumbent
whose publicly-available information shows its link achieves a 99.9
percent link availability at a C/N threshold of 0 dB, for example, from
claiming that it can actually achieve only a 90 percent link
availability at that threshold. Such a claim would tend to exaggerate
the extent to which the earlier round system is susceptible to
interference from every second-round system. SpaceX also contends that
a rule requiring a first-round system to show a 99.0 percent link
availability without the interferer at a C/N threshold of 0 dB
incentivizes efficient spectrum sharing through coordination, since ``a
first-round system that cannot achieve this minimum benchmark level of
performance on a given link--indicating its inefficient use of
spectrum--would have to coordinate with the second-round system to
determine a more efficient spectrum sharing arrangement.'' O3b, in
proposing its increase in unavailability threshold formula, supports
protection of links with baseline availabilities as low as 97 percent,
and argues the SpaceX proposal would unfairly provide no protection for
links with lower baseline availability levels that meet the needs of
customers with a higher interference tolerance.
 Decision. The Commission agrees with SpaceX that an inefficient
incumbent system design should not unreasonably hamper future entry.
Further, the Commission has reviewed the SpaceX study and finds that
the data, assumptions, and methodology employed are reasonable and note
that, although O3b has commented that the study could be expanded upon
using different system parameters, no commenter objects to the data,
assumptions, or methodology SpaceX used. While O3b's formula shows
protection of links with baseline availabilities as low as 97 percent,
its formula inherently recognizes that lower performing links should
receive less protection and does not specifically justify or
technically support requiring protection of links below 99.0 percent
availability. Rather, the Commission concurs with SpaceX that a 99.0
percent link availability without the interferer at a C/N threshold of
0 dB is a reasonable minimum benchmark to guard against the risk of
low-performing incumbent links. The Commission therefore will require
this benchmark as a minimum value to be incorporated into an inter-
round compatibility showing to demonstrate compliance with the long-
term and short-term interference metrics adopted above.
4. Additional Interference Metrics
i. Loss of Synchronization
 Further Notice. The Further Notice also asked whether additional
means are needed to protect earlier-round systems against loss of
synchronization due to potentially high levels of short-term
interference.
 Comments. Most commenters on this issue oppose including additional
criteria to protect against loss of synchronization. Telesat argues
that doing so is unnecessary because in modern satellite systems the
concept of link unavailability also protects against the loss of
synchronization as long as an appropriate C/N objective is chosen.
Kuiper states that including such a protection criteria would undermine
incentives for a resilient design of modems and receivers and result in
a less efficient spectrum sharing framework. Kuiper additionally
maintains that any issues an incumbent may have regarding
synchronization loss is best addressed in good-faith coordination with
new entrants. Commenters also note that information on the particular
modems used by incumbents, which is required to determine a protection
criteria necessary to prevent loss of synchronization for a particular
system, is not typically disclosed in domestic or international
filings. Kuiper suggests the appropriate way to address particularized
interference concerns of a given incumbent is not through systematic
changes to the methodology but instead through operator-to-operator
coordination.
 Two commenters support requiring later-round operators to
specifically protect against an incumbent's loss of synchronization,
arguing that consideration of loss of synchronization does not render
analyses overly complex, and that when information has been shared
pursuant to good-faith coordination, the consideration of these
additional metrics is straightforward and can ensure protection of a
variety of NGSO system designs and service characteristics. OneWeb also
argues the Commission should account for short-term degraded throughput
events where an operator may experience high levels of degradation
causing a modem to lose synchronization or suffer other critical
errors. OneWeb argues that loss of synchronization should be a required
metric in any compatibility showing to ensure that operators have a
complete picture of the interference environment if operators cannot
achieve a coordination agreement.
 Decision. The Commission declines to mandate new entrants protect
incumbent systems against loss of synchronization, or incorporate a
short-term degraded throughput metric, beyond the protections afforded
by the long-term and short-term interference protection criteria the
Commission adopts above. The Commission agrees with commenters who
argue that doing so would risk incentivizing inefficient system
designs, including the choices of modems and receivers that are not
capable of quickly re-establishing synchronization in a shared spectrum
environment. The Commission also agrees with Telesat that doing so is
unnecessary because a limit on the increase in link unavailability also
protects against the loss of synchronization. In addition, requiring
new entrants to meet such protection criteria that are defined solely
by incumbents, to address particular interference sensitivities of
incumbent systems, outside of protections mutually agreed in
coordination, would create uncertainty for new entrants and could
unduly restrain new entry and competition.
ii. Carrier-to-Noise Objectives
 Further Notice. The Further Notice sought specific comment on
whether an earlier-round operator should be able to specify two C/N
objectives--one relative to the C/N level below which the victim modem
would lose signal lock with the satellite and another relative to the
C/N level below which the victim link would become unavailable because
it is not able to offer the minimum wanted throughput.
 Comments. Several commenters on this issue support the Commission
adopting a single minimum C/N objective relative to link
unavailability, rather than include multiple C/N objectives such as one
below which the victim modem would lose lock. SpaceX proposes the
Commission adopt a reference C/N threshold between -3 dB and 0 dB,
because this range accounts for both real modem performance and the
modulation and coding rates of broadband satellite waveforms within a
reasonable margin. O3b suggests the Commission specify 0 dB as the
standard C/N level to account for the threshold performance that
efficient modems should be capable of achieving. Noting that the
commonly used adaptive coding and modulation (ACM) standard DVB-S2X can
demodulate
