FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Use of the 5.850-5.925 GHz Band
Document number: 2024-28980
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 100838
Publication date: 2024-12-13

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 100838-100856]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-28980]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 1, 90, 95, and 97

[ET Docket No. 19-138; FCC 24-123; FR ID 265055]


Use of the 5.850-5.925 GHz Band

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) adopts rules and takes other steps to further address the
transition of 5.9 GHz Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
operations from Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC)-based
technology to cellular-vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X)-based technology.
Specifically, the Commission adopts technical and operational rules
governing devices using C-V2X-based technology, eliminates the DSRC
requirement for communications zone designations, finalizes the
timeline for sunsetting the use of DSRC-based technology, addresses the
issue of additional spectrum allocations for ITS use, addresses the
issue of reimbursing the transition costs of DSRC incumbents, and
encourages the development of industry standards.

DATES: This final rule is effective February 11, 2025. Existing
licenses for DSRC systems may be renewed as necessary following this
effective date but only for a period not to exceed December 14, 2026.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jamie Coleman of the Office of
Engineering and Technology, at [email protected] or 202-418-2705.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Second
Report and Order, ET Docket No. 19-138, FCC 24-123, adopted on November
20, 2024, and released on November 21, 2024. The full text of this
document is available for public inspection and can be downloaded at
 https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-123A1.pdf . Alternative
formats are available for people with disabilities (Braille, large
print, electronic files, audio format) by sending an email to
 [email protected] or calling the Commission's Consumer and Governmental
Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530 (voice), (202) 418-0432 (TTY).

Procedural Matters

 Regulatory Flexibility Act. The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980,
as amended (RFA), requires that an agency prepare a regulatory
flexibility analysis for notice and comment rulemakings, unless the
agency certifies that ``the rule will not, if promulgated, have a
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small
entities.'' Accordingly, we have prepared a Final Regulatory
Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) concerning the possible impact of the rule
changes contained in the Second Report and Order on small entities. The
FRFA is set forth in Appendix B of the FCC document, https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-123A1.pdf .
 Congressional Review Act. The Commission has determined, and the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget concurs, that this rule is ``major''
under the Congressional Review Act, 5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission
will send a copy of this Second Report and Order to Congress and the
Government Accountability Office pursuant to 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

Synopsis

Introduction

 The Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) holds promise to
improve transportation safety and mobility by integrating advanced
communications technologies into vehicles and infrastructure. The
connected vehicle ecosystem of the future will make the nation's
transportation system more flexible, resilient, and safe. This
ecosystem requires technical and operational rules governing devices
using C-V2X (cellular-vehicle-to-everything) based technology. In the
First Report and Order of the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC)
proceeding, 86 FR 23281 (May 1, 2021), the Commission retained the
upper 30 megahertz portion (5.895-5.925 GHz) of the 5.850-5.925 GHz
(5.9 GHz) band for ITS operations. The Commission also required the ITS
service to transition from Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC)-
based technology to C-V2X-based technology as the connected mobility
platform for implementing the future of ITS communications in the
United States. In the Second Report and Order, the Commission further
addresses the transition of 5.9 GHz ITS operations from DSRC to C-V2X
by codifying C-V2X technical parameters in the Commission's rules,
including band usage, message priority, and channel bandwidth. The
Commission promulgates rules governing equivalent isotropically
radiated power (EIRP) and out-of-band emissions (OOBE) limits for C-V2X
on-board units (OBUs) and roadside units (RSUs), and antenna height
limits for RSUs. In addition, the Commission encourages the development
of industry standards and finalizes the timeline for sunsetting the use
of DSRC-based technology. Finally, the Commission addresses the issues
of additional spectrum allocations for ITS use and reimbursing the
transition costs of DSRC incumbents.

Background

 The Commission adopted the First Report and Order in 2020, wherein
it concluded that the most efficient use of the 75 megahertz of
spectrum in the 5.9 GHz band would be achieved by expanding unlicensed
operations in the lower 45 megahertz of the band (5.850-5.895 GHz), and
designating the upper 30 megahertz of the band (5.895-5.925 GHz) for
the ITS service using C-V2X technology. Among other considerations, the
Commission made this decision because (1) the DSRC services once
contemplated for operations across the full 5.9 GHz band

[[Page 100839]]

had not come to fruition in the 20 years since it allocated the
spectrum for the ITS service; (2) those envisioned vehicle-safety
features can be or are already being provided using other spectrum
bands or alternative technology; and (3) the significant public
interest benefits of adding 45 megahertz of Unlicensed National
Information Infrastructure (U-NII) spectrum to enable the next-
generation Wi-Fi, which operates on wider channels and allows gigabit
connectivity with lower latency, improved coverage, and power
efficiency. To protect incumbent 5.9 GHz band services, including
federal incumbent operations, from potential harmful interference from
unlicensed operations, the Commission imposed stringent power limits
and operating requirements on unlicensed devices (i.e., access points,
subordinate devices, and client devices) operating in the lower 45
megahertz and restricted unlicensed use of the lower 45 megahertz to
indoor locations. As the First Report and Order determined that the
operators in the revised ITS band must use C-V2X technology, the
Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (FNPRM), 86 FR 23323 (May 6,
2021), sought comment on further transition issues and proposed rules
to finalize the technical parameters for C-V2X operations and the
timing of when operations must transition from the DSRC technology.
Although the FNPRM sought comment on the possibility for full-power
outdoor unlicensed operations across the lower 45 megahertz portion of
the 5.9 GHz band, those unlicensed operations issues are not addressed
in the Second Report and Order. In an Order on Reconsideration, 89 FR
24835 (April 9, 2024), the Commission affirmed its decision in the
First Report and Order to repurpose the lower 45 megahertz for indoor
unlicensed operations and rejected various arguments regarding indoor
unlicensed devices' potential to cause harmful interference to ITS
operations in the upper 30 megahertz.
 Recently, the Office of Engineering and Technology (OET), the
Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau (PSHSB), and the Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau (WTB) (hereafter, ``the Bureaus'') granted
rule waivers to parties requesting to deploy C-V2X operations in the
upper 30-megahertz portion of the 5.9 GHz band (5.895-5.925 GHz) prior
to adopting final C-V2X-based technical rules. Specifically, each
waiver applicant sought waivers for rule sections that establish the
technical requirements mandating DSRC-based technology in the upper 30
megahertz of the 5.9 GHz band, to allow C-V2X-based operations in the
band, and to provide adjustments to the technical parameters where the
two technologies differ. The Bureaus found that waiving those rules was
warranted under 47 CFR 1.925, subject to the waiver applicants'
commitments to adhere to certain technical parameters and conditions
developed to protect DSRC and federal incumbents from potential harmful
interference caused by C-V2X operations in the upper 30 megahertz. All
C-V2X operations pursuant to a waiver are limited to transportation and
vehicle-safety related communications. Finally, the granted waivers
were conditioned on the requirement that each waiver recipient would
ensure that all operations and devices authorized under the waiver
would comply with the final rules or other guidance provided by the
Commission.

Discussion

 In the Second Report and Order, the Commission finalizes rules
concerning band usage, message prioritization, channel bandwidth,
communications zones, power for RSUs and OBUs, and OOBE limits for C-
V2X operations, along with other transition issues, including the
transition timeline. Additionally, the Commission reaches several
conclusions related to the incorporation of standards, the allocation
of additional spectrum for ITS, and compensation to incumbents. The
decisions in this document will not only promote the efficient use of
30 megahertz of spectrum dedicated to ITS but also the safety benefits
this technology promises to deliver to the American public.
 DSRC is defined in the Commission's rules as the use of radio
techniques to transfer data over short distances between roadside and
mobile units, between mobile units, and between portable and mobile
units to perform operations related to improving traffic flow, traffic
safety, and other ITS applications in a variety of environments. DSRC
systems may also transmit status and instructional messages related to
the units involved. Currently, local government entities and entities
eligible for Industrial/Business Pool licenses are eligible to operate
RSUs using DSRC, while OBUs in vehicles are licensed by rule. The
existing DSRC rules lay out a hierarchical priority system for
messages. Communications involving safety of life have priority access
over all other DSRC communications. Communications involving public
safety have the next highest priority, with a presumption that RSUs
operated by State or local governmental entities are engaged in public
safety communications. The lowest tier in this communications hierarchy
are non-priority communications, which include all other communications
not related to safety of life or public safety.
 As stated in the FNPRM, the Commission's goal is to facilitate a
smooth transition from DSRC-based operations to C-V2X-based operations.
Accordingly, the Commission must address the need, if any, to adopt
requirements analogous to existing DSRC requirements that would
similarly govern C-V2X operations in the 5.895-5.925 GHz band. The
Commission now addresses the technical issues necessary to ensure
efficient and effective use of the band.

C-V2X Standards

 In the 5.9 GHz NPRM, 85 FR 6841 (February 6, 2020), the Commission
proposed to incorporate by reference into the Commission's rules the
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) C-V2X standard Release 14.
The Commission did not receive significant comment on this issue. After
the release of the 5.9 GHz NPRM, 3GPP announced the completion of
Release 16, which includes enhanced 5G network capabilities.
Accordingly, the FNPRM sought further comment on how the Commission
should handle standards with respect to C-V2X. Specifically, the
Commission asked whether either 3GPP C-V2X standard Release 16 or
Release 14, in whole or in part, should be incorporated into its rules;
whether Release 14 should be incorporated initially with an eventual
transition to Release 16; or whether there is a compelling argument for
not incorporating either standard into the rules.
 Comments received in this regard suggest a variety of approaches to
the issue. T-Mobile disputes the need for a general incorporation,
stating that ``referencing specific 3GPP releases in the rules [would]
quickly make them outdated and stifle innovation by freezing
technologies in place, instead of allowing them to evolve naturally to
satisfy customer needs and reflect innovation.'' The Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) expresses similar views, suggesting that
the Commission refrain from incorporating by reference any one
particular standard, instead allowing industry to test and evaluate the
technology and applicable standards without imposing a regulatory
ceiling. Further, ITE asserts that the

[[Page 100840]]

Commission's question regarding a phased-in approach where it would
adopt Release 14 now and replace it with Release 16 later does not
correctly characterize the actual technology implementation process.
Rather, ITE indicates that the 5G equipment based on Release 16 would
enhance and complement Release 14 Long Term Evolution (LTE) operating
equipment and Release 14 equipment would likely remain in use even
after Release 16 becomes dominant. Other commenters find merit in
incorporating standard(s) references in some manner. 5G Americas, for
example, citing the ongoing technology evolution, asks the Commission
to generally refer to 3GPP releases covering C-V2X, instead of
``cementing a specific 3GPP release.'' While skeptical that C-V2X can
be sufficiently realized on the allocated spectrum, AT&T nonetheless
suggests, without further specificity, that ``the Commission should
incorporate by reference those portions of both Release 14 and Release
16 that are relevant to C-V2X, giving ITS band users sufficient
latitude to innovate.'' Autotalks indicates that ``Releases 14, 15, and
16 are non-interoperable'' and it supports incorporating by reference
``explicit'' C-V2X releases to assure ``wide-scale interoperability.''
 Based on the record before the Commission, the Commission is not
incorporating by reference any one particular standard. The Commission
encourages industry to develop a consensus concerning 3GPP releases
covering C-V2X. The Commission believes this approach is necessary due
to the constantly evolving nature of both 3GPP standards and the
functionality of C-V2X. As stated by ITE, new testing will undoubtedly
lead to changes or enhancements to the applicable standards-and being
held to a regulatory ceiling by imposing a particular standard may cap
the potential of future C-V2X applications. The Commission's focus in
the proceeding is to set objective performance expectations for C-V2X
technology but let industry come to a consensus on the technology
standard that should be applicable to C-V2X moving forward. Given the
broad record support for not incorporating any one particular standard,
the Commission will thus provide industry the flexibility to develop a
technology standard that fits within the technical bounds prescribed in
this document.
 In making this decision, the Commission reiterates its commitment
to vehicle safety and the need for all vehicles that incorporate C-V2X
technology to have the capability to successfully communicate with each
other. Although the Commission is not mandating a particular standard
through incorporation by reference, the Commission expects that the
industry will ensure that all equipment, regardless of manufacturer or
vehicle integrator, is interoperable and that future iterations of
equipment based on evolving standards will be forwards and backwards
compatible to ensure that C-V2X technology delivers the expected safety
benefits to the American public.
 Finally, the Commission recognizes that safety-related wireless
devices and services need to be secure to protect user privacy and
ensure efficient and timely delivery of the intended safety service.
The Commission prioritizes cybersecurity and privacy of consumer
communications through rulemaking and other activities. In addition,
cybersecurity and privacy actions specific to connected vehicles are
the focus of ongoing actions at the U.S. Department of Transportation
(U.S. DOT) with its C-V2X acceleration plan and at the U.S. Department
of Commerce's Bureau of Industry and Security with its proposed ban on
the sale or importation of connected vehicles integrating specific
pieces of hardware and software, or separately sold components, with a
sufficient nexus to the People's Republic of China or Russia. 89 FR
79088 (Sept. 26, 2024). The Commission expects that equipment
manufacturers implementing C-V2X technology will comply with existing
standards and best practices and collaborate with the automotive
industry to develop new guidance, standards, and best practices that
consider cybersecurity and privacy concerns to improve the C-V2X
security posture. The FCC will continue to monitor and engage with
federal and private sector partners on these vital issues.

Band Usage

 The Commission's existing ITS rules lay out a hierarchical priority
system for messages. In the FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on
whether to retain the message priority hierarchy for C-V2X deployment
and whether the 5.895-5.925 GHz band should be limited to non-
commercial services or safety-of-life applications, and if so, how such
a restriction could be implemented. In this regard, the Commission
noted that because the stated purpose of ITS is to promote safety, it
was inclined to retain this message prioritization system in the rules
to help ensure successful transmission of the most important messages.
The Commission asked how ``safety-of-life'' should be defined, how
appropriate applications should be delineated, and whether such a
limitation could be established via changes to the licensee eligibility
requirements. Additionally, the Commission asked how the priority
requirement would work in the C-V2X environment and whether the
priority determination should continue to be associated with the type
of licensee or a more granular approach that considers the type of
message. As noted above, all C-V2X operations pursuant to the recently
granted waivers are limited to transportation and vehicle-safety
related communications.
 Several commenters state that the upper 30 megahertz (5.895-5.925
GHz) of the 5.9 GHz band should be limited to safety-of-life or non-
commercial applications. In its comments, Auto Innovators states that
safety-of-life messages should always have priority when competing for
spectrum with other types of messages and that the Commission should
retain its three-tier message priority hierarchy. The Motor and
Equipment Manufacturers Assoc. (MEMA) also states that the Commission
should retain its existing message priority hierarchy, given the need
to ensure that the most important messages are successfully transmitted
over less critical messages. Robert Bosch LLC (Bosch) comments that a
hierarchical priority system is necessary to ensure safety-of-life
messages. Therefore, Bosch states that the FCC should preserve the
safety-of-life/public safety/non-priority framework for message
prioritization. Bosch recommends that the Commission allocate a
dedicated portion of the 30 megahertz to safety-of-life messages, which
would help ensure uninterrupted transmission of related messages. Bosch
claims that the remainder of the band could be used for both safety-of-
life messages and/or advanced safety services, thereby reducing the
risk of interference, while mitigating high channel load scenarios.
However, Bosch states that advanced safety messages that are not
strictly safety-of-life can also provide notable safety benefits as
well as improved efficiency. For example, Bosch contends that vehicle
platooning or timed vehicle intersection movement can be viewed as
beneficial functionalities within the transportation sector. Bosch
expressed agreement with the Alliance for Automotive Innovation that
the Commission should not overly restrict operations in the upper 30
megahertz to only safety-of-life operations and that it is critical for
the Commission to recognize the importance and value of

[[Page 100841]]

additional functions, such as vehicle platooning, that require use of
the spectrum.
 Responding to the Commission's request that commenters address the
need for granularity in the three-tier message priority hierarchy, MEMA
states that, utilizing the existing framework, any messages that could
reduce the risk of an accident should receive priority over other
messages. For instance, MEMA mentions that public safety messages
should defer to safety-of-life messages, while messages that strictly
relate to traffic congestion, efficiency, or other non-safety issues
should only be transmitted when there is little risk of harmful
interference. On the other hand, MEMA asserts that commercial
operations should be permitted in the ITS band because a prohibition on
commercial operations ``will further disincentivize continued
innovation in V2X applications'' and, in any case, the distinction
between ``commercial'' vs. ``non-commercial'' services is undefined in
this context. AT&T suggests that the Commission should limit the ITS
band to non-commercial applications and services that promote road
safety, but allow the U.S. DOT to define specific road-safety related
applications and services that qualify for use in the 5.895-5.925 GHz
band. New America's Open Technology Institute (OTI) and Public
Knowledge (PK) state that prohibiting commercial activity on the upper
30 megahertz would be consistent with the auto industry's repeated
insistence on the critical need for additional spectrum for public
safety and collision avoidance purposes. Similarly, DSA questions the
automotive industry's claims that 30 megahertz is an insufficient
amount of spectrum for vehicular safety applications while it also
advocates for the ability to use that same 30 megahertz to support
commercial, non-safety applications and services. OTI/PK also state
that if the Commission does not prohibit commercial use, it would be
creating an incentive for both the auto and mobile industries to
underinvest in potential safety-of-life signaling applications in favor
of commercial applications that are quicker to monetize. OTI/PK
``continues to believe that requiring licensees to use public safety
spectrum exclusively for public safety best serves the public interest
and avoids any potential conflict between maximizing safety and
maximizing profit.''
 The Intelligent Transportation Society of America (ITS America)
argues that spectrum use questions have traditionally been decided by
groups that construct standards for these technologies--namely, the
U.S. DOT, SAE International, or the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (``IEEE''). ITS America asserts that these groups
have appropriately balanced the primacy of safety-of-life applications
and the possibility of commercial applications that could incentivize
V2X on-board unit deployment in private vehicle fleets. ITS America
contends that OTI/PK's suggestion to limit use of the 5.895-5.925 GHz
band to safety-of-life and public safety communications would
materially deter V2X investment and deployment, thereby limiting the
number of vehicles utilizing V2X safety measures. NCTA--The internet &
Television Association (NCTA) contends that it is unfair to allow
licensees to gain access to valuable spectrum without an auction. AT&T
states that limiting use of the spectrum to non-commercial applications
and services would prevent undue commercial gain from those deploying
C-V2X and allow the range of operations needed to improve road safety.
ITE and ITS America join MEMA in arguing that it is impractical to try
determining which applications are safety-of-life for the purposes of
restricting the use of the spectrum.
 Given that the ITS remains focused on integrating radio-based
technologies to enhance the transportation and vehicular-safety related
ecosystem, the Commission agrees with those commenters that argue C-V2X
operations should be governed by a prioritization system that is
similar to the hierarchical system currently in place for DSRC. Thus,
safety-of-life messages have top priority, followed by public safety
communications, and then non-priority communications that promote road
safety and efficient, effective road use. The Commission disagrees with
commenters such as OTI/PK who state that allowing non-priority
communications in the band could lead to underinvestment in safety-of-
life applications. The Commission also disagrees with commenters such
as Bosch that the Commission allocate a dedicated portion of the 30
megahertz to safety-of-life messages. Given that the Commission is
prioritizing safety-of-life and public safety usage, the Commission
expects that C-V2X operators will focus their efforts on applications
within this range in order to effectively utilize the 30 megahertz of
spectrum made available to them in this document. The Commission adopts
C-V2X rules that reflect the existing DSRC message prioritization
hierarchy as follows (in order of precedence): safety-of-life, public
safety, and non-priority communications.
 Based on the record in the FCC's proceeding, the Commission
believes that the communications prioritization hierarchy will ensure
that the ITS spectrum is not being used for communications and
applications that would impair the timely and reliable use of the
spectrum for safety of life and public safety communications. As a
practical matter, the Commission's decision to adopt a prioritization
system for C-V2X communications and the high priority to which safety-
of-life and public safety usage messages are entitled will limit the
extent to which other type of applications (such as those supporting
paid advertising and marketing messages) can be effectively developed
and deployed. The Commission notes that the distinction between
``commercial'' and ``non-commercial'' remains undefined in the C-V2X
context, and find limited information in the record to help the
Commission craft a meaningful and readily applicable definition at this
time. The Commission further notes that there is fundamental
disagreement in the record as to whether such a distinction would be
helpful or harmful to the realization of C-V2X's fundamental safety-
related objectives. Finally, there is no ``commercial'' component to
the definition the Commission adopts for C-V2X, which is limited to
operations ``related to the improvement of traffic flow, traffic
safety, and other Intelligent Transportation System applications.''
Given the evolving nature of the C-V2X technology integration, the
Commission will continue to assess how the C-V2X technology in the
upper 30 megahertz develops and promotes safety-of-life applications
and public safety services and whether a further change to the band
usage would maximize the spectrum usage without compromising the
intended safety purposes to be supported by the 5.9 GHz band.
 The Commission also sees no reason to modify the structure by which
C-V2X licenses are licensed under parts 90 and 95 of its rules,
notwithstanding NCTA's contention that the value of the spectrum
warrants use of an auction process unless the spectrum's use is
restricted to safety-of-life services. As an initial matter, RSU/OBU
licenses are issued on a non-exclusive basis and the Commission sees no
need to revise that approach based on the record here. Because the
Commission's RSU/OBU licensing process does not contemplate the
acceptance of mutually exclusive applications, there is no basis to use
an auction process. The Commission also

[[Page 100842]]

sees no reason to deviate from the history of this band that supported
the prior DSRC licensing process. Under the Transportation Equity Act
for the 21st Century, Public Law 105-178, 112 Stat. 107 section 5206(f)
(1998), Congress directed the Commission to consider the spectrum needs
for ITS. The subsequent allocation of the 5.9 GHz band was made based
on a finding that DSRC applications would be a key element in meeting
the nation's transportation needs and improving highway safety.
Additionally, in the DSRC Report and Order, 64 FR 66405 (November 26,
1999), the Commission decided against an auction requirement for ITS
licensees, as users would already be subject to licensing and
regulatory fees.

Channel Bandwidth

 In the FNPRM, the Commission proposed a ``light touch'' regarding
C-V2X channel bandwidth, essentially retaining the remaining portion of
the ITS band plan in place for the legacy DSRC technology beyond the
transition to C-V2X-based technology. In this regard, the Commission
described ``the existing ITS band plan'' in the upper 30 megahertz as
containing three, 10-megahertz DSRC channels: channels 180, 182, and
184 corresponding to 5.895-5.905 GHz, 5.905-5.915 GHz, and 5.915-5.925
GHz, respectively. Channels 180 and 182 can be combined into channel
181 (5.895-5.915 GHz) to provide a single 20-megahertz channel. In the
FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether this band plan,
specifying three 10-megahertz channels, inter alia, should apply to C-
V2X operations. Specifically, the Commission asked whether the band
plan should continue to accommodate combining two channels into a
single 20-megahertz channel; whether channels 182 and 184 should be
permitted to be combined into a single 20-megahertz channel; and
whether all three channels should be permitted to be combined and used
as a single 30-megahertz channel. The Commission further asked what
consequences any of these channel bandwidths would have on C-V2X
deployment and adoption and how a completely flexible band plan versus
a prescriptive band plan would affect the ability of C-V2X technology
to maximize efficient and effective use of the band. In this regard,
the Commission urged commenters to provide sufficient detail regarding
their preferred band plan and how such a plan could work with C-V2X and
all other operational and technical rules being addressed, such as
power limits and out-of-band emissions limits.
 Some commenters state that the Commission should refrain from an
overly prescriptive plan and instead allow C-V2X operators to utilize
the upper 30 megahertz in a flexible manner. Other commenters state
that C-V2X channelization issues should be determined by the
transportation industry. Arguing for maximum flexibility, AT&T cites
the continued evolution of C-V2X and states that the Commission should
continue to allow ``10 MHz channels and, through their aggregation,
wider 20 MHz and 30 MHz channels.'' The Utah Department of
Transportation (UDOT) similarly echoes the desire for the band plan to
continue to accommodate combining two 10-megahertz channels into a
single 20-megahertz channel for C-V2X. The Motor Equipment and
Manufacturers Association (MEMA) argues for retaining the existing ITS
30-megahertz band plan following the transition to C-V2X, saying that
``by retaining separate channels within the ITS band, licensees can
better support safety-of-life use cases which rely on more stringent
requirements in terms of safety, security, prioritization, and resource
availability.''
 Given the Commission's preference for a light touch to minimize
disruption to ongoing transition activities, the Commission will
continue to provide for 10-megahertz channel bandwidths, resulting in
three channels: 5.895-5.905 GHz, 5.905-5.915 GHz, and 5.915-5.925 GHz,
respectively. The Commission will allow users to combine the 10-
megahertz channels into 20 megahertz contiguous channels or a single
30-megahertz channel without restriction, thus accommodating various
ITS applications and services. Additionally, because the current
channel number designations reflect the original DSRC band plan and
related standards, such designations are not relevant to C-V2X and the
Commission therefore do not assign channel number designations to the
10-megahertz bandwidths in the C-V2X rules adopted in this document.
This band plan will provide maximum flexibility to enable the ITS
industry, which is in the early stages of implementing C-V2X systems,
to evolve and modify operations as necessary to use the band in the
most efficient way possible to deliver safety applications to the
American public.

Communications Zones

 The 5.9 GHz band ITS spectrum is shared and licensed in non-
exclusive geographic areas based on geo-political boundaries. To
maximize the use within this shared spectrum, the Commission's rules
require that each registered RSU designate its intended area of
operation or ``communications zone'' and that such communications zones
be the smallest necessary. Under the rules, a communications zone is
defined as the service area associated with an individual fixed RSU.
The communications zone radius is derived from the RSU equipment class
specified in 47 CFR 90.375. In the FNPRM, the Commission proposed to
retain the ``communications zone'' designations currently in the rules
and require RSUs to specify their intended zone, believing this would
maximize spectrum use among all users, continue to ensure that stations
only cover their intended area, and provide opportunities for other
licensees to install RSUs for other nearby areas without mutually
interfering. The Commission asked commenters to address whether the
current communications zone distance limits should be retained without
change, modified, or eliminated. The Commission also sought comment on
what effect any proposed changes would have on the ability for C-V2X to
deploy new systems and continue operating into the future. The
Commission also sought comment on whether it should continue to specify
both transmitter output power and radiated power levels for
communications zones.
 In response, 5GAA states that, while DSRC technology theoretically
was required to utilize RSU communications zones to manage congestion,
use of communications zones did not occur in practice, and C-V2X does
not require a similar mechanism for congestion control. 5GAA recommends
revisions to 47 CFR 90.375 and 90.377 of the rules to remove references
to communications zones and the associated output power limits.
Furthermore, as noted in this document, the Bureaus recently granted
waivers to parties requesting to deploy C-V2X operations in the upper
30-megahertz portion of the 5.9 GHz band (5.895-5.925 GHz) prior to
adopting final C-V2X-based rules. Notably, C-V2X waiver applicants did
not specify communications zones in their waiver requests and requested
waiver of that rule section. Consequently, as part of those grants, the
Bureaus permitted C-V2X RSUs and OBUs to operate with a 33 dBm EIRP and
without transmitter output power limits. Waiver grant recipients are
not required to designate communications zones or limit their
transmitter output power or EIRP for designated communications zone
sizes in their areas of operation.
 The Commission finds that retaining the existing communications
zone construct is unnecessary as ITS evolves

[[Page 100843]]

from DSRC to C-V2X technology. Based on information contained in the
record indicating that DSRC operations did not utilize communications
zones to manage congestion and that C-V2X operations do not require
such a mechanism to manage congestion, along with the fact that no C-
V2X waiver applicants requested communications zone designations, the
Commission concludes that the communications zone definitions,
designations, and associated reduced power limits are unnecessary to
manage congestion control in C-V2X operations. Thus, the C-V2X rules
adopted herein do not include communications zone requirements. See the
Final Rules, 47 CFR 90.7, 90.375, 90.377 for these rule changes.

C-V2X Technical Requirements

Power and Antenna Height Limits for C-V2X Roadside Units (RSUs)
 Power. The Commission's current DSRC rules specify the maximum
radiated RSU power permitted on each channel, ranging generally from 23
dBm to 33 dBm, but permitting State and local government entities to
radiate at higher levels on the control channel (channel 178) at up to
44.8 dBm and on the public safety priority channel (channel 184) at up
to 40 dBm. In the FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on what RSU
power levels should be associated with each communications zone,
channel, and user under the modified ITS band plan, and whether the
rules should continue to permit higher radiated power for State and
local government entities or be consistent among all users as a way of
maximizing spectrum use and controlling potential harmful interference
between users. The Commission sought comment on whether RSU radiated
power should be limited to 23 dBm as specified for some channels, 33
dBm as specified for others, or some other value, such as permitting
higher power on a control channel; whether the rules should continue to
specify both output power (power delivered to the input of the
transmitting antenna) and radiated power levels for communications
zone/channel combinations, or whether it would be more appropriate to
specify only a radiated power limit, and specify power as a power
density (power per unit of frequency, commonly known as power spectral
density (PSD)) to normalize power for wider bandwidth channels, if the
use of such channels is still permitted; and whether compliance with
the limits should be determined with a root mean square (RMS) detector
(i.e., average measurement) or with a peak detector.
 5GAA recommends adopting a maximum 33 dBm EIRP without transmitter
output power limits for C-V2X RSUs to promote more robust safety
services and maximize the overall benefits of C-V2X safety services. A
broad range of commenters support 5GAA's recommendation. Auto
Innovators contends that raising the RSU EIRP limit in this manner
would provide more flexibility to C-V2X operations. DENSO International
America, Inc., on behalf of DENSO Corporation and its US affiliate
(DENSO) supports a maximum 33 dBm EIRP for C-V2X RSUs to provide more
protection from unlicensed device out-of-band emissions from the
adjacent 5.850-5.895 GHz U-NII-4 band. 5G Americas supports 5GAA's
recommendation for C-V2X RSU's in-band power limit because the proposal
is consistent with 3GPP physical layer standards. In response to the
5.9 GHz NPRM proposal, the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration (NTIA) supported a maximum RSU EIRP limit of 33 dBm. In
its comments on the Joint Waiver Parties C-V2X waiver request, which
only specified the 5.905-5.925 GHz band, NTIA supported an RSU EIRP
limit of 33 dBm over a 20-megahertz channel (33 dBm/20 MHz) at 5.905-
5.925 GHz, and then, in its October 2020 Technical Report, an RSU EIRP
limit of 33 dBm in the lower 10-megahertz channel (33 dBm/10 MHz) at
5.895-5.905 GHz. In its June 7, 2024 letter, NTIA further expressed
support for the 33 dBm limit throughout the entire 30 megahertz. NTIA
expressed agreement with the Commission's conclusion that requiring
coordination for ITS RSU installations located within a section 90.371
coordination zone is the best approach to facilitate sharing with
federal systems. The Commission received no comments on whether it
would be appropriate to specify the EIRP as a PSD, or whether
compliance with the EIRP limits should be evaluated using RMS or peak
measurements.
 After consideration of the record, the Commission adopts an EIRP
PSD limit for C-V2X RSU operations, without any limit on the
transmitter output power. Because the PSD limit will limit the overall
EIRP, the Commission sees no need to also adopt a corresponding maximum
EIRP limit. By specifying radiated power limits, without a transmitter
output power limit, the Commission offers more flexibility for RSU
stations to provide reliable service in a given coverage area, and
enable licensees to select the most efficient and effective equipment
parameters to meet their coverage requirements, while protecting
incumbent federal radiolocation stations from harmful interference. An
EIRP PSD limit will keep the power even across the channel to avoid
RSUs concentrating energy in a narrow bandwidth, thereby keeping the
harmful interference potential low, and promoting more efficiency/
higher data throughput by making the use of wider bandwidth channels
more attractive when RSUs are transmitting. Although the Commission
adopts these general limits, the Commission notes that if C-V2X RSUs
are to be located within a coordination zone identified in 47 CFR
90.387(b), they must first be coordinated with NTIA. As recommended in
the NTIA letter and supported in the record, the Commission adopts a 33
dBm/10 MHz, 33 dBm/20 MHz, and 33 dBm/30 MHz EIRP PSD limits for C-V2X
RSUs These power levels will enable ITS systems to operate over their
intended service areas and protect federal incumbent radar systems for
any RSU location outside the coordination zones.
 Consistent with the measurement procedure for out-of-band emissions
from unlicensed devices that operate in the 5.850-5.895 GHz (U-NII-4)
and 5.925-6.425 GHz (U-NII-5) bands, the Commission permits compliance
with the RSU EIRP limits to be determined using RMS measurements rather
than requiring peak measurements. As the Commission has previously
determined, RMS measurements are more appropriate to characterize a
transmitter's operation because peak power may only be reached
occasionally and for short periods of time, whereas RMS measurements
represent the continuous power being generated from a device.
 Antenna height. The Commission's rules restrict DSRC RSU antenna
height to limit their signals within their designated zones to the
extent practicable. RSU antenna height is currently limited to 8 meters
at full power and may be as high as 15 meters with a corresponding
power reduction. In the FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether
the existing RSU antenna height limitations in the rules are justified,
if there are any reasons to permit higher antenna heights, and whether
licensees should continue to be required to reduce their power for
higher RSU antenna heights as a way of controlling coverage area and
reducing the potential for harmful interference. In the C-V2X waiver
grants noted in this document, the Commission requires compliance with
the existing RSU antenna height limitation requirements.

[[Page 100844]]

 In its comments, 5GAA recommends that the Commission retain the
existing RSU antenna height limitations and associated power reduction
requirement for roadside antennas over 8 meters in height up to a
maximum of 15 meters. DENSO contends that the power and antenna height
issues require sufficient technical study and should be agreed to by
all stakeholders because these technical requirements have a
significant impact on V2X communication system performance and cost.
 The Commission agrees with 5GAA that the existing limitations on
roadside unit transmitting antenna height and associated power
reduction requirement for RSU transmitting antennas over 8 meters in
height up to a maximum of 15 meters should be retained in the
Commission's rules. These limitations have been successful in enabling
coexistence within the band and preventing harmful interference between
ITS DSRC operations and to other incumbent operations in the 5.9 GHz
band while also enabling sufficient signal coverage over the localized
areas being served by each RSU. Retaining the roadside antenna height
limits and the associated power reduction requirements for antennas
more than 8 meters in height will continue to provide a known spectral
environment for C-V2X systems so that network designers can create
efficient systems while reducing the potential for harmful interference
with other ITS licensees and incumbents in the 5.895-5.925 GHz band.
Thus, the Commission retains the roadside unit antenna height
limitations and associated power reduction requirement currently
specified in the Commission's rules. In instances where the maximum RSU
EIRP must be reduced due to an antenna height greater than 8 meters
above the roadway surface, the RSU PSD limits must be equivalently
reduced.
Power Limits for C-V2X On-Board Units (OBUs)
 Under the Commission's part 95 rules, DSRC OBU transmitters
operating in the 5.895-5.925 GHz band must comply with technical
standard Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
802.11p-2010 for wireless access in vehicular environments. For
vehicular and portable on-board units, IEEE standard 802.11p-2010
specifies maximum transmitter output power (power supplied to the input
of the transmitting antenna) limits ranging from 1 mW (0 dBm) to 760 mW
(28.8 dBm), and maximum radiated power (EIRP) permitted on each channel
ranging generally from 23 dBm to 33 dBm, but permitting State and local
government entities to radiate at higher levels up to 44.8 dBm. In the
FNPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether it should modify these
power rules for application to C-V2X on-board units. The Commission
proposed to limit C-V2X OBU transmitter output power to no more than 20
dBm and EIRP to no more than 23 dBm, believing these power levels to be
appropriate for C-V2X vehicular and portable devices. The Commission
sought comment on whether it should increase the OBU EIRP limit to 33
dBm and whether such an increase would affect the ability of C-V2X
roadside units to co-exist with and protect federal radiolocation
stations. Further, in this context, the Commission also reminded
commenters of the need to simultaneously ensure that portable on-board
units comply with the Commission's radiofrequency (RF) radiation
exposure limits.
 In its comments, 5GAA recommends increasing the C-V2X OBU EIRP
limit to 33 dBm and eliminating the transmitter output power limit
requirement. A broad range of commenters support this 5GAA
recommendation. Ford Motor Company (Ford) stated ``that the transmit
power limit for OBUs should be specified only as an EIRP of 33 dBm RMS
to provide broader coverage including emergency/public safety
vehicles.'' Ford submits that ``an increased EIRP limit (achieved
through a combination of higher transmit power and antenna gain) will
allow C-V2X-OBU equipped vehicles to communicate more effectively among
each other and with C-V2X RSUs. This additional flexibility can be
useful to first responders and public safety vehicles in providing
higher reliability and range for their safety critical needs (e.g.,
traffic light preemption).'' Auto Innovators similarly supports 5GAA's
proposed power limits to provide more flexibility for C-V2X operations.
 Fiat Chrysler Automobiles supports swift adoption of 5GAA's
proposed C-V2X service rules to facilitate deployment in the U.S. 5G
Americas supports 5GAA's proposed C-V2X technical rules, including the
OBU in-band power limit, because it is consistent with 3GPP physical
layer standards. OTI/PK agree that the Commission should adopt 5GAA's
proposal and authorize on board units to operate at up to 33 dBm, if
feasible. Dynamic Spectrum Alliance (DSA), a global, cross-industry
alliance focused on increasing dynamic access to unused radio
frequencies and unlicensed usage proponent, supports 5GAA's request for
OBUs to operate with a 33 dBm EIRP.
 In its reply comments, NCTA states that the 5GAA proposal would
increase power tenfold without addressing NTIA guidance relating to the
protection of radiolocation exclusion zones. Further, NCTA suggests
that ``if the Commission determines that C-V2X OBUs can operate at such
high power (i.e., up to 33 dBm) without the need for exclusion zones,
it should also permit U-NII-4 devices to operate using at least the
same power level without exclusion zones, as they would pose a
significantly lower risk of potential harmful interference to federal
radars than similarly powered C-V2X devices.''
 Subsequent to the comment period, 5GAA modified its original
support for a general 33 dBm EIRP limit by suggesting that the
Commission's rules should allow the OBU EIRP limits that were granted
in the C-V2X waivers i.e., OBUs operating in the 5.905-5.925 GHz band
may operate at 33 dBm EIRP, but not exceed 27 dBm EIRP within 5 degrees of horizontal. 5GAA states that OBUs that seek to
operate at up to 33 dBm within 5 degrees of horizontal can
implement a geolocation function to reduce their power to the 27 dBm
EIRP level when operating near federal radar sites that require
protection.
 In its Technical Report submitted in response to the 5.9 GHz NPRM,
NTIA determined that OBUs operating at 23 dBm EIRP or less would not
need to be coordinated to protect federal operations in the 5.905-5.925
GHz band, thus providing an implied power limitation for non-NTIA
coordinated ITS operations. Subsequently, in its comments on the Joint
Waiver Request filing, NTIA supported a maximum 33 dBm OBU EIRP limit
for the C-V2X operations in the 5.905-5.925 GHz band. However, to
adequately protect the primary federal radiolocation services operating
in the 5.9 GHz band during the period in which devices are operating
under a waiver, NTIA requested that C-V2X OBUs be limited to 27 dBm
EIRP within 5 degrees in elevation from the horizontal
plane. The granted waivers limit OBU operations and power reduction
conditions to the 5.905-5.925 GHz band, as requested by NTIA.
 On June 7, 2024, NTIA submitted a letter to the Commission
providing additional information in response to the 5.9 GHz FNPRM. The
NTIA letter addressed, among other things, the C-V2X OBU EIRP limits
necessary for ``the protection of federal radiolocation systems.'' As
the NTIA's OBU proposal, which was similar to the most recent 5GAA
proposal, differed from the Commission's initial 5.9 GHz FNPRM

[[Page 100845]]

proposal, OET issued a Public Notice on June 11, 2024 inviting comment
on the proposal. The NTIA proposal, as set forth in the OET Public
Notice, would permit OBU devices to optionally incorporate geofencing
techniques to protect federal radiolocation sites from harmful
interference, while operating with higher power in otherwise unaffected
areas. In sum, for geofenced devices, the Public Notice proposal would
provide a 33 dBm EIRP PSD limit over the operating bandwidth in areas
outside of coordination zones. Such devices would rely on a geofencing
capability to limit the EIRP PSD to 23 dBm for operations that utilize
the 5.895-5.905 GHz band within coordination zone areas and 27 dBm
within 5 degrees of horizontal for coordination area
operations that exclusively use the 5.905-5.925 GHz band. Geofenced
devices operating in any portion of the 5.895-5.905 GHz band would have
to abide by the ``worse-case'' 23 dBm limit if operating within the
coordination zones. Devices that do not incorporate a geofencing
capability would be required to meet the aforementioned restrictions at
all locations.
 Additionally, NTIA asks that the Commission adopt specific
compliance requirements to ensure geofencing capabilities are properly
implemented. In this regard, NTIA suggests that manufacturers
implementing a geofencing capability would need to specifically
demonstrate and certify compliance of the capability within the FCC's
equipment certification process specified in part 2 of the Commission's
rules. Further, in the event that interference protection requirements
are changed, resulting in updated protection zones, the device should
include a mechanism to update the OBUs with new information within a
reasonable timeframe.
 Comments filed in response to the Public Notice support the
optional use of geofencing techniques. In its comments, the Intelligent
Transportation Society of America (ITS America) states that it supports
NTIA's proposal related to optional geofencing capabilities and
appreciates the flexibility that the proposal provides to C-V2X
operations with regards to power levels. ITS America further states
that updating geofencing parameters for deployed devices poses
challenges and will require collaboration among government and industry
stakeholders to successfully implement. Auto Innovators also supports
the use of geofencing techniques to enable operations at less
restrictive EIRP levels.
 Support for geofencing techniques also came from additional
commenters, including the 5G Automotive Association, the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the
Institute of Transportation Engineers, and the Wireless Infrastructure
Association. These commenters recommend the Commission define two
distinct C-V2X channels, specifically focusing on the lower 10
megahertz channel at 5.895-5.905 GHz and the upper 20 megahertz channel
at 5.905-5.925 GHz. Doing so, they say, will ensure interoperability
within the band. These commenters also request that the Commission
adopt rules requiring C-V2X operators to look to the NTIA website for
information on the location of coordination zones. Both the
Commission's rules and the NTIA's comments in this document specify 47
CFR 90.371(b) of the rules as the location of the coordination zones
necessary to protect federal radiolocation systems. Lastly, these
commenters also recommend including provisions in the rules that would
require an OBU equipped with geofencing capability to lower its
transmit EIRP to the appropriate level within 60 seconds of entering
the power reduction zone.
 Based on consideration of the record, the Commission adopts power
limit rules for C-V2X OBUs that provide for optional use of
``geofencing'' techniques to allow the OBUs to operate at a higher
radiated power in some locations. As the Commission has discussed,
geofencing technique involves a radiofrequency device using a
geolocation capability to determine whether its geographic coordinates
are within a defined geographic area. In the instant case,
``geofenced'' OBU devices would incorporate a geolocation capability to
be aware of the appropriate protection areas around federal
radiolocation sites. The OBUs would be programmed with the existing
5.895-5.925 GHz band federal radiolocation sites' coordination zones
(specified by geographic coordinates and a radius) to ensure that they
operate with lower power levels within the protected areas. OBU
equipment that does not incorporate this geolocation capability would
be required to comply with the more restrictive OBU EIRP limit.
 Thus, reflective of NTIA's June 7, 2024 recommendation and to allow
the maximum flexibility possible for C-V2X OBU operations while still
protecting incumbent federal radar operations in the band from harmful
interference, the Commission will permit C-V2X OBUs with geolocation
capabilities to operate with up to the maximum 33 dBm/10 MHz, 33 dBm/20
MHz, and 33 dBm/30 MHz EIRP PSD outside of a 47 CFR 90.387(b)
coordination zone. Within the coordination zones, the following limits
will apply: all operations that include use of the 5.895-5.905 GHz
channel (i.e., 5.895-5.905 GHz, 5.895-5.915 GHz, and 5.895-5.925 GHz)
are limited to a 23 dBm EIRP over the channel bandwidth; all other
channels (i.e., 5.905-5.915 GHz, 5.915-5.925 GHz, 5.905-5.925 GHz
operations) are limited to 33 dBm over the channel bandwidth, but must
be reduced to 27 dBm over the channel bandwidth within 5
degrees of horizontal in elevation. OBUs not equipped with geofencing
capability will be limited to the power levels specified for operation
within the coordination zones. Manufacturers incorporating geofencing
capability for an OBU will need to specifically demonstrate and certify
that the device implements the capability in a manner that complies
with the requirements discussed herein when seeking an FCC Equipment
Certification under part 2 of the Commission's rules. If geofencing
locations and parameters are subsequently modified, a mechanism should
be available such that OBUs can be updated with the new information.
 The Commission further declines to implement recommendations from
parties responding to the Public Notice that the Commission re-
channelizes C-V2X operations into two distinct 10 megahertz and 20
megahertz channels. As stated in the channel bandwidth section above,
the Commission is providing maximum flexibility to enable the ITS
industry to evolve and modify operations as necessary to use the band
in the most efficient way possible to deliver safety applications to
the American public. The Commission also declines these parties'
recommendation that the Commission adopt rules requiring C-V2X
operators obtain coordination zone information from NTIA's website.
However, the Commission does support industry and government
collaboration on additional means of obtaining this information. To
that end, the Commission notes that NTIA has developed machine readable
KML files for download from its website that can be used by C-V2X
devices for determining if they are within a coordination zone. The
Commission also declines to implement a 60-second EIRP adjustment
requirement after an OBU enters a coordination zone. The rules require
C-V2X devices to comply with the power limits for their location and
manufacturers must ensure that devices operate such that they comply
with the rules for their location. Thus,
