FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Access to Video Conferencing
Document number: 2024-27479
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireline Competition Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 100878
Publication date: 2024-12-13

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 240 (Friday, December 13, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 100878-100898]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-27479]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 14 and 64

[CG Docket Nos. 23-161, 10-213, and 03-123; FCC 24-95; FR ID 261149]


Access to Video Conferencing

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC
or Commission) takes steps to ensure the accessibility of interoperable
video conferencing services (IVCS). The Commission provides additional
clarity on how the Commission's accessibility performance objectives
apply to interoperable video conferencing services (IVCS), modifies
those performance objectives to ensure access to IVCS, and addresses
how the Interstate telecommunications relay services (TRS) Fund will
support the provision of Video Relay Service (VRS) and other forms of
TRS in video conferences.

DATES:
 Effective date: Effective January 13, 2025, except for instruction
6 (the amendments to Sec. 64.606(g)(6)), which is delayed. The
Commission will publish a document in the Federal Register announcing
the effective date for the amendments to Sec. 64.606(g)(6).
 Compliance date: The compliance date for Sec. Sec. 14.21(b)(2)(iv)
and (b)(4) is January 12, 2027.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Ike Ofobike, Disability Rights Office,
Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, at (202) 418-1028; email:
 [email protected] ; or William Wallace, Disability Rights Office,
Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau, at (202) 418-2716; email:
 [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Second
Report and Order, in CG Docket Nos. 23-161, 10-213, and 03-123,
document FCC 24-95, adopted on September 26, 2024, released on
September 27, 2024. The Commission previously sought comment on the
issue in a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), published at 88 FR
52088, August 7, 2023. The full text of this document is available for
public inspection and copying via the FCC's Electronic Document
Management System (EDOCS) website at https://www.fcc.gov/edocs and via
the Commission's Electronic Comment Filing System (ECFS) website at
 https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs . To request materials in accessible formats
for people with disabilities (Braille, large print, electronic files,
audio format), send an email to [email protected] or call the Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530.

Synopsis

Background

 1. Under section 716 of the Communications Act, as amended (the
Act), 47 U.S.C. 617, providers of advanced communications services
(ACS) and manufacturers of equipment used for ACS must make such
services and equipment accessible to and usable by people with
disabilities, if achievable. Service providers and manufacturers may
comply with section 716 of the Act either by building accessibility
features into their services and equipment or by choosing to use third-
party applications, peripheral devices, software, hardware, or customer
premises equipment (CPE) that are available to individuals with
disabilities at nominal cost. If accessibility is not achievable
through either of these means, then manufacturers and service providers
must make their products and services compatible with existing
peripheral devices or specialized CPE commonly used by people with
disabilities to achieve access, subject to the achievability criterion.
The Commission is directed to adopt ``performance objectives to ensure
the accessibility, usability, and compatibility of advanced
communications services and the equipment used for such services.''
 2. The Act defines advanced communications services as: (A)
interconnected VoIP service; (B) non-interconnected VoIP service; (C)
electronic messaging service; (D) interoperable video conferencing
service; and (E) any audio or video communications service used by
inmates for the purpose of communicating with individuals outside of
the correctional facility where the inmate is held, regardless of
technology used. 47 U.S.C. 153(1). Interoperable video conferencing
service, in turn, is defined as: [a] service that provides real-time
video communications, including audio, to enable users to share
information of the user's choosing. 47 U.S.C. 153(27).
 3. In 2011, when initially adopting rules to implement section 716
of the Act, the Commission attempted to determine what Congress meant
by including the word ``interoperable'' as part of the term
interoperable video conferencing service. Finding that the record
before it was insufficient to decide this question, the Commission
sought further comment on the issue.
 4. In June 2023, after refreshing the record on the definition of
``interoperable video conferencing service,'' the Commission resolved
this definitional issue. The Commission found no persuasive reason to
modify or limit the scope of the statutory definition. Therefore, the
Commission concluded that its part 14 accessibility rules apply to all
services and equipment that meet the statutory definition. Given the
extended pendency of questions regarding the application of part 14 of
the Commission's rules to video conferencing, the Commission recognized
that some service providers might need additional time to comply with
those rules, and therefore allowed IVCS providers until September 3,
2024, to come into compliance with its existing part 14 rules.
 5. Telecommunications Relay Services and Interoperable Video
Conferencing Services. Enacted in 1990, Title IV of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), codified as section 225 of the Act, directs the
Commission to ``ensure that interstate and intrastate
telecommunications relay services are available, to the extent possible
and in the most efficient manner,'' to people in the United States with
hearing or speech disabilities. TRS are defined as

[[Page 100879]]

``telephone transmission services'' enabling such persons to
communicate by wire or radio ``in a manner that is functionally
equivalent to the ability of [a person without hearing or speech
disabilities] to communicate using voice communication services.''
There are currently three forms of internet-based TRS: Video Relay
Service (VRS) ``allows people with hearing or speech disabilities who
use sign language to communicate with voice telephone users through
video equipment and a live communications assistant (CA);'' Internet
Protocol Relay Service (IP Relay) allows an individual with a hearing
or speech disability to communicate with voice telephone users by
transmitting text via the internet; and Internet Protocol Captioned
Telephone Service (IP CTS) permits a person with hearing loss to have a
telephone conversation while reading captions of what the other party
is saying on an internet-connected device. The provision of internet-
based TRS is supported by the Interstate TRS Fund, maintained through
mandatory contributions from providers of telecommunications service,
interconnected VoIP service, and non-interconnected VoIP service. Three
non-internet-based forms of TRS--traditional TRS using text telephony
(TTY), Captioned Telephone Service (CTS), and Speech-to-Speech Relay
(STS)--are also supported in part by the TRS Fund and are available
through state TRS programs.
 6. The structure of the Commission's TRS program reflects the fact
that, historically, most people have used wireline or wireless
telephone networks to communicate remotely by voice. Thus, North
American Numbering Plan (NANP) telephone numbers are used to route
calls between TRS users and the people they are calling, and the
provision of TRS, to date, has typically been configured to fit within
the typical structure of a traditional telephone call, with a ``calling
party'' and ``called party'' and originating and terminating NANP
numbers. This structure has continued to be used to frame the provision
of TRS even after the development of internet-based forms of TRS. As a
result, even though a VRS user's connection with a CA is established
via an internet video link, the Commission has been able to rely on
originating and terminating telephone numbers as part of the
information required to verify the user's eligibility and the minutes
of service for which TRS providers are compensated.
 7. Video conferencing, however, is generally accessed through the
internet, without necessarily involving any telephone numbers. While a
consumer can obtain audio-only access to some video conferences by
dialing a telephone number, full video access is usually achieved
directly through the internet, without the use of originating or
terminating telephone numbers. As a result, for a consumer to use VRS
to participate in a video conference, a telephone number must be
available for an audio-only connection to the video conference. The VRS
consumer must establish a direct video connection to the conference--in
the same way as other participants, but independently of the VRS
provider--and establish a second, separate video connection to the VRS
provider. The CA then establishes a separate, audio-only connection to
the conference, using the dial-in number. The CA's only connection to
the VRS user is via the second video connection. Thus, the CA cannot
see the other video conference participants, and the VRS user can only
view the CA over the second video connection, often on a separate
screen.
 8. To address concerns about the availability of TRS on video
conferencing platforms, the Commission requested the Disability
Advisory Committee (DAC) to study the matter. In its 2022 report, the
DAC stated that it is impossible for users of most video conferencing
platforms and most TRS providers to natively interconnect their
preferred TRS provider to video conferencing platforms, and that,
typically, TRS users can only interconnect their preferred TRS provider
to a video conferencing platform by dialing in via the public switched
telephone network.
 9. Such a dial-in connection is often unavailable, and even when
available, dialing into a video conference poses multiple difficulties.
First, the TRS provider's CA, who is connected to the video conference
via the audio-only dial-in connection, has no visual access to the
other video conference participants (including visual cues to indicate
who is speaking) or any documents or other visual information being
shown to participants. Further, the CA's audio-only connection may
result in poor audio quality, causing errors in interpretation or
captioning. Second, as a commenter explains, these arrangements require
a TRS user to run two separate applications or devices--one to
participate in the video portion of the conference, and another to
communicate with the TRS provider's CA. The commenter adds that
following the discussion is challenging enough with one application or
one device; having to toggle between two applications or two devices
makes meaningful participation even more arduous.
 10. For all these reasons, the DAC recommended that the FCC resolve
these issues by: facilitating a technical mechanism for TRS providers
to natively interconnect TRS services, including video, audio,
captioning, and text-based relay to video conferencing platforms;
ensuring that users can seamlessly initiate TRS from the provider of
their choice on any video conferencing platform; addressing the
integration of CAs and the overall accessibility challenges of video
conferencing platforms; and, clarifying the legal ability of TRS
providers to seek compensation for service provided for video
conferences from the TRS Fund. Since the DAC recommendations were
published, one VRS provider has reported that it now offers a means of
integrating its provision of VRS with one video conferencing platform.
 11. In 2023, the Commission proposed IVCS-specific amendments to
the performance objectives in the part 14 rules on accessibility of ACS
and amendments to the TRS rules to authorize and facilitate the
provision of TRS in video conferences. Specifically, the Commission
proposed to require IVCS providers to include speech-to-text (i.e.,
captioning of all voice communications) and text-to-speech capability,
to enable the use of sign language interpreting, and to include
accessibility settings in the user interface controls. The Commission
also sought comment on whether technical standards are available or
could be fashioned for use as safe harbors, whereby certain performance
objectives for IVCS can be satisfied by providing access to relevant
forms of TRS.
 12. Regarding its TRS rules, the Commission proposed to clarify
that the integrated provision of TRS in video conferences can be
supported by the Interstate TRS Fund. The Commission also proposed
additional rule amendments specific to video conferences, addressing
VRS user validation and call detail supporting compensation requests;
participation of VRS CAs and the use of multiple CAs and multiple VRS
providers; and the ability of VRS users and CAs to turn off their
cameras when not actively participating in a video conference.
Regarding TRS generally, the Commission proposed to amend the
confidentiality requirements for TRS CAs and providers in the context
of video conferences and prohibit exclusivity agreements between TRS
providers and IVCS providers. Finally, the Commission sought comment on
how to avoid TRS substituting for

[[Page 100880]]

accommodations for individuals with disabilities that employers,
educational institutions, health care organizations, and government
agencies are required to provide under other applicable laws, including
whether to allow TRS users to reserve a CA in advance of a video
conference.

Second Report and Order

Video Conferencing Accessibility

 13. Need for Improvement. The Commission finds that there is a
continuing need for improvement in making video conferencing
accessible. Video conferencing has become a routine facet of everyday
life. Recent data from Gallup show that, as of February 2024, only 20%
of U.S. employees with remote-capable jobs work exclusively on-site
(compared to 60% in January 2019); 54% have hybrid work arrangements,
and 27% have exclusively remote work arrangements. The Pew Research
Center has found that 78% of remote workers use video or online
conferencing services at least sometimes, with more than half using
such services often. A TRS provider points out that video conferencing
is here to stay as an important component of communications going
forward. Similarly, a commenter notes that going forward, video
conferencing and other technologies with accessibility features will
continue to be a catalyst for post-COVID economic recovery, opening
important employment opportunities for traditionally underserved and
underemployed communities. In short, there is no disagreement among
commenters as to the importance of video conferencing services to
people's everyday lives or the need to improve the accessibility and
usability of those services for individuals with disabilities.
 14. The record also reflects that there are significant gaps in the
accessibility of video conferencing platforms. As the Commission has
previously noted, some video conferencing platforms have implemented
accessibility features, such as braille display support, captioning,
keyboard accessibility features, high-contrast visual elements,
customizable notifications, verbosity controls, pinning and
spotlighting, and support for screen readers. However, even with these
advances, challenges remain. Numerous comments from consumers request
that the Commission ensure the availability of features and
enhancements needed to make video conferences more accessible.
 15. A coalition of advocacy organizations notes that often the
video windows in which speakers and interpreters appear are too small
for a viewer to be able to read lips or observe sign language
interpreting. And, while some IVCS providers offer captioning, if the
video conference host controls the captioning, other users may not be
able to adjust the captions when the captioning appears too small and
lacks adequate contrast against the background to be reasonably
legible. Further, consumers can access video conferences from a wide
range of internet-enabled devices, increasing the need for customizing
what they see on their screens. However, each video conferencing
platform uniquely arranges and identifies its controls and settings,
which makes it more difficult for unfamiliar users to adjust the
settings on their devices for optimal presentation as needed during a
video conference.
 16. Individuals who are blind or have low vision also report
problems accessing video conferences. An advocacy organization points
out that creating, hosting, or joining a meeting presents multiple
accessibility barriers for members of these communities, regardless of
which platform and device combination are utilized. Users who are blind
or have low vision may encounter difficulty navigating features,
controls, and settings of video conferencing platforms with their
preferred assistive technology. As a commenter states, if, for example,
certain controls are not operable with assistive technology or are not
properly labeled, people who are blind or have low vision are not able
to enter, operate, and conclude a call. Furthermore, if control and
setting features of the conference platform are purely visual, they may
be inaccessible to users who are blind or have low vision.
 17. A 2024 study examining the experiences of people with various
disabilities when using popular video conferencing platforms reveals
additional challenges, particularly for neurodivergent participants or
those with physical or motor impairments. For example, some respondents
with speech, motor, or cognitive disabilities described being unable to
formulate questions or locate and activate a video conferencing
platform's ``raise your hand'' function in time to contribute in calls.
Other respondents described being overwhelmed by the need to learn new
functions and tools on different video conferencing platforms.
 18. As several commenters point out, these concerns are heightened
because conference call participants are generally not in a position to
dictate what video conferencing platform will be used for a particular
conference. For example, a patient who is deaf may not be able to
obtain healthcare because the doctor's telehealth conferencing platform
does not enable a connection to a sign language interpreter or VRS.
Similarly, visual content shared in the video conferencing platform
during a video conference is usually not accessible to people who use
screen readers or braille displays because shared documents typically
appear only as a flat image without perceivable elements. In these and
other scenarios, a person with a disability often has no opportunity to
request a different, accessible video conferencing system.
 19. Compliance with Existing General Performance Objectives. As
discussed above, IVCS poses a broad range of accessibility issues,
which often require solutions specifically tailored to the multimedia
aspect of this subcategory of ACS. Attempts to address these issues
were delayed while the Commission's interpretation of the term
interoperable video conferencing service remained unresolved. The
result is a patchwork of different accessibility features from
different video conferencing providers, causing a confusing and
inconsistent landscape for people with disabilities to navigate. In
addition, because IVCS is so often used for pre-scheduled, multi-party
communication, consumers with disabilities often have no choice as to
which service is used for a video conference--that choice is made by
the person or organization hosting the video conference.
 20. These accessibility gaps can be closed to a substantial extent
if IVCS providers and equipment manufacturers comply with the
Commission's current rules. Part 14 of those rules, initially adopted
in 2011 to implement section 716(e) of the Act, includes a set of
performance objectives to ensure the accessibility, usability, and
compatibility of advanced communications services and the equipment
used for such services. The current performance objectives define, in
general terms, what providers of IVCS and manufacturers of equipment
used for IVCS must accomplish to make their services, equipment, and
software accessible, usable, and compatible. In general, for services,
equipment, and software to be accessible: input, control, and
mechanical functions must be locatable, identifiable, and operable by
people with disabilities; and all information necessary to operate and
use the product must be available to people with disabilities. 47 CFR
14.21(b). Within this rubric, the provision sets forth a list of
performance objectives defining further what accessible means for
people with specific types of disabilities. For

[[Page 100881]]

example, one provision states that advanced communications services,
equipment, and software shall be operable without hearing, i.e., shall
provide at least one mode that does not require user auditory
perception. 47 CFR 14.21(b)(1)(iv). Like other providers of ACS and
manufacturers of ACS equipment, IVCS providers and manufacturers are
required to meet each of these objectives (unless an objective is not
achievable).
 21. A number of the accessibility improvements sought by commenters
can be addressed by IVCS providers coming into compliance with the
existing rules. For example, section 14.21(b)(1) of Commissions rules
states that, for services, equipment, and software to be accessible to
people who are blind, input and control functions shall be provided in
at least one mode that does not require user vision, and all
information necessary to operate and use the product, including but not
limited to, text, static or dynamic images, icons, labels shall be
available through at least one mode in auditory form. Meeting these
performance objectives (e.g., by providing, among other things, voice-
activated control settings and screen-reader functionality or
compatibility) would address a commenter's concerns that chat functions
and control settings on IVCS platforms are often visual only, and thus
inaccessible to blind and low-vision users. As of September 3, 2024,
IVCS providers should have rolled out updates to address such
deficiencies, if achievable.
 22. Additionally, section 14.21(b)(2) of the Commission's rules
states that in at least one mode, ACS shall permit operation by, and
provide visual information to, people with visual acuity between 20/70
and 20/200, without relying on audio. Meeting this objective through,
e.g., magnification, high-contrast, and color inversion options, as
well as compatibility with third-party refreshable braille displays,
would be important steps toward making IVCS platforms accessible to
low-vision and deafblind users.
 23. Similarly, compliance with the existing rules could
substantially reduce accessibility gaps faced by people with cognitive
and mobility disabilities. Section 14.21(b)(1) of the Commission's
rules specifies that, to be accessible, advanced communications
services and equipment must have modes that are operable with limited
manual dexterity, and with limited reach and strength, without
requiring body contact or close body proximity, and without time-
dependent controls, and at least one mode that minimizes the cognitive,
memory, language, and learning skills required of the user. Steps that
providers could take to implement these requirements include providing
voice- or gesture-based controls, one-button shortcuts, an ``easy-to-
use'' setting, and other features. In an accompanying Further Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (FNPRM), the Commission seeks additional comment on
whether the performance objectives described above need further
modification to ensure the accessibility of IVCS.
 24. Need for IVCS-Specific Performance Objectives. While
accessibility gaps in IVCS can be addressed to some extent by
implementing the performance objectives of our current rules, the
record makes clear that, in a number of areas, more specific guidance
is needed to promote accessibility in the IVCS context. For example,
captions are an obvious means for IVCS providers to implement the
existing performance objective specifying that ACS provide auditory
information through at least one mode in visual form, and many IVCS
platforms offer automatic speech recognition-generated captioning.
However, the record indicates that captions are often inaccurate, too
small, or difficult to turn on and manipulate. As a commenter explains,
IVCS platforms vary considerably with respect to the ability to
activate and effectively use automated captions. Users are often at a
loss as to how to turn on captions and frequently are unable to
position and otherwise manipulate captions, which is necessary for
optimal viewing. For example, on some platforms the captions have been
too small for effective reading. Other platforms fail to ensure a
sufficient level of captioning quality, resulting in excessive errors
that make it difficult to follow the dialogue.
 25. In addition, some accessibility concerns are not directly
addressed at all by the current rules. For example, none of the
existing performance objectives requires IVCS platforms to facilitate
the use of sign language and sign language interpretation--a key
omission for a medium inherently suited to sign language communication.
Therefore, the Commission amends part 14 of its rules as discussed
below, to define more specifically the objectives that IVCS providers
must meet to achieve accessibility and promote more consistency in
their implementation, thereby enabling people with disabilities to
participate in video conferences whenever accessibility is achievable.
 26. These outcome-oriented performance objectives maintain
incentives and opportunities for innovative design in this rapidly
developing industry sector and avoid straying into the prohibited
territory of mandatory technical standards. Thus, the Commission finds
inapposite a commenter's concern that the proposed performance
objectives do not include reference standards or compliance procedures.
This is by design, and is true of all the performance objectives in
part 14 of the Commission's rules. As noted earlier, section 716 of the
Act expressly requires the Commission to allow flexibility in the
implementation of accessibility objectives and precludes us from
imposing mandatory technical standards. 47 U.S.C. 617(a)(2), (e)(1)(D).
Consistent with section 716 of the Act, these performance objectives
will allow IVCS providers to choose whether to satisfy their
accessibility obligations by building certain features directly into
their applications or by ``using third party applications, peripheral
devices, software, hardware, or CPE that is available to the consumer
at nominal cost and that individuals with disabilities can access.''
 27. A commenter recommends that the Commission makes the
performance objectives optional, contending that mandatory requirements
would impose significant cost burdens on businesses and impact the
overall cost for the general public. The new performance objectives are
subject to the achievability criterion, a criterion that is defined in
terms of reasonable effort or expense, 47 CFR 14.10(b), as well as the
special exemption and waiver provisions of the ACS rules. However, the
statute does not grant the Commission authority to make ACS performance
objectives optional. See 47 U.S.C. 617(a)(1), (b)(1), (e)(1)(A).
 28. Just as the existing part 14 of the Commission's rules
performance objectives apply both to advanced communications services
and to equipment and software used with ACS, the performance objectives
the Commission adopts for specific application for IVCS also apply to
equipment and software used for IVCS. Manufacturers of equipment used
for IVCS must ensure that such equipment, as well as software
components of such equipment, meet these new and modified objectives,
unless that is not achievable.
 29. Given the critical importance of access to video conferencing
for people with disabilities, the Commission finds no cause for further
delay in providing specific guidance on the necessary steps to make
video conferencing accessible. Where the adoption of a proposed rule is
supported by the record, there is no

[[Page 100882]]

persuasive reason to defer its adoption, as some commenters urge,
pending an assessment of what has been achieved during the extended
compliance period or the outcome of potential collaboration among
stakeholders. As a commenter points out, even if some issues may
require additional time to resolve, implementation of new performance
objectives can begin while fact-finding and deliberation over more
complex policy and operational issues proceeds on a parallel track.
Similarly, although the Commission encourages collaboration among
stakeholders to further improve the accessibility of features and
functions of video conferencing services, there is no reason to delay
the adoption of more specific performance objectives while waiting for
such collaboration to bear fruit. The record reflects consensus both
that video conferencing has become a ubiquitous and critical part of
daily life and that video conferencing accessibility remains a work in
progress. The untenable result is that people with disabilities are
unable to participate fully in what is now a routine mode of
communication. Given the centrality of video conferencing in modern
American society, and that 14 years have passed since Congress mandated
the accessibility of IVCS, video conferences should be made accessible
as soon as it is achievable to do so.
 30. The Commission does recognize, however, that bringing
accessibility to video conferencing may pose some technical challenges,
especially for smaller IVCS providers. It may also require substantial
interaction with other parties, including TRS providers and the
disability community. Therefore, compliance with part 14 of the
Commission's rules adopted in document FCC 24-95 will not be required
until January 12, 2027.

IVCS Performance Objectives

 31. Captions. Section 14.21(b)(2)(iv) of the Commission's rules
sets forth the performance objective that ACS shall provide auditory
information through at least one mode in visual form and, where
appropriate, in tactile form.
 32. The Commission's amendment to this performance objective
directly addresses one of the most broadly impactful and persistent
accessibility issues concerning video conferences, i.e., the
inconsistent availability of accurate captions across video
conferencing providers. The record is clear that captions play a
crucial role in allowing people who are deaf or hard of hearing to be
fully engaged in a video conference conversation. As a commenter notes,
a lack of captions can make meaningful interaction impossible. While
the existing rule already makes clear that captioning (the provision of
auditory information in visual form) is necessary for accessibility, it
does not address the quality of captions.
 33. As modified, the performance objective states that captions
must be accurate and synchronous. The Commission does not include the
language proposed in the NPRM stating that caption quality must be
``comparable to that provided on TRS Fund-supported captioned telephone
services.'' As multiple commenters noted, the Commission's TRS rules do
not currently provide quantitative standards to measure accuracy or
latency in the IP CTS context. Pending further development of
quantitative measures, this performance objective reflects a
qualitative standard, similar to the qualitative standards currently
applicable to IP CTS and live television programming. The amended rule
defines accurate to mean that captioning matches the spoken words of a
conversation, in the order spoken, verbatim, without summarizing or
paraphrasing. Given that IVCS, like IP CTS or live video programming,
involves real-time communication without advance scripting, 100% error-
free captioning may not always be achievable. However, captioning
should be sufficiently accurate to enable a user to understand what is
being said. Implementation of this performance objective will be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis, considering overall
understandability and accuracy, the ability of the captions to convey
the aural content of the call in a manner equivalent to the aural
communication, and the extent to which captioning errors made the video
conference inaccessible.
 34. The amended rule defines synchronous to mean that captions must
coincide with the corresponding spoken words and sounds to the greatest
extent possible, be delivered fast enough to keep up with the speed of
those words and sounds, and remain displayed long enough to be read by
the user. In other words, to the greatest extent possible, the captions
should begin to appear at the time that the corresponding speech or
sounds begin and end approximately when the speech or sounds end.
Captions must be sufficiently synchronous to enable a user to
participate in real-time in a conversation among video conference
participants.
 35. While a quantitative standard of caption quality may be
preferable, the Commission rejects the contention that a qualitative
standard provides insufficient notice regarding the quality required,
given that analogous qualitative standards are already in place for
video programming and TRS. Regarding a commenter's concerns about
factors outside a provider's control affecting caption quality, the
Commission notes that the obligation to meet this performance
objective, like all part 14 of the Commission's rules performance
objectives, is qualified by the criterion of achievability.
 36. As modified, the performance objective also specifies that IVCS
enable users to connect with third-party captioning services and enable
the display of such captions on the requesting party's video conference
screen. In some instances, participants in video conferences may prefer
a third-party captioning service, which may provide a higher degree of
accuracy than can be achieved by using the IVCS provider's native
captioning. Or, a video conference host may be legally obligated to
provide (and pay for) captioning service for a video conference that
poses specific captioning challenges. As the DAC explains, some video
conferencing services struggle to integrate third-party captioning
services into their conference calls. In some cases, users must open a
separate web browser or application to view captions, forcing them to
split their attention between two screens (if a second screen is even
available to the user). If deaf and hard of hearing participants are
forced to split their attention between multiple screens, or multiple
devices, it often will be difficult to follow the visual conversation
on one screen while simultaneously reading the captions on another.
 37. To address these problems, the amended performance objective
provides that IVCS shall enable users to connect with such third-party
accommodations services, such that the captions provided by third
parties are viewable on the user's video conference screen, rather than
on a separate screen. In other words, to be accessible, IVCS must
enable a user to view on-screen the display of captioning provided by a
third party. The Commission does not prohibit IVCS providers from
affording participants the option to view captions on a separate
screen, which may be preferable in some instances to accommodate
certain disabilities, peripheral devices, or accessibility software.
 38. Although some commenters focus on a need to access human
captioners, the amended rule does not limit the kinds of third-party
captioning services that may be accessed by IVCS users.

[[Page 100883]]

Consistent with the technology-neutral, outcome-oriented nature of
performance objectives, the rule does not differentiate between
captioning generated with human involvement and captions created
entirely with automatic speech recognition technology.
 39. Additionally, the requirement to enable third-party captioning
does not require an IVCS provider to ensure that third-party captioning
is available to users at no or nominal cost--unless the IVCS provider
is relying on a third party to fulfill its primary captioning
obligation. Similarly, if an IVCS provider is not relying on a third
party to fulfill its primary captioning obligation, the IVCS provider
is not responsible for ensuring that captions provided by a third party
are accurate and synchronous, except to the extent of its obligation to
not impair or impede accessibility.
 40. One commenter urges the Commission to require video
conferencing providers to integrate with IP CTS providers, suggesting
that IVCS providers will not be able to offer captioning services equal
in quality to IP CTS. IP CTS is one type of a third-party captioning
service. Accordingly, the amended performance objective requires that
IVCS providers offer a mechanism for conference hosts and users to
connect with an IP CTS provider, if that is their preference, unless
the capability for such connection is not achievable.
 41. This performance objective does not dictate the specifics of
any technical interface or lock in user interface designs. In
particular, the Commission does not mandate that an IVCS provider make
its connection interface for third parties compatible with any specific
technology that may be used by a particular captioning service or IP
CTS provider.
 42. Sign Language Interpreting. To ensure that video conferences
are accessible to users who communicate in sign language, the
Commission proposed to adopt a new performance objective providing that
IVCS enable the use of sign language interpretation, including the
transmission of user requests for sign language interpretation to
providers of video relay service and other entities and the provision
of sufficient video quality to support sign language communication.
 43. The Commission adopts the proposed performance objective with a
few modifications. This performance objective provides that
accessibility for IVCS includes enabling a video connection for sign
language interpreters, so that they can view and be viewed by users of
these services. The performance objective is modified to make clear its
applicability to both IVCS itself and to equipment and software used
for IVCS. For additional clarity, the proposed rule is modified by
inserting the words ``provided by third parties'' after ``enable the
use of sign language interpretation.'' This change addresses a
commenter's concern as to whether a sign language interpretation
function must be integrated into an IVCS platform. The performance
objective does not require IVCS providers to provide sign language
interpretation as part of their services; rather, it specifies that an
IVCS provider shall enable users to access sign language interpretation
services provided by others.
 44. This performance objective does not differentiate regarding the
type of sign language service that may be offered by a third party. The
Commission anticipates that most sign language users who participate in
video conferences will be using American Sign Language (ASL). However,
this performance objective is intended to apply broadly to all forms of
visual language commonly in use by people with disabilities. For
example, Cued English uses hand shapes, hand placements, and non-manual
signals on the mouth to provide a transliteration of spoken English for
some individuals with hearing disabilities. The Commission believes
that the same technology that facilitates the inclusion of ASL
interpreters is equally applicable to other forms of interpretation or
transliteration.
 45. The Commission declines, at this time, to modify this
performance objective as a commenter proposes: to require IVCS
platforms to provide sign language interpretation, rather than merely
enable it. Adopting this recommendation would mean that IVCS providers
would need to arrange for sign language interpreting to be available to
users at all times and would be responsible for the quality of the
service provided. The record is insufficient for the Commission to
assess this proposal, which likely would be implemented through
automatic sign language interpretation software, akin to automatic
speech recognition. The Commission seeks further comment on this
proposal in the FNPRM.
 46. The commenter contends that the rule must be crafted so that
ASL interpretation and English Captioning have functional equivalency
within IVCS platforms. The Commission's goal in the TRS context is to
devise accessibility requirements that will allow individuals with
disabilities to have a communication experience that is functionally
equivalent to the experience of those without such disabilities. The
Commission does not require different accessibility tools to be equal
to each other.
 47. Although the Commission does not mandate a particular level of
video quality, the quality must be sufficient to allow users to see and
understand interpreters' signing, and for users' own sign language to
be seen and understood by interpreters and others. The Commission does
not anticipate--and the record does not indicate--that this criterion
will pose any undue burden on video conferencing providers. Video
quality is a fundamental component of a competitive video conferencing
product. Providers are therefore independently motivated to provide
high-quality video.
 48. User Interface Controls. To implement the DAC's recommendation
that the Commission ensure users' ability to control the activation and
customize the appearance of captions and video interpreters, the
Commission sought comment on adopting a new performance objective
providing that IVCS provide user interface control functions that
permit users to adjust the display of captions, speakers, and signers
and other features for which user interface control is necessary for
accessibility.
 49. To ensure that accessibility features can be adjusted to
address the specific needs of individual users and the various
circumstances in which IVCS may be used, the Commission adopts the
performance objective set forth in the NPRM, with modifications. The
proposed performance objective is modified to ensure that individual
users have the ability to activate, as well as adjust, features such as
captions. In addition, the performance objective is modified to make
clear its applicability to both IVCS itself and to equipment and
software used for IVCS. Finally, the Commission clarifies that this
performance objective includes participants' ability to edit their
display names before or after joining a video conference.
 50. As a commenter explains, given the wide range of IP-enabled
devices that can be used for video conferences, the need for individual
users to be able to customize what they see on their screens is
critical. However, user controls that allow such customization are
frequently unavailable or insufficient. Further, existing ACS
performance objectives do not directly address this problem. Although
Sec. 14.21(b)(1) of the Commission's rules generally requires that
control functions necessary for a user to operate a covered

[[Page 100884]]

service or product shall be accessible, that performance objective does
not expressly address the need for control functions to enable a user,
not only to operate the service, but to ensure its accessibility.
Accessibility is not a static condition: to ensure that a video
conferencing service is accessible across the wide range of devices
that may be used to access it, by users with varying disability-related
needs, individual users must themselves be able to manipulate
accessibility-related functions. The performance objective the
Commission adopts addresses this problem by providing that video
conference participants be able to control the activation and settings
of accessibility-related features. The text of the new provision
reflects that user control is especially important in two areas:
captioning and the visual display of speakers and signers.
 51. In its 2022 report, the DAC states that, among the platforms
that offer captions, some do not allow users to customize caption size,
color, opacity, and other critical settings to ensure readability. A
coalition of accessibility-focused organizations explain that IVCS
platforms vary considerably with respect to the ability to activate and
effectively use automated captions, and that users are often at a loss
as to how to turn on captions and frequently are unable to position and
otherwise manipulate captions, which is necessary for optimal viewing.
To address these concerns, the performance objective the Commission
adopts requires IVCS providers to allow call participants to
independently control the activation and display of captions on their
individual devices. To the degree achievable, call participants must be
able to alter the size, font, and on-screen location of captions and to
adjust the color and opacity of both the captions and the caption
background. This objective generally aligns with the Commission's
requirements in other contexts, particularly with regard to the
customizability of captions on digital apparatus. See 47 CFR
79.103(c)(1)-(10). The character customization requirements for digital
apparatus mandate the ability to change character size between 50% and
200% of the default size. Digital apparatus covered by Sec. 79.103 of
the Commission's rules must also allow captions and caption backgrounds
that can display the 64 colors and 8 fonts defined in the CEA-708
standard, as well as allow users to override the authored colors and
choose from at least 8 specified colors. The Commission does not
replicate those specific requirements here. However, the CEA-708
standard may provide a useful reference point for IVCS providers and
equipment manufacturers in assessing their caption customization
options. Additionally, the Commission notes that limiting captions to a
very small character size range may be insufficient to meet the
performance objective.
 52. The record reveals that additional accessibility challenges
arise as the number of participants in a video conference grows. For
example, when faced with numerous, undifferentiated video windows,
which are automatically enlarged based only on sound cues, it can be
extremely challenging to determine when an interpreter (or another sign
language user) is signing. A sign language user who loses sight of the
interpreter is effectively exiled from the conversation until they
regain that visual connection. Ensuring that the interpreter's video
window is always prominently displayed, even if another participant is
sharing their screen, is therefore vital to maintaining effective
communication. As a commenter explain, these issues can be partially
addressed by ``spotlighting'' and ``multi-pinning.'' ``Spotlighting''
identifies a particular window as the active speaker, making that
user's window visible on all other users' screens. Spotlighting
capability is generally only available to a conference call's host.
``Pinning'' and ``multi-pinning'' allow a user to disable the active
speaker view and determine which video window (or windows) will always
be visible on the user's own screen. Spotlighting interpreters ensures
that these individuals are easily visible amidst multiple video streams
or when displayed on small screens. While this is necessary for all
individuals who rely on interpreters, it is especially important for
consumers with visual impairments or close vision, who need full
visibility of an interpreter to actively participate.
 53. To ensure that critical visual information is accessible, users
also must be able to reconfigure the layout and visibility of video
windows appearing on the users' own device. Each open video window
reduces the on-screen real estate available for other windows. As a
result, a sign language user's window may become too small to allow for
effective sign language communication. This is true even if the user's
video window is pinned, because pinning, alone, does not alter the
relative size of the video windows. A call participant who requires
sign language must therefore be able to minimize or hide extraneous
windows, expand the windows of their choice, or relocate particular
windows. For example, a participant may utilize the multi-pinning
feature to pin both a presentation leader and an interpreter, move the
windows so they remain side-by-side, and then expand both windows to
allow the participant to clearly view the interpreter without missing
out on visual cues from the speaker. As another example, a sign
language user on a conference call with multiple other sign language
users may want to pin all of their windows and place them together to
ensure all sign language users are visible.
 54. In addition, participants must be able to edit their own
display names. This allows participants (including interpreters and
third-party accommodation services) to quickly differentiate themselves
from other call participants, helping sign language users and
interpreters find each other more easily, especially in conference
calls with many participants. Again, every moment a sign language user
and an interpreter spend trying to connect to each other is a moment of
lost communication and participation for the user. As a VRS provider
notes, VRS CAs identify themselves by a CA Number, rather than their
name, to protect their privacy. As discussed below, the Commission
amends its TRS rules to require VRS CAs to identify their employer in
the CA's display name. Compliance with this rule therefore requires
that participants be able to change their display names.
 55. The record indicates that, while some video conferencing
providers currently offer spotlighting and multi-pinning capabilities,
typically they are controlled by the call's host, who must either make
such adjustments themselves or specifically allow that privilege to a
requesting participant. A conference call host may also disable the in-
call chat feature, leaving participants unable to contact the host to
request access to these features. In such scenarios the host may not
even be aware that accommodations are needed. As a result, individual
users may be deprived of the ability to directly customize their in-
call experience in a way that works best for them. Commenters therefore
assert that IVCS providers should enable any participant in a video
conference to customize their settings for accessibility.
 56. Accordingly, the performance objective the Commission adopts
specifically provides that users be able to activate and adjust the
display of speakers and signers. As with captioning controls, the
relevant or achievable settings may vary for different kinds of IVCS
(e.g., more

[[Page 100885]]

settings may be needed for a video conferencing service that is
frequently used for conferences involving large groups, than for one
whose target market rarely includes participants in large-group video
conferences). For large-group video conferences, in particular,
accessibility requires that pinning, multi-pinning, spotlighting, and
window configuration functionality be available, and that those
functions can be accessed in individual users' settings menus, without
having to obtain permission from a call host. The Commission notes that
while some IVCS calls utilize a ``hosted'' conference room, i.e., a
single virtual location that all call participants connect to, others
are designed primarily for unhosted, person-to-person video calls. The
performance objective adopted here applies to all forms of IVCS.
 57. A commenter raises a general concern that an overly detailed
performance objective would lock in user interface designs, and urges
the Commission to resist making regulatory choices that it states will
necessarily limit the ability of IVCS providers and equipment
manufacturers to shape and adjust their user interfaces. The Commission
concludes that this performance objective strikes an appropriate
balance between flexibility and specificity. As with all part 14 of the
Commission's rules performance objectives, the new and amended
objectives are outcome-oriented and do not mandate a technical
standard. The Commission also emphasizes that the rule it adopts does
not dictate how IVCS providers must organize their user controls.
Individual providers may decide what layouts and configurations are
appropriate for their services, as long as the results comply with
Commission rules.
 58. The performance objective adopted here also provides that users
be able to activate and adjust other features for which user interface
control is necessary for accessibility. Although some commenters argue
for additional specificity, at this time, the Commission does not
attempt an exhaustive catalog of all such features. However, the fact
that a particular feature is not mentioned in the performance objective
does not imply that it is unnecessary for accessibility. For example, a
commenter recommends that the Commission include a specific requirement
for IVCS platforms to include screen reader verbosity controls, and
notes that some video conferencing platforms currently allow users to
independently customize their verbosity settings. The Commission agrees
that this functionality is an important means for blind and low-vision
users to be able to follow and participate in a video conference, and
such user control may often be necessary for accessibility. To that
extent, verbosity controls (as well as other features not specifically
mentioned) are included in the performance objective. However, to
individually address this and other user controls recommended by
commenters, the Commission believes the record would benefit from
additional information about the specific aspects of interface control
that are most important to address in the video conference setting. The
Commission seeks further comment on this issue in the FNPRM.
 59. A commenter suggests that IVCS users' accessibility preferences
should be stored and retained within the IVCS platform, so that users
will not have to change the settings each time they use the service.
However, the record is insufficient to address this proposal. In the
FNPRM, the Commission seeks additional comment on the need for such an
objective, how it would apply across devices, and the technical issues
involved.
 60. Text-to-Speech. To ensure that IVCS is accessible for people
with speech disabilities, the Commission proposed to amend Sec.
14.21(b)(1)(ix) of its rules, which specifies that ACS be operable in
``at least one mode that does not require user speech,'' to specify
that IVCS provide text-to-speech functionality. The existing rule
specifies that, to be accessible, IVCS must be operable without user
speech--for which a logical implementation would be the provision of
text-to-speech functionality. However, the record indicates that an
additional way of making IVCS operable by people with speech
disabilities is available, in the form of speech-to-speech technology
products, which automatically convert speech that is difficult to
understand to speech that is more understandable. Therefore, at this
time the Commission does not adopt the proposed modification. Instead,
in the FNPRM, the Commission seeks additional comment on modifying
Sec. 14.21(b)(1)(ix) of its rules to encompass a broader range of
solutions for people with speech disabilities.
 61. Other Performance Objectives Proposed by Commenters. In the
NPRM, the Commission sought comment on whether additional performance
objectives should be specified for IVCS to address other accessibility
concerns. A number of the performance objectives suggested by
commenters merit the Commission's consideration. In many instances,
however, the current record is insufficient to address them at this
time. In the FNPRM, the Commission seeks additional comment on these
proposals. Other commenter proposals appear to be inconsistent with the
flexible, outcome-oriented approach the statute directs the Commission
to take.
 62. A commenter recommends adoption of a performance objective
requiring that video functionality, screen sharing, video window re-
sizing, and video sharing be compatible with tablets. Another commenter
objects to this proposal, contending that tablet compatibility
represents a de facto technical mandate. While the Commission
recognizes that people with disabilities often have particular
difficulty in accessing IVCS on tablets, the record is insufficient to
determine whether a performance objective specific to tablets is
needed, and how it should apply. For example, an IVCS provider may
choose not to make its service available on tablets, or may not design
an app specifically for tablets. Further, it is unclear to what extent
responsibility for tablet compatibility should be placed on tablet
manufacturers, IVCS providers, or both. In the FNPRM, the Commission
seeks additional comment on whether a tablet-specific performance
objective is needed, and whether additional performance objectives
should apply to manufacturers of tablets and other devices used to
access IVCS.
 63. The current record is also insufficient to address
recommendations that performance objectives specify that IVCS provide a
gallery view mode, ensure that a sufficient number of videos is
supported without degrading the quality of the video or audio, and
include dedicated video- and text-based side channels. A commenter
raises several objections to these proposals, stating variously that
they are technologically infeasible, implicate variables outside of a
video conferencing provider's control, exceed the Commission's
authority, or are technical mandates in all but name. While the
proposed features can be beneficial, the Commission is concerned that
unnecessarily specific requirements could dampen incentives for
entrepreneurship and innovation in this rapidly evolving market. In
addition, IVCS encompasses a broad variety of video communication
services, for which the recommended performance objectives may not be
uniformly applicable or relevant. In the FNPRM, the Commission seeks
additional comment on the need for specific performance objectives in
these areas, as well as whether such objectives could be implemented
without adversely
