FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: TRS Fund Support for internet Protocol Captioned Telephone Service Compensation
Document number: 2024-19559
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 71848
Publication date: 2024-09-04

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 171 (Wednesday, September 4, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 171 (Wednesday, September 4, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 71848-71860]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-19559]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 64

[CG Docket Nos. 22-408, 03-123, and 13-24; FCC 24-81; FR ID 241645]


TRS Fund Support for internet Protocol Captioned Telephone
Service Compensation

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) adopts a revised, five-year plan for support of
internet Protocol Captioned Telephone Service (IP CTS) by the
Interstate Telecommunications Relay Services Fund (TRS Fund). To ensure
that IP CTS providers have the appropriate incentive structure to
support captioning with communications assistants (CAs) and with only
automatic speech recognition (ASR), the Commission establishes separate
compensation formulas for CA-assisted and ASR-only IP CTS. In addition,
this compensation plan will give providers certainty regarding the
applicable compensation levels, provide an incentive to improve
efficiency, and allow the Commission an opportunity to timely reassess
the compensation formulas in response to potential unanticipated cost
changes and other significant developments.

DATES: Effective October 4, 2024.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Michael Scott, Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau, 202-418-1264, [email protected] .

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order and Order (Report and Order), in CG Docket Nos. 22-408, 03-
123, and 13-24; FCC 24-81, adopted and released on July 31, 2024. The
Commission previously sought comment on these issues in a notice of
proposed rulemaking, released on December 22, 2022, and published at 88
FR 7049, February 2, 2023 (NPRM). The full text of this document can be
accessed electronically via the FCC's Electronic Document Management
System (EDOCS) website at: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-81A1.pdf or via the FCC's Electronic Comment Filing System (ECFS)
website at: www.fcc.gov/ecfs . To request materials in accessible
formats for people with disabilities (Braille, large print, electronic
files, audio format), send an email to: [email protected] or call the
Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau at: (202) 418-0530 (voice).

Synopsis

 1. Section 225 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (the
Act), 47 U.S.C. 225, requires the Commission to ensure that
telecommunications relay services (TRS) are available to persons who
are deaf, hard of hearing, or deafblind or have speech disabilities,
``to the extent possible and in the most efficient manner.'' TRS are
defined as ``telephone transmission services'' enabling such persons to
communicate by wire or radio ``in a manner that is functionally
equivalent to the ability of a hearing individual who does not have a
speech disability to communicate using voice communication services.''
IP CTS, a form of TRS, permits an individual who can speak but who has
difficulty hearing over the telephone to use a telephone and an
internet Protocol (IP)-enabled device via the internet to
simultaneously listen to the other party and read captions of what the
other party is saying. IP CTS is supported entirely by the TRS Fund,
which is composed of mandatory contributions collected from
telecommunications carriers and Voice over internet Protocol (VoIP)
service providers based on a percentage of each company's annual
revenue. IP CTS providers receive monthly payments from the TRS Fund to
compensate them for the reasonable cost of providing the service, in
accordance with a per-minute compensation formula approved by the
Commission.
 2. Before 2020, IP CTS captions were produced by a CA, usually with
the CA repeating (``revoicing'') a caller's speech into an ASR program,
which then converted the CA's speech to text. In 2018, the Commission
ruled that IP CTS also could be provided on a fully automatic basis,
using only ASR technology to generate captions, without the
participation of a CA.
 3. Before 2018, compensation for IP CTS providers was determined by
a proxy method, known as the Multistate Average Rate Structure (MARS)
methodology, in which compensation was set equal to the average per-
minute payment by state TRS programs to providers of an analogous
service,

[[Page 71849]]

Captioned Telephone Service (CTS). In 2018, the Commission determined
that this approach had resulted in providers receiving compensation
substantially higher than the industry average cost to provide IP CTS.
Therefore, the Commission adopted a different methodology, setting
compensation based on the weighted average of the actual allowable
costs reported by providers (that is, total allowable expenses of all
providers divided by total IP CTS minutes). In the 2020 IP CTS
Compensation Order, published at 85 FR 64971, October 14, 2020, the
Commission considered whether to adopt a separate compensation formula
for calls captioned without CA involvement, to address what appeared to
be the substantially lower average cost of ASR-only captioning.
However, the Commission concluded it did not yet have sufficient data
from the provision of fully automatic IP CTS to accurately estimate the
relevant costs.

The 2022 Notice of Proposed Rulemaking

 4. On December 22, 2022, the Commission released an NPRM seeking
comment on establishing a revised IP CTS compensation plan. The
Commission proposed to apply different compensation formulas to the
provision of CA-assisted and ASR-only IP CTS and sought comment on
additional issues potentially affecting the compensation formulas,
including the appropriate application of such formulas; identifying the
costs attributable to ASR-only captioning; whether to adjust certain
allowable-cost criteria and the allowed operating margin; calculation
of average per-minute cost and compensation level(s); the duration of
the compensation period; adjustment factors for inflation or
productivity; and alternatives to reasonable-cost-based compensation.

Separate Rates for CA-Assisted and ASR-Only IP CTS

 5. The Need for Separate Rates. The Commission amends its rules to
establish separate rates for CA-assisted and ASR-only IP CTS.
Historically, while the Commission has applied separate compensation
rates to different relay services, the Commission has rarely applied
separate rates to different methods of providing a single relay
service. In this instance, however, the record supports the
Commission's initial view that special considerations warrant the
application of different compensation formulas to the CA-assisted and
ASR-only modes of providing IP CTS. The record also supports the
concern that continued application of a single formula may lead to
waste of TRS Fund resources and increase the risk of fraud and abuse.
Deferring the adoption of separate formulas would prolong the adverse
effects of the single rate and discourage providers from continuing to
offer CA-assisted captioning, reducing the availability of a service
mode that continues to be preferred for some calls.
 6. Cost Difference. The updated cost reports confirm that there is
a substantial cost difference between ASR-only and CA-assisted IP CTS.
For 2023, historical allowable expenses reported by providers average
approximately $0.60 per minute for ASR-only IP CTS and $1.04 per minute
for CA-assisted IP CTS, a cost difference of $0.44 per minute. For
2024, providers' projected allowable expenses average approximately
$0.65 per minute for ASR-only IP CTS and $1.32 per minute for CA-
assisted IP CTS, a cost difference of $0.67 per minute.
 7. Benefits of CA-Assisted Service. The record also confirms that,
while consumers increasingly select ASR-only captioning when offered a
choice, CA-assisted captioning continues to be preferred for some
portion of IP CTS calls. Further, some research indicates that ASR
technology may show algorithmic bias in the accuracy with which it
transcribes voices and that the participation of CAs may improve the
accuracy of captioning for a substantial portion of calls. Establishing
separate formulas that better reflect the cost difference between ASR-
only and CA-assisted service will strengthen the incentive for
providers to continue providing CA-assisted captions when preferred by
the consumer or needed for high-quality service. Conversely,
maintaining a single rate is likely to reinforce what appears to be a
substantial incentive for providers to limit the use of the CA-assisted
mode, even where a consumer would prefer it. Once ASR-only service was
introduced by most providers, it quickly became the most commonly used
service mode--averaging 43.5% of compensable minutes in 2022, 74.6% in
2023, and a projected 84.5% in 2024. Although the percentage of ASR-
only use is different for each provider, as of December 2023, average
CA-assisted usage (as a percentage of total minutes) is substantially
higher for providers that offer consumers a choice of service mode than
for providers that unilaterally determine the service mode.
 8. TRS Fund Stewardship Concerns. The current single rate of $1.30
per minute became effective July 1, 2021, when approximately 15% of IP
CTS minutes were ASR-only. As the volume of ASR-only service has
increased, the average per-minute cost of IP CTS has declined,
resulting in excessive compensation at the current single rate. In
2023, compensation for ASR-only minutes produced an operating margin of
$0.70 per minute--116.7% above expenses. Moving ASR-only compensation
closer to actual cost will conserve the TRS Fund and may decrease the
potential incentive for a provider to engage in fraudulent practices.
 9. Need for Metrics. Various parties argue that it would be better
as a matter of policy and good governance for the Commission to
establish service quality metrics before resetting IP CTS compensation
rates. Progress has been made toward establishing metrics. In February
2023, the MITRE Corporation (MITRE), in its capacity as a Federally
Funded Research and Development Center, formed a working group to
develop a recommendation on metrics and measures for IP CTS service
quality. The working group, composed of community advocates, IP CTS
providers, academia, and subject matter experts from related
industries, was tasked by MITRE to: identify and define measures that
can be used to quantify and compare caption quality as it relates to
effective communication; propose methods for assessing IP CTS using
these measures; and identify potential criteria for establishing
meaningful thresholds for acceptable caption quality. The working
group's report, completed June 5, 2024, includes six recommendations
for further study to establish metrics:
 Work with an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-
certified standards developer to initiate a process to formalize
caption quality standards;
 Continue to refine measures and metrics as technology
improves, while recognizing that no single measure reflects caption
quality for all users, and that there is a distinction between what is
feasible today and what is needed for full functional equivalence;
 Adopt a more transparent testing framework, as described
in the report;
 Use the recommended testing framework to measure caption
accuracy, caption delay, non-speech information, and punctuation and
formatting;
 Provide more transparency for research plans and results;
and
 Perform additional research to improve measures, identify
appropriate metrics, and establish thresholds for acceptable caption
quality.
 10. By reaching consensus on a number of issues that had been the
subject of dispute among commenters on the Telephone Caption Metrics

[[Page 71850]]

NPRM, published at 86 FR 7681, February 1, 2021, the working group may
have laid the foundation for ultimate adoption of caption quality
metrics. However, it is unnecessary--and would not be appropriate--for
the Commission to defer the adoption of revised compensation formulas
until metrics are in place. The Commission need not resort to metrics
to recognize that the current compensation rate for ASR-only service is
unreasonably high. Continuing to support ASR-only IP CTS at this rate
would be inconsistent with responsible stewardship of the TRS Fund.
 11. One commenter's expert suggests that rate-setting should be
delayed because the compliance cost of meeting such metrics are unknown
today. The Commission's exogenous cost recovery criteria provide a
mechanism for recovery of such compliance costs in appropriate
circumstances.
 12. In addition, continuing to pay a single rate for IP CTS,
regardless of the captioning mode, inherently encourages providers to
increase or promote even more use of lower-cost ASR-only captioning,
regardless of whether the quality is better or worse than higher-cost
CA-assisted captioning. Adopting bifurcated compensation rates will
mitigate such incentives pending further information about the relative
quality of the two service modes.
 13. Reliability of Cost Data. Several commenters argued that the
cost and demand data then available--consisting of historical cost and
demand for 2021 and 2022 and projected cost and demand for 2023 and
2024--were insufficiently reliable to support a revised compensation
plan, and especially the application of different rates to ASR-only and
CA-assisted IP CTS. For example, it was argued that historical cost and
demand data for 2021 and 2022 were unreliable due to the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on the demand for IP CTS and that there was
insufficient experience with ASR-only service to enable the Commission
to reliably estimate its cost. However, now that the record has been
updated to include providers' cost and demand reported in February
2024, which includes historical cost and demand for 2022 and 2023 and
projections for 2024 and 2025, these arguments for further delay are
less applicable.
 14. The current record also suggests that any pandemic-related
effects on IP CTS demand and cost have almost entirely dissipated. It
now appears that, by mid-2022, IP CTS demand had resumed approximately
its historical trajectory. As to the effects of the pandemic on labor
cost, in the case of IP CTS, the Commission finds no persuasive
evidence of any impact that would render the cost data for 2023 and
2024 unreliable. Unlike the supply of Video Relay Service (VRS) CAs,
which is inherently restricted due to the need for highly trained
American Sign Language interpreters, the supply of CAs of the type
needed by most IP CTS providers appears to be more elastic, and a
lasting labor shortage less likely--especially given the shift to
mostly ASR-only captioning. The record--which shows that historical CA-
assisted costs increased less than 3% from 2022 to 2023--appears to
confirm that any unusual upward trend did not outlast the pandemic.
 15. Regarding ASR-only IP CTS, an additional year of cost and
demand data has significantly increased the confidence with which the
Commission can reasonably estimate the average per-minute cost of ASR-
only service. The cost and demand data now available include at least
20 months of historical ASR-only data from every IP CTS provider
offering service prior to January 2024. This is substantially more than
the 12 months of historical data the Commission ordinarily uses in
setting rates. Also, because IP CTS compensation rates are set based on
industry-wide averages, individual cost and demand variations are less
important than they might have been if the Commission had found it
necessary to set rates on a more individualized basis. And as noted
above, delaying the establishment of a separate rate for ASR-only
service will reinforce providers' incentive to decrease reliance on
CAs, even where preferred by the consumer or needed for functionally
equivalent service. By December 2023, ASR-only minutes increased to an
average of 85% of total IP CTS minutes.
 16. Additional experience with the ASR-only mode may further
improve the Commission's ability to assess its effect on the cost of IP
CTS. However, by taking account of current data, the compensation
formulas herein will reflect the reasonable costs of each service mode
more accurately than the current formula does. Adopting revised
formulas also will substantially reduce the current waste of TRS Fund
resources (as well as possible incentives for fraud and abuse) and
reduce providers' incentive to inappropriately substitute ASR-only for
CA-assisted service.
 17. A commenter's expert consultant states that setting a separate,
lower rate for ASR-only service would discourage innovation in the
provision of automatic forms of IP CTS. However, no evidence is
presented for this claim, and given the very substantial difference in
reported costs for these services, a lower rate can be set for ASR-only
without depriving providers of resources for innovative research and
development.

Proposals for Additional Rate Categories

 18. Separate CA-Assisted Rate for CART-Based IP CTS. The Commission
declines to adopt a separate CA-assisted rate for calls that are
captioned using the Communications Access Realtime Translation (CART)
method, as advocated by InnoCaption. The term CART is used in this
context to refer to a captioning method whereby a professional
stenographer produces captions without any assistance from ASR
software. The Commission finds that setting separate rates for the
broad categories of CA-assisted and ASR-only methods of providing IP
CTS is justified by special considerations, as a limited deviation from
the historical practice of applying the same compensation formula to
all methods of providing a particular relay service. However, except
for the conditional rate supplement discussed further below, which is
applicable to any qualifying provider of CA-assisted service, including
providers using the CART method, the Commission is unpersuaded that any
analogous considerations warrant a further subdivision of the CA-
assisted rate.
 19. Although the Commission recognizes that the CART method may
have certain benefits, the record at this time does not indicate that
those benefits are so clear as to warrant giving special support for
this approach over other methods of CA-assisted captioning, despite its
acknowledged higher cost. The evidence in the record regarding the
particular advantages of the CART method is from 2020, and with recent
improvements in ASR technology, providers have developed new methods of
using ASR with CA-assisted captioning. Thus, there are now several
variants of CA-assisted captioning being used by IP CTS providers--as
well as variations in the methods used by providers to determine which
service mode should be applied to a call. The process of developing
metrics and measures for IP CTS service quality is not yet complete,
and the current record does not provide definitive evidence as to
whether testing of the methods in use today, using improved
measurements, would indicate a material, qualitative difference between
InnoCaption's performance using the CART method and the performance of
IP CTS providers using other methods of producing CA-assisted captions.

[[Page 71851]]

Further, the efficacy of any particular captioning method is not
determined solely by the technology used, but also by the resources and
skill with which that technology may be implemented by a particular
service provider. Given the statutory mandates for efficiency and
technological neutrality, as well as the absence of definitive
measurements of service quality, the Commission finds insufficient
basis at this time for setting different compensation rates based on
the specifics of each CA-assisted captioning method.
 20. Separate ASR-only Rates for Fully Automated and ``Hybrid''
Providers. The Commission also declines to adopt a commenter's
recommendation that two different compensation rates be set for ASR-
only minutes, based on whether the service provider is fully automated,
i.e., does not employ CAs for captioning any calls, or is a hybrid
provider that uses CA-assisted methods for some calls and ASR-only for
others. The commenter also seems to suggest that a provider that uses
CAs for every call should be subject to a different CA-assisted rate
than the CA-assisted rate applicable to providers that do not provide
CA assistance for every call. Currently, no provider uses CAs for every
call; therefore, it is not necessary to address this theoretical
concern on the current record.
 21. The concerns noted above regarding deviations from the
Commission's historical practice are also applicable here. In addition,
if the Commission adopted the commenter's suggestion, the vast majority
of ASR-only minutes would be compensated under the rate established for
hybrid providers. For the same reason, an ASR-only rate based on the
average ASR-only cost of the four hybrid providers would be similar to
a cost-based ASR-only rate based on the ASR-only costs of all reporting
providers. While fully automatic providers would receive a much higher
compensation rate for their ASR-only minutes, their higher per-minute
costs are likely attributable primarily to the very low volume of
minutes projected by fully automatic providers, given the economies of
scale that appear to be involved in ASR-only captioning. Therefore, it
is unlikely that differentiating ASR-only rates in this manner would
succeed in accounting for any cost differential that may be inherent in
a provider's choice of whether to use multiple captioning methods.

Classification of Calls

 22. As proposed, the CA-assisted compensation formula shall apply
to any call (or any call minutes, if a CA is not present for the entire
call) to which a CA is dedicated, provided that the CA is actively
engaged in the captioning process. The applicability of the CA-assisted
rate will not be affected by the specific nature of the active task(s)
performed by the CA during such assignment (i.e., revoicing, typing the
captions, or monitoring and correcting the output of an automatic
speech recognition program). The Commission concludes that assigning a
CA to monitor and correct any errors in ASR-generated captions
justifies compensation at the CA-assisted rate, provided that the CA is
dedicated to these tasks from the beginning to the end of the call (or
for the entire portion of the call that the provider designates as CA-
assisted). However, the CA-assisted rate shall not apply if the CA is
monitoring more than one call, or is splitting time between monitoring
a call and attending to other tasks, or is only monitoring the
captions, e.g., for research purposes, without actually correcting or
supplementing the ASR-generated captions when necessary. In such a
case, the employee's involvement is more in the nature of general
supervision of ASR-only operations.
 23. The Commission is also sensitive to the potential risk that,
given the substantial differential between the ASR-only and CA-assisted
compensation rates adopted herein, an IP CTS provider might have an
incentive to hire additional CAs or steer consumers to CA-assisted
calls even if consumers would not benefit from such a mode of IP CTS.
For example, if such CAs work at home while receiving minimal training
and supervision, the incremental per-minute cost (for a low-cost
provider) of additional CA-assisted minutes might be less than the rate
differential under the Commission's bifurcated compensation plan.
Therefore, the Commission delegates authority to the Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau, in coordination with the Office of the
Managing Director, to work with the TRS Fund administrator to ensure
that annual cost reports include information that will enable the
Commission to determine the reasonableness of IP CTS providers'
practices related to hiring, training, and supervising CAs and to
prevent waste of TRS Fund resources.
 24. In addition, the Commission reserves the right to revisit and
revise the compensation formulas for CA-assisted and ASR-only IP CTS
prior to the end of the compensation period, if it concludes that such
intervention is called for to achieve statutory objectives. For
example, if evidence suggests that CAs are being added to calls
primarily to gain the higher compensation rate, without significantly
increasing the accuracy of the captions, then--in addition to taking
other appropriate measures--the Commission may revise the compensation
formulas to correct providers' incentives and mitigate the risk of
waste, fraud, and abuse.

Allowable Costs

 25. As proposed in the NPRM, the Commission expands the criteria
for IP CTS cost recovery for research and development (R&D), numbering,
and user access software, harmonizing them with the VRS cost criteria
adopted in 2023. See 88 FR 71994, October 19, 2023 (2023 VRS
Compensation Order). The Commission declines to revisit the
longstanding policy that the TRS Fund does not support the cost of
providing, installing, or maintaining customer premises equipment.
 26. Research and Development. The Commission revises its allowable
cost criteria to allow TRS Fund support for the reasonable cost of R&D
to enhance the functional equivalence of IP CTS, including improvements
in service quality that may exceed the Commission's mandatory minimum
TRS standards. As in the case of VRS, the Commission finds that the
current criterion--allowing cost recovery only for R&D conducted to
ensure that a provider's service meets the minimum TRS standards--is
unnecessarily restrictive. Authorizing providers (as well as
Commission-directed entities) to conduct additional research is
consistent with the statutory mandate to encourage the use of improved
technology for TRS and with the Commission's policy of authorizing
multiple IP CTS providers to compete with one another based on service
quality. Such competition logically may lead IP CTS providers to
conduct research and development on innovative methods of producing and
delivering captions, resulting in improved service quality that may
exceed the level required by the minimum TRS standards. The Commission
also finds support for this change in commenters' recent submissions
emphasizing the need to ensure that the compensation plan supports
research and development to improve IP CTS. To establish consistent
allowable-cost criteria for all three forms of IP-based TRS, the
Commission concludes that the expanded allowability of reasonable
research and development costs shall also apply to internet Protocol
Relay Service (IP Relay).

[[Page 71852]]

 27. The Commission also sought comment on whether to adopt measures
to prevent waste and ensure that the benefit of the conducted research
and development actually enhances functional equivalence. However, the
Commission also noted that by using an average cost methodology and
setting compensation formulas for multi-year periods, the Commission
can provide substantial incentives for providers to use research and
development funds wisely and avoid incurring unnecessary costs. The
Commission continues to believe that the above incentive structure is a
robust safeguard against waste, and agrees with commenters that
additional safeguards are not necessary at this time. The Commission
stresses that, as with all provider-reported expenses, expenses for
research and development to improve IP CTS are allowable only if
reasonable. In addition, expenses incurred to develop proprietary user
devices and software (or any non-TRS product or service) are not
recoverable from the TRS Fund.
 28. Numbering. The Commission treats as allowable the reasonable
costs of acquiring North American Numbering Plan (NANP) telephone
numbers for IP CTS users, in those circumstances where assignment of a
telephone number is necessary to provide the service. In 2008, the
Commission determined that such costs would not be supported by the TRS
Fund, reasoning that they are not attributable to the use of relay
service and that analogous costs incurred by voice service providers
are typically passed through to their customers. Recently, however, the
Commission revisited this issue with respect to IP Relay and VRS,
concluding that the reasonable cost of assigning and porting NANP
numbers for those services should be supported by the TRS Fund.
Recognizing that the Commission's rules require the assignment of NANP
numbers to IP Relay and VRS users and that, based on the current
record, numbering costs are unlikely to be recoverable from users as a
practical matter, the Commission concluded that such costs are now
appropriately attributed to the use of relay to facilitate a call.
 29. While the most common IP CTS configuration allows consumers to
use existing telephone numbers to place and receive calls over a
landline voice service, assignment of a new number may be necessary as
a practical matter for some configurations of IP CTS--for example,
where an over-the-top application enables captioning of calls placed
and received on smartphones and other devices. In such instances, the
provider may assign a new NANP number to the user, which is different
from the user's landline or mobile number. The new number may be used,
for example, to enable incoming calls (including 911 callbacks) to be
received via the captioning app on a smartphone, rather than the
phone's native telephony application. In such cases, as is true for VRS
and IP Relay, the IP CTS provider typically does not have a billing
relationship with the consumer, and there seems to be little point in
creating such a relationship for the sole purpose of passing through
what likely would be a de minimis monthly charge for any particular IP
CTS user.
 30. Therefore, the Commission revises the allowable-cost criteria
for IP CTS to allow TRS Fund support of an IP CTS provider's reasonable
costs of acquiring NANP telephone numbers when necessary to provide the
service. The Commission stresses that the cost of number assignment is
allowable only where such number assignment is necessary for the
provision of IP CTS in a particular configuration. As noted above, most
IP CTS users receive captioning on a landline phone, in a configuration
that does not require the assignment of a new telephone number. As with
other reported costs, if audits or other review reveals that numbering
costs are being reported in excess of reasonable amounts, the excess
will be disallowed.
 31. The Commission also clarifies that, to the extent IP CTS
providers are responsible for delivery of a user's 911 call to the
nearest Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP), the TRS Fund supports
reasonable expenses to connect the 911 call quickly and to
automatically provide location data to the PSAP.
 32. Customer Premises Equipment. The Commission's rules do not
prohibit IP CTS providers or their partners from distributing customer
premises equipment (CPE) to IP CTS users. However, the TRS Fund does
not support the provision of CPE to TRS users, except where Congress
has specifically authorized such support. The NPRM did not re-open or
seek comment on this issue. Nonetheless, a number of commenters urge
the Commission to revisit whether the TRS Fund should support the
provision of CPE to IP CTS users. Because this question does not fall
within the scope of the NPRM, it is not necessary for the Commission to
address those comments in this document.
 33. Further, even if those comments could be construed as within
the scope of the NPRM, for the reasons articulated in the Commission's
prior orders, commenters provide no persuasive reason to revisit the
issue on its merits. The Commission long ago decided that costs
attributable to equipment that a TRS provider distributes to a
consumer, including installation, maintenance, and testing, are not
compensable from the TRS Fund. The well-established distinction in the
Commission's rules between relay services, which are supported by the
TRS Fund, and end user devices, which are not, is grounded in the text
of the governing statutory provision. As the Commission has explained,
section 225 of the Act focuses on the provision of relay service,
requiring common carriers to provide relay services either directly or
indirectly (e.g., through a TRS Fund-supported provider), and this is
apparent from the plain language of section 225 of the Act, which is
directed at services that carriers must offer in their service areas
that enable communication between persons who use a TTY or other non-
voice terminal device and an individual who does not use such device.
The Commission has further held that costs associated with CPE are not
part of a provider's expenses in making relay services available;
rather they must be incurred by consumers to receive these services,
just as people who do not use relay services must purchase their
phones. The Commission's determinations disallowing CPE costs have been
upheld by federal courts of appeals.
 34. Contrary to ClearCaptions' argument, a mere analogy between
section 225 of the Act and certain provisions in section 254 of the
Act, 47 U.S.C. 254, carries no legal weight. TRS support is governed by
section 225 of the Act, not section 254 of the Act, and the Commission
rejects the suggestion that somehow its authority under the former
provision can be expanded based on a purported analogy to how the
Commission has exercised its authority under the latter provision.
 35. In addition, even if the Commission had statutory authority to
do so, it is unconvinced that TRS Fund support for provider
distribution of user devices--in particular, purpose-built, proprietary
equipment--would be necessary or appropriate to ensure the availability
of functionally equivalent relay service. Authorizing TRS Fund support
for the kinds of user devices currently offered by providers--i.e.,
relatively expensive, proprietary equipment that can only be used with
one provider's service and that has an unusually short useful life--
appears inconsistent with the Commission's mandate to make TRS
available in the most efficient manner. In the VRS context, the
Commission has adopted

[[Page 71853]]

policies to encourage the use of non-proprietary, off-the-shelf,
screen-equipped devices, such as smartphones, laptops, and personal
computers, to access VRS. In general, the use of non-proprietary
devices for TRS (e.g., by downloading software applications developed
by providers) has several advantages. First, it is less costly, as most
people in the United States already own such devices and use them for a
wide variety of purposes other than TRS. Second, the use of non-
proprietary devices avoids ``locking in'' users to the service of a
single TRS provider, which limits consumer choice and which also can
encourage the offering of free devices as an inducement to use a
particular provider's relay service. Third, the use of non-proprietary
devices avoids ``siloing'' TRS users in ways that can hinder access to
communication technologies available to mainstream users.
 36. The record is clear that IP CTS can be accessed without
proprietary equipment, by downloading providers' software applications
to smartphones, tablets, and laptops. For example, many providers make
their applications available on Google Play and the Apple App Store.
Although a commenter argues that such applications are generally
impractical for seniors (who comprise the bulk of IP CTS users), a
survey indicates that smartphone ownership is growing faster among
seniors than other age groups, and that as of 2021, 61% of seniors
owned smartphones--a percentage that presumably will continue to
increase. In addition, reasonable expenses incurred in helping seniors
download and use a provider's smartphone application are allowable
costs supported by the TRS Fund. Finally, even for those consumers who
are unable to use smartphone or other software applications to access
IP CTS, it appears that screen-equipped wireline telephones, usable for
captioned phone calls (or screens that can be connected to a wireline
telephone) are commercially available for home use.
 37. User Access Software. The Commission adopts its proposal to
allow TRS Fund support for the reasonable cost of developing,
maintaining, and providing software and web-based applications that
enable users to access IP CTS from off-the-shelf user devices, such as
mobile phones, desktop computers, and laptops running on widely
available operating systems. This change harmonizes the cost criteria
for IP CTS with those adopted for VRS. As with VRS, such costs must be
incurred by an IP CTS provider to enable users to connect to its
service platform; therefore, they are attributable to the provision of
IP CTS. Further, recovery of such costs is consistent with the
efficiency mandate, as it supports the use of off-the-shelf IP-enabled
user devices to access TRS and decreases consumers' dependence on TRS
equipment specifically designed for connection to a particular TRS
provider.
 38. Consistent with its compensation ruling for VRS, the Commission
declines to allow TRS Fund support for the cost of user access software
needed for proprietary user equipment supplied by the provider or a
third party. While TRS users need a software interface to access TRS,
they do not need proprietary devices that can be connected to and used
with only one provider's service, nor do they need software designed
for such devices. Although the Commission does not prohibit providers
from distributing such devices and software to consumers requesting
them, it is not necessary to support proprietary devices and software
with TRS Fund resources. Further, allowing recovery of such software
costs would not advance the Commission's policy to enable users to
access TRS from off-the-shelf IP-enabled devices and to avoid
dependence on TRS equipment specifically designed for a particular
provider's network. If an IP CTS provider supplies user access software
for both off-the-shelf and proprietary devices, and the development
costs for each type of software cannot be directly assigned, a provider
may adopt a reasonable allocation method to separate such costs, to
ensure that it does not seek recovery for costs associated with
proprietary devices. The provider shall specify the method used in its
cost reports, so that it can be evaluated by the TRS Fund administrator
and the Commission.
 39. Field Staff Visits. While the Commission did not seek comment
on the issue of whether providers should be able to recover the costs
associated with deploying their field staff, the Commission's ruling in
the 2023 VRS Compensation Order sufficiently addresses the issues
raised in the comments regarding the treatment of costs incurred by IP
CTS providers' field staff. In the 2023 VRS Compensation Order, the
Commission reaffirmed that, because the costs of installing,
maintaining, and training customers to use provider-distributed devices
(or software for proprietary provider-distributed devices) are not
recoverable through TRS Fund compensation, expenses for field staff
visits for such purposes are not allowable expenses for VRS or IP CTS.
In addition, the Commission clarified that the reasonable cost of
service-related work performed by field staff during a visit to a new
or current user (e.g., to assist customers with registration, use of
the service on a non-proprietary device, or completing a port) is an
allowable cost of providing VRS or IP CTS.

Determination of Cost-Based Rates

 40. Cost Averaging. The Commission has broad discretion in choosing
compensation methodologies and setting compensation rates within the
parameters established by section 225 of the Act. To set cost-based
benchmarks for IP CTS compensation rates, the Commission continues to
rely on the methodology used in the 2020 IP CTS Compensation Order, in
which rates were set based on the weighted average of each provider's
projected and historical costs for the current and immediately
preceding calendar years (now 2023 and 2024). Under this weighted-
average method, the allowable expenses reported by all CA-based and
ASR-based IP CTS providers respectively for calendar years 2023
(historical expense) and 2024 (projected expenses) are totaled and the
allowed operating margin (determined as a percentage of expenses) is
added to total allowable expenses. The resulting total is divided by
total historical (for 2023) and projected (2024) compensable minutes of
demand for CA-based and ASR-based IP CTS respectively for those two
calendar years, to yield an average cost per minute (including
operating margin). This average cost per minute is called a
``weighted'' average because it gives more weight to the per-minute
cost incurred by providers with relatively high demand and less weight
to the per-minute cost incurred by providers with relatively low
demand.
 41. The Commission maintains this approach for essentially the same
reasons cited in the 2020 IP CTS Compensation Order. First, this
methodology has produced consistent and reliable results without
imposing undue administrative burdens on either IP CTS providers or the
Commission. Second, average-cost-based compensation, especially when
applied for more than one year, provides substantial incentives and
opportunities for individual TRS providers to increase their efficiency
and capture the resulting profits. Third, maintaining a consistent
compensation methodology provides a measure of transitional stability
at a time of technological change.
 42. According to Hamilton Relay's expert, the Brattle Group,
averaging is inappropriate for IP CTS because ``IP

[[Page 71854]]

CTS costs do not appear to follow a normal distribution, which
typically would mean a few providers with very high costs, a few
providers with low costs, and a majority of providers with costs
somewhere in the middle of a bell curve.'' However, the Brattle Group
cites no authority for the claim that cost-averaging is only
appropriate when provider costs are in a bell-curve shaped
distribution--which is unlikely to occur where, as here, the sample
size is limited to nine providers, five of which are very small or
start-ups. The Commission is also unpersuaded that there is
justification for replacing the average-cost approach with a ``mean
plus one standard deviation'' approach, as advocated by Hamilton Relay.
Setting a CA-assisted rate based on this approach would overcompensate
providers with average costs and substantially dilute the incentive for
higher-cost providers to become more efficient.
 43. Tiered or Small-Provider Rates. CaptionMate urges the
Commission to adopt a tiered rate structure for IP CTS, or
alternatively a separate rate for small providers, contending that
supporting smaller providers with relatively high per-minute costs
would offer consumers more choice and promote innovation. The
Commission adopted tiered rates for VRS due to a combination of
specific circumstances that were threatening the viability of
competition among VRS providers. In 2020, the Commission declined to
adopt tiered rates for IP CTS because it was not persuaded that similar
or equally compelling factors are present in the IP CTS market to an
extent that would justify introducing the complexities and potential
inefficiencies of a tiered rate structure or an emergent provider rate.
This remains the case today.
 44. First, unlike in VRS, the IP CTS market has not been dominated
for a long period by a single provider. The market share of the largest
IP CTS provider is not comparable to that of the largest provider in
the VRS market. Second, while there are economies of scale in IP CTS,
there is little evidence that such economies of scale are preventing
the emergence of efficient competitors. IP CTS's record of growth
suggests that there are substantially greater opportunities than in the
VRS context for a provider to reach efficient scale within a relatively
short period of time. Where higher costs are incurred by a relatively
large IP CTS provider, it is more likely attributable to business
decisions concerning use of contractors as turnkey service providers,
prior investments in technology and business processes, and differences
in business models, rather than issues of scale. Third, unlike VRS, IP
CTS is not dependent on interoperability and does not have other
network effects that make it difficult for new entities to enter the
market or obtain eligible IP CTS users as customers. Fourth, the
relatively recent introduction of ASR-only IP CTS, as well as new
methods of providing CA-assisted IP CTS, provides additional evidence
that Commission policies are not deterring innovation in this arena.
Fifth, the four recently granted applications for IP CTS certification
indicate that new entrants believe that additional competitors can
succeed and innovate in the provision of IP CTS. In summary, given the
relative ease of new entry and the presence of vigorous competition
based on service quality, the Commission concludes that the goals of
offering consumer choice and encouraging innovation can continue to be
achieved without resorting to the ratemaking challenges, complexities,
and potential inefficiencies of a tiered rate structure or a separate
small-provider rate.
 45. The Commission also notes that none of the IP CTS providers
advocating a special small-provider rate offers CA-assisted service. In
a recently filed petition, advocates for accessibility contend that the
TRS Fund should not support the provision of IP CTS by providers that
do not allow users to select CA-assisted service. While the Commission
does not prejudge this petition, the fact that none of the providers
subject to the proposed small-provider rate offers a CA-assisted option
reinforces its conclusion that the objectives of section 225 of the Act
would not be served by adopting such a rate.
 46. The Commission also emphasizes that it is mandated to make TRS
available in the most efficient manner, not to ensure that every TRS
provider is able to operate successfully, regardless of the cost. A
small provider claims that it offers a service of unique value,
targeting a younger demographic and offering captioning in 67
languages. However, the Commission must balance the potential benefits
of diverse service offerings with the need for efficiency. To the
extent that there is significant demand for multiple-language
captioning, the record does not show that it cannot be made available
by a provider supported by the TRS Fund at the rates set herein, or
through other channels. Also, the compensation plan adopted herein,
which limits the cumulative reduction in the ASR-only compensation rate
during the five-year compensation period, allows all providers of ASR-
only service to be compensated at a level higher than the current
average cost. Thus, small ASR-only providers will also be afforded a
period of stability to support their growth under relatively favorable
conditions.

Estimating IP CTS Expenses

 47. Attribution of Expenses to Service Categories. The Commission
adopts the NPRM's tentative conclusion that, when possible, providers
must directly assign costs to either ASR-only or CA-assisted IP CTS,
and when that is not possible, they must reasonably allocate such costs
based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs. Where they could
not directly attribute costs to one or another service, most providers
have allocated joint expenses based on the share of their IP CTS
minutes that are ASR-only or CA-assisted. The Commission finds this to
be a reasonable method.
 48. Relevant Cost Data. Since 2018, the Commission has established
the cost basis for IP CTS provider compensation by averaging providers'
reported historical expenses for the prior calendar year (here, 2023)
with their projected expenses for the current calendar year (here,
2024). The Commission has found this method to be a useful way to
counteract providers' tendency to overestimate future costs. The
Commission finds no compelling reason for any substantial modification
of this approach. IP CTS providers' cost projections in the record do
not include such dramatic variations as were raised by VRS provider
projections in the recently concluded VRS compensation proceeding.
 49. Adjustment Factor. To ensure that compensation for CA-assisted
service in the first year of the next period is sufficient to cover
likely inflation-related cost increases (offset by productivity related
decreases) between Fund Years 2023-24 and 2024-25, the Commission
adjusts each provider's average allowable expenses for calendar years
2023 and 2024 by 3.77%, which is the change from fourth quarter 2022 to
fourth quarter 2023 in the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) index of
seasonally adjusted ``total compensation for private industry workers
in professional, scientific, and technical services.'' This adjustment
uses the same index that will be used to adjust compensation for CA-
assisted IP CTS in subsequent years of the compensation period. The
Commission does not apply an adjustment factor to ASR-only service. As
explained below, an adjustment factor for ASR-only cost is not needed
for this compensation period.

[[Page 71855]]

 50. Newly Allowable Cost Categories. Although the Commission
revises several allowable-cost categories, the record does not indicate
that these changes will result in any significant increase in the
estimated cost of service. Previously non-allowable expenses reported
for numbering activities are identified by each IP CTS provider in its
annual cost report. However, because most IP CTS users do not require
the assignment of numbers, average per-minute expenses reported for
number assignment are less than $.001 per minute, resulting in only a
trivial cost adjustment. In the other categories of previously non-
allowable costs, only one provider reported relevant non-allowable
expenses for 2023 and 2024, and that provider has stated it was not
able to segregate proprietary from non-proprietary software costs, or
research and development for proprietary equipment from research and
development for relay service. As a result, even this provider did not
report any expenses in newly allowable cost categories other than
number assignment. Therefore, the changes in allowable cost categories
do not result in any adjustment of estimated average allowable per-
minute expenses for either CA-assisted or ASR-only IP CTS. For the
reasons stated above, costs for customer support provided by field
staff remain non-allowable to the extent that they are attributable to
installation, maintenance, or customer assistance with provider-
distributed devices or software for proprietary devices.
 51. Technology Cost. Some commenters argue that the Commission
should adjust allowable expenses to take account of an asserted need
for increases in technology investment, beyond the amounts estimated in
annual cost reports. Given the excess in average TRS Fund payments
above reasonable cost for the last several years, the Commission finds
it implausible that IP CTS providers have been unable to spend
reasonably necessary amounts in technology-related cost categories
(engineering and research and development). Due to the extraordinarily
high average operating margins recently achieved by IP CTS providers,
ample resources have been available to enable providers to purchase any
technology they may need or develop it in-house. In 2021, IP CTS
providers reported average expenses of approximately $0.93 per minute
and were paid approximately $1.36 per minute from the TRS Fund ($1.42
in January-June and $1.30 in July-December), for an operating margin of
46.2%. In 2022, they reported average expenses of approximately $0.83
per minute and were paid $1.30, for an operating margin of 56.9%. In
2023, they reported average expenses of approximately $0.72 per minute
and were paid $1.30, for an operating margin of 80.6%. Further, the
proliferation of ASR technology in other areas, including captioning
for video conferencing and television, is likely to ensure that ASR
development costs need not be borne by IP CTS providers alone. As noted
above, providers have not reported incurring any additional research
and development expenses for 2023 and 2024 in the newly allowable
category of expenses for research and development to improve IP CTS
beyond what is necessary to meet minimum TRS standards. Therefore, the
Commission is not persuaded that extraordinary levels of additional
support from the TRS Fund will be needed to assist IP CTS providers in
securing necessary technology. In addition, the compensation plan
limits the cumulative reduction in the ASR-only compensation rate
during the next compensation period, providing an above-cost
``cushion'' as a safeguard against any unpredicted increases in
technology-related cost.
 52. CA Cost. Some commenters argue that the current compensation
rate is insufficient to support a wage rate for CAs at the level they
assert is needed--specifically, the federal contractor minimum. In
contrast with the VRS compensation proceeding, the record here does not
show that there is a continuing shortage of people qualified to work as
IP CTS CAs. Indeed, the recent substantial decline in CA-assisted IP
CTS minutes suggests the opposite. On the other hand, the Commission
agrees that the quality of CA-assisted service likely will benefit if
CAs are paid at higher hourly rates. To this end, the Commission
prescribes two rates for CA-assisted service: a base rate, determined
using the established average cost methodology; and a supplemental
rate, applicable to the minutes handled by those CAs whose hourly wages
exceed a threshold amount.
 53. Marketing and Outreach Cost. Some commenters contend that the
Commission should set rates that provide an additional incentive to
engage in marketing and outreach, e.g., to ensure the IP CTS industry
invests in growth by reaching and offering the service to more
qualifying consumers. They claim that only a small fraction of
consumers who would benefit from IP CTS are being served. ClearCaptions
blames declining compensation rates for causing a reduction in
marketing expenditures by providers. According to providers' cost
reports, however, marketing expenditures have increased substantially
since 2020, both in dollars per minute and as a percentage of total
allowable expenses. IP CTS providers reported spending an average of
$.0903 per minute, or 13.0% of total expenses, on marketing in 2023,
and projected spending $.1114 per minute, in 2024, or 15.0% of total
expenses, in 2024. These percentages are far higher than in any recent
year--and will continue to be supported at that level by the rates set
in the Report and Order. Given the significant increase in marketing
expenditures, the cost data do not suggest a need to provide additional
monetary incentives for providers to find new IP CTS customers.
 54. The Commission also does not find it credible that, despite the
extraordinarily large operating margins (far above the allowed 10%
level) actually earned by providers at the current rate, IP CTS
providers have been unable to spend what is needed to market the
service to likely customers. Nor does the Commission find it credible
that IP CTS providers cannot continue to do so as rates are reduced to
allow more reasonable operating margins. In this regard, despite some
commenters' claims, the number of people in the United States who could
benefit from IP CTS is largely a matter of speculation. While
ClearCaptions suggests that the estimated 12.8 million U.S. residents
with moderate to profound hearing loss are all ``potential IP CTS
customers,'' many individuals who use hearing aids do not need the
additional assistance of IP CTS. There are a variety of other sources
of communications assistance available to this population, including
hearing-aid compatible telephones and mobile phones, specialized high-
amplification phones, and increasingly, commercially available ASR-
enabled telephones and services. In addition, many seniors with
moderate to profound hearing loss may be precluded from benefitting
from a captioning service due to vision-related or cognitive
disabilities. The Commission is setting TRS Fund support at a level
that should encourage reasonable efforts to promote IP CTS among people
who can benefit from it, but there is no evidence to support the
assumption that everyone with at least moderate hearing loss needs,
wants, and is able to use the service.
