FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Addressing the Homework Gap Through the E-Rate Program
Document number: 2024-18122
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireline Competition Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 67303
Publication date: 2024-08-20

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 161 (Tuesday, August 20, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 161 (Tuesday, August 20, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 67303-67326]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-18122]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 54

[WC Docket No. 21-31; FCC 24-76; FR ID 237079]


Addressing the Homework Gap Through the E-Rate Program

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission or FCC) takes steps to modernize the E-Rate program to meet
the evolving needs of schools and libraries around the country by
allowing for the distribution of Wi-Fi hotspots and services to
students, school staff, and library patrons for off-premises use.

DATES: Effective September 19, 2024, except for the amendments to
Sec. Sec. 54.504 and 54.516, at amendatory instructions 4 and 9,
respectively, which are delayed indefinitely. The Commission will
publish a document in the Federal Register announcing the effective
date for those sections.

[[Page 67304]]


FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information, please
contact, Molly O'Conor, Telecommunications Access Policy Division,
wireline competition Bureau, at [email protected] or (202) 418-7400
or TTY: (202) 418-0484. Requests for accommodations should be made as
soon as possible in order to allow the agency to satisfy such requests
whenever possible. Send an email to [email protected] or call the Consumer
and Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a synopsis of the Commission's
Report and Order (Order) and Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(FNPRM) in WC Docket No. 21-31; FCC 24-76, adopted on July 18, 2024 and
released on July 29, 2024. The full text of this document is available
at the following internet address: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-76A1.pdf .

Introduction

 Technology has become an integral part of the modern classroom and
receiving an education, especially in the recent past, and the barrier
to accessing such technology puts individuals at a significant
disadvantage to their peers and often prevents educators from being
able to teach. In the Report and Order (Order), the Commission take
steps to modernize the E-Rate program to meet the evolving needs of
schools and libraries around the country by allowing for the
distribution of Wi-Fi hotspots and services to students, school staff,
and library patrons for off-premises use.
 Since its inception more than 25 years ago, the Commission's E-Rate
program has supported high-speed, affordable internet services to and
within school and library buildings, and has been instrumental in
providing students, school staff, and library patrons with access to
the essential broadband services that are required for next-generation
learning. Recognizing the Commission's responsibility to ensure the E-
Rate program evolves with the educational needs of students and library
patrons, the Commission has frequently modernized the program to
reflect the changes in education and technology, including by providing
more equitable access to funding for Wi-Fi networks in schools and
libraries. Recently the Commission has seen significant advances in
technology that have changed not only the way schools and libraries
provide educational resources, but also the way students, school staff,
and library patrons access such resources. In particular, an internet
connection has become an essential requirement for learners to access
tasks that are vital to obtaining an education, including homework
assignments, online classes, library materials, continuing education,
and career and government applications.
 The need for internet connectivity beyond the campus boundaries was
further underscored by nationwide school and library closures beginning
in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, when most educational
activities were unexpectedly forced to shift online overnight. During
this time, thanks to the creativity and resourcefulness of schools and
libraries around the country, many students, school staff, and library
patrons that would have been caught on the wrong side of the digital
divide or the ``Homework Gap''--i.e., students unable to fully
participate in educational opportunities because they lack broadband
connectivity in their homes--were able to obtain a broadband connection
provided by their local school or library. Many schools and libraries
used funding provided through the congressionally-appropriated
Emergency Connectivity Fund (ECF) program to purchase connected
devices, Wi-Fi hotspot devices, broadband connections, and other
eligible equipment and services for students, school staff, and library
patrons in need, to use at a variety of locations, including locations
other than schools and libraries, during the pandemic. Notably, schools
and libraries found success in establishing ECF-funded Wi-Fi hotspot
lending programs to provide the hotspot equipment and monthly mobile
wireless broadband services needed to connect individuals who otherwise
lacked the internet access needed to fully participate in remote
learning.
 Even with schools and libraries reopening and returning to in-
person instruction, the need for internet connections outside of the
school or library buildings to fully engage in education remains, and
schools and libraries are seeking to continue funding these valuable
lending programs to keep their students, school staff, and library
patrons connected. That is why the Commission adapts the E-Rate program
to recognize these needs. Building on its experiences in the ECF
program and the comments the Commission received in response to the
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), 88 FR 85157, December 7, 2023,
the Commission adopts a budget mechanism to allow for the equitable
distribution of Wi-Fi hotspots and services to students, school staff,
and library patrons. These rules are intended to be another step in
updating the E-Rate program to reflect the realities of many schools
and libraries by lending Wi-Fi hotspots and services through community
and school libraries across the country so that students, school staff,
and library patrons with the greatest need can be connected and learn
without limits.

Discussion

 In the Order, the Commission takes steps to modernize the E-Rate
program to ensure that schools and libraries across the nation have the
tools necessary to connect their students, school staff, or library
patrons who have fallen onto the wrong side of the digital divide or
the Homework Gap. First, the Commission permits schools and libraries
to purchase Wi-Fi hotspots and services that they can lend to students,
school staff, and library patrons for off-premises use and direct the
Wireline Competition Bureau (Bureau) to make the services and equipment
eligible as part of the funding year 2025 eligible services list
proceeding. Second, relying on the successes of and lessons learned
from the ECF program, as well as the Wi-Fi hotspot lending programs
established by schools and libraries with ECF support, the Commission
establishes a budget mechanism to set a limit on the amount of support
that an eligible school or library can request for Wi-Fi hotspots and
services that can be loaned to their students, school staff, and
library patrons, thereby allowing schools and libraries the flexibility
to target those with the greatest need in their respective populations.
Next, the Commission also remains committed to supporting the
connectivity needs of school and library buildings by prioritizing
funding for these off-premises services after on-premises-related
funding requests. Mindful of its duty to be a responsible steward of
limited universal service resources, the Commission also adopts
safeguards to ensure the E-Rate funds are used for their intended
purpose. Finally, the Commission reaffirms its conclusions that the
obligations of the Children's internet Protection Act (CIPA) apply if
the school or library receives E-Rate support for internet service,
internet access, or network connection services or related equipment,
including Wi-Fi hotspots.
 Based on the record and consistent with its authority pursuant to
section 254(h) of the Communications Act, the Commission adopts its
proposal to permit schools and libraries to receive E-Rate support for
Wi-Fi hotspots and services to be used off-premises by students, school
staff, and library patrons. Although the E-Rate program has not
historically provided support for most off-premises uses of E-Rate-

[[Page 67305]]

supported services, the Commission agrees with commenters that today's
educational environment has substantially changed since the advent of
the E-Rate program in 1997. Namely, the increasing shift to digital
learning due to evolving technologies as well as pandemic-related
changes has resulted in internet connectivity becoming a necessity to
being able to fully participate in modern education for students,
school staff, and library patrons alike.
 For schools, the pandemic highlighted the digital divide, leaving
those students without access to reliable home internet unable to
access educational resources, participate in remote learning, or
connect with teachers. Smith Bagley, Inc. (SBi) described how emergency
funding during the pandemic increased educational opportunities for
Tribal students by focusing on digital inclusion and introducing
digital learning tools that have been available to urban and suburban
communities for years, allowing them to connect to schools on days they
would otherwise miss and allowing teachers to reach students that would
otherwise be left disconnected. The digital divide between students
with access to broadband at home and those without exacerbates existing
inequalities, particularly for certain communities--such as those in
rural or economically-disadvantaged areas. Commenters note that stable
internet connectivity at home is essential to ``educational
opportunity, equity, and achievement'' with digital learning tools
enabling ``more expansive, up-to-date content, the inclusion of
educational videos, and effective online collaboration.'' Others
explain the reliance on online digital resources allows learners ``to
engage with supplemental educational materials, complete homework
assignments, and connect with one another,'' which leaves ``[s]tudents
and staff that are unable to access the connected classroom . . . at a
significant disadvantage.'' A 2021 report observed that
``[h]istorically students caught in the digital divide have lower
academic achievement with a significant impact on lifetime earnings.''
 Likewise, for libraries, providing free, high-speed access to the
internet is critical to many of the services libraries provide,
particularly for disadvantaged communities. Library services
increasingly include virtual offerings. For example, libraries allow
patrons to access digital resources remotely, including reserving or
renewing books, accessing digital collections and e-materials,
providing community support resources, and even offering support to
library patrons who are educators or students, making these digital
resources available to library patrons at the moment they need them.
Additionally, Wi-Fi hotspot lending programs that provide remote access
to the internet for library patrons are both successful and in high
demand. For instance, one commenter explains that at the Chicopee
Public Library, Wi-Fi hotspots are checked out ``every day to people
who have no other way of accessing this service without putting
themselves in danger of being unable to afford basic necessities.''
 The Commission modernizes the E-Rate program to address this
digital inequity that leaves some students, school staff, and library
patrons unable to fully participate in schoolwork or access library
resources. The Commission further recognizes how learning is no longer
confined to the physical school or library building during regular
operating hours, and how libraries and schools often serve to fill the
educational and connectivity gap for their students, school staff, and
library patrons who lack access to the internet. Additionally, based on
its experiences through the ECF program, the Commission further seeks
to recognize the utility of Wi-Fi hotspots as an easily sourced and
affordable means of providing connectivity for schools and libraries
and acknowledge the commenters' countless examples of how Wi-Fi hotspot
lending programs established with ECF funding have benefitted
communities and students around the nation. Now, numerous libraries and
schools are faced with the difficult decision to reduce the number of
Wi-Fi hotspots available for circulation or start charging fees, not
because of lack of demand, but because of lack of available funding.
This has only been further exacerbated by the recent loss of Affordable
Connectivity Program (ACP) benefits by many low-income households
across the country. As such, the Commission extends eligibility to
provide eligible schools and libraries with much-needed assistance in
getting the students, school staff, and library patrons with the
greatest need connected via Wi-Fi hotspots and services that can be
used off-premises.
 Eligible Equipment & Services. The Commission adopts the proposed
definitions to permit Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile wireless internet
services as eligible for E-Rate support. In the NPRM, the Commission
sought comment on what specific equipment and services should be deemed
eligible for the off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile wireless
internet services. Specifically, the Commission sought comment on
adopting the ECF program's definition of a Wi-Fi hotspot (i.e., ``a
device that is capable of (a) receiving advanced telecommunications and
information services; and (b) sharing such services with a connected
device through the use of Wi-Fi'') and limiting service eligibility to
commercially available mobile wireless internet services that can be
supported by and delivered with such Wi-Fi hotspots. Commenters are
largely supportive of making off-premises uses eligible for E-Rate
funding and, despite also requesting additional equipment and services
be made eligible, were supportive of the proposed definitions of Wi-Fi
hotspots and mobile wireless internet services that can be used off-
premises. Based on the record, the Commission adopts the proposed
definitions for the equipment and services eligible for support in the
E-Rate program and direct the Bureau to add Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile
wireless internet services that can be used off-premises as eligible
services as part of the funding year 2025 eligible services list
proceeding.
 With respect to eligible equipment, the Commission adopts
definitions of ``Wi-Fi'' and ``Wi-Fi hotspot'' in its rules that are
based on the definitions adopted by it in the ECF program.
Specifically, the Commission defines ``Wi-Fi'' as ``wireless networking
protocol based on Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
standard 802.11'' and the Commission defines ``Wi-Fi hotspot'' as ``a
device that is capable of receiving advanced telecommunications and
information services, and sharing such services with another connected
device through the use of Wi-Fi.'' The Commission finds that this
decision is both supported by the record and by its own experiences
successfully providing connectivity to students, school staff, and
library patrons delivered by Wi-Fi hotspots through the ECF program.
However, the Commission also wishes to acknowledge that these terms may
have other accepted meanings within the communications industry. For
example, Intel defines ``Wi-Fi hotspot'' to mean ``a physical location
where individuals can access the internet wirelessly through a wireless
local area network (WLAN) using Wi-Fi technology.'' The Commission
concludes that this definition would be overly broad for these
purposes, as the function described can be provided by many different
types of devices and may permit unintended scenarios such as funding
public Wi-Fi hubs in a public

[[Page 67306]]

park or a community center, which is beyond the scope of its goal to
provide connectivity to individual students, school staff, or library
patrons caught in the Homework Gap or digital divide. Therefore, for
the purposes of the E-Rate program, the definition the Commission
adopts for ``Wi-Fi hotspot'' means a device (sometimes referred to as a
``mobile hotspot'' or ``portable hotspot device'') that is intended to
provide Wi-Fi connectivity to a hotspot user as its sole function.
Additionally, the Commission limits the capability of a sole purpose
Wi-Fi hotspot to devices that: (1) are portable; and (2) are a single
device (i.e., not a set of linked devices). Finally, these Wi-Fi
hotspots must be for use with a commercially available mobile wireless
internet service, rather than for use with Citizens Band Radio Service
(CBRS) or other private network services.
 The Commission declines to make other multi-functional devices that
can support Wi-Fi eligible for E-Rate support. Thus, the Commission
finds such multi-functional devices, e.g., smartphones, PCs, notebooks,
tablets, customer premises equipment, routers or switches, and wireless
access points, etc., are not eligible. In the ECF Order, 86 FR 29136,
May 28, 2021, the Commission also found it unnecessary to support
costly smartphones used as Wi-Fi hotspots, when much less expensive
hotspot devices can serve the same purpose. The Commission finds this
determination remains true today; and therefore, the Commission limits
E-Rate support to sole function Wi-Fi hotspot devices. Additionally,
with respect to the requests to support end-user devices like laptops
or tablets, the Commission concludes that this equipment remains
ineligible for E-Rate support, consistent with its previous decisions
to decline support for ``computers and other peripheral equipment''
based on its finding that only equipment that is an essential element
in the transmission of information is eligible (e.g., internal
connections) for E-Rate support. Similar to its reasoning for making
smartphones ineligible, the Commission also finds it unnecessary to
take on the costly expenses of laptops or tablets with built-in
wireless connections, when less expensive, sole purpose Wi-Fi hotspots
are capable of delivering the same service. The Commission also
declines to permit applicants to request the mobile wireless services
delivered to broadband-enabled end user devices (e.g., laptops,
tablets). While the Commission recognizes that there are some benefits
to students using these devices, the Commission is concerned that it
adds unneeded complexity in its review of the services eligibility,
particularly in trying to ensure these E-Rate-supported services are
targeted to students with need, rather than just to students who need a
school-assigned tablet or laptop.
 With respect to mobile wireless internet services, the Commission
limits the use of services to those that can be supported by and
delivered with Wi-Fi hotspots provided to an individual user. The
Commission appreciates the suggestions of several commenters who urge
it to also expand eligibility beyond just Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile
wireless services. Citing concerns that limiting eligibility to Wi-Fi
hotspots and mobile wireless services would be contrary to the
statutory requirement in section 254(h)(2)(A) of the Communications Act
to establish ``competitively neutral'' rules, these commenters argue
that the Commission should also permit E-Rate support for other off-
premises technologies, including: fixed wireless connections and the
related equipment, private 5G/LTE networks, CBRS and television white
space (TVWS), fiber, and network expansion or construction. The
Commission acknowledges these commenters' concerns and recognize that
connectivity provided by Wi-Fi hotspots is not a one-size-fits-all
solution. However, in taking this action, the Commission remains
focused on the statutory obligation to establish rules that enhance
access to the extent it is ``economically reasonable.'' At this time,
the Commission does not possess the information necessary to make a
broader determination, nor did any commenters sufficiently analyze the
feasibility of broadening the scope of eligibility. In particular, the
Commission does not have sufficient data to rely on to establish
funding caps on the equipment or service costs associated with other
solutions or to establish an overall budget like the one adopted for
Wi-Fi hotspots herein. At this time, the Commission establishes caps in
this program on both services and equipment in order to simplify
review, aid administration, and constrain costs. Commenters provided
examples of costs for existing network builds, but not in a way that
would allow the Commission to establish caps or assess cost-
effectiveness on costs of access points, antennas, switches, radios,
customer premises equipment, backhaul, installation, RF design and
planning, engineering, licenses, maintenance, software updates, and
other miscellaneous charges. For example, while some stakeholders urge
the Commission to permit E-Rate support for applicant-enabled off-
campus networks, and provide some analysis for the potential cost
efficiency of such solutions, they also acknowledge that these
alternatives that would require much higher up-front deployment costs
and rely on reaching a large number of students, school staff, and
library patrons. Even if constrained by the overall budgets adopted,
the Commission is concerned that these alternative solutions would be
challenging to review for cost-effectiveness by applicants and the
Administrator without additional data and analysis. In contrast, the
Commission's experiences funding Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile wireless
internet services through the ECF program have demonstrated that this
particular solution can reasonably be supported. The Commission
therefore finds that taking this incremental step toward supporting the
off-premises educational needs of its nation's students, school staff,
and library patrons is not only in the public interest, but it is also
within its legal authority. As such, the Commission limits eligibility
to commercially available mobile wireless internet services and the Wi-
Fi hotspots needed to deliver such services to an individual user.
 Per-User Limits. Mindful of the importance of maximizing the use of
limited funds, and consistent with the limitation adopted in the ECF
program, the Commission adopts a rule to prohibit an eligible school or
library from applying for more than one Wi-Fi hotspot provided for use
by each student, school staff member, or library patron in the E-Rate
program. The NPRM sought comment on whether the Commission should
impose per-user limitations on eligible Wi-Fi hotspots and services.
The ECF program limited support to one Wi-Fi hotspot device per
student, school staff, or library patron. Many commenters expressed
support for this approach. In adopting a per-user limitation on these
equipment and services, the Commission seeks to equitably distribute
and maximize the use of limited funds and the number of students,
school staff, and library patrons served.
 Minimum Service Standards. The Commission declines to adopt minimum
service standards for Wi-Fi hotspots and services used off-premises at
this time. While the Commission understands commenters' requests to
establish limits related to data and quality of service, it finds that
adopting minimum service standards runs the risk of penalizing the
students, school staff, and library patrons in places

[[Page 67307]]

where slower speed, data capped, and/or high latency services are
currently the only affordable options. Furthermore, the Commission
agrees with commenters' views that schools and libraries are in the
best position to know what is available and sufficient for their
students', school staff members', and library patrons' remote learning
needs. The Commission expects that schools and libraries will make the
best decisions to meet the remote learning needs of their students,
school staff, and library patrons.
 Demonstrating Cost-Effective Purchases of Wireless Services. In
making the off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and mobile wireless
services eligible, the Commission concludes that the E-Rate program's
current requirement that applicants demonstrate that mobile wireless
services are more cost-effective than internal broadband services is
not applicable to off-premises use. The Commission adopted that
requirement because schools and libraries often require substantial
bandwidth connections to meet their on-premises connectivity needs,
which in turn would require them to seek E-Rate support for large
numbers of data plans to meet those needs that may be more expensive
than other methods of providing internal broadband access for mobile
devices at the school or library. Here, the Commission solely makes the
off-premises use of mobile wireless services eligible at this time; and
thus, it finds no need to impose any such requirements for applicants
seeking support for the off-premises use of wireless internet service
and the Wi-Fi hotspots needed to deliver the services. In the event
that the off-premises use of additional services and equipment becomes
eligible in the future, the Commission will reconsider this approach
and whether other requirements may be necessary. The Commission also
reminds applicants seeking support for the off-premises use of wireless
internet services and Wi-Fi hotspots that they remain subject to the E-
Rate program's competitive bidding rules when seeking support for these
services and equipment, including the requirement that they select the
most cost-effective service offering, using price of the eligible
equipment and services as the primary factor considered.
 Implementation. The Commission directs the Bureau to make Wi-Fi
hotspots and internet services eligible for E-Rate funding as part of
the funding year 2025 eligible services list proceeding. Additionally,
in implementing these changes, the Commission reaffirms the delegation
of authority to the Bureau to interpret its rules and otherwise provide
clarification and guidance regarding any ambiguity that may arise to
ensure that support for these services provided to schools and
libraries further the goals it has adopted for the E-Rate program. The
Commission also directs the Universal Service Administrative Company
(USAC), the Administrator of the E-Rate program, in coordination with
and under the oversight of the Bureau, to issue further guidance and
training on administrative and related processes for requesting support
for the off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and services.
 Wi-Fi Hotspot Lending Program Mechanism. The Commission now adopts
a budget mechanism to allow for the equitable distribution of Wi-Fi
hotspots and services to students, school staff, and library patrons.
In doing so, the budget mechanism will allow eligible schools and
libraries to develop hotspot lending programs, while setting a limit on
the amount of support that an applicant can request for Wi-Fi hotspots
and services. In the NPRM, the Commission sought comment on how to
establish a Wi-Fi hotspot program, recognizing that there are
insufficient E-Rate funds to support a Wi-Fi hotspot and recurring
service for every student, school staff member, and library patron
across the nation. The NPRM also asked whether a per-student limit,
like the one used for category two funding budgets, could help ensure
support was distributed equitably to schools and libraries. The NPRM
sought administratively feasible ways to prioritize support to students
and library patrons without sufficient internet access. In response,
several commenters described the challenges to the approaches used in
the ECF program and sought greater flexibility for schools and
libraries. The Commission also looks to lessons learned from its
administration of the ECF program in addressing these challenges, with
particular focus on program integrity. With these considerations in
mind, the Commission adopts a budgeted approach based on a mechanism
provided in the comments to create a targeted lending program that
allows eligible schools and libraries to be able to request a limited
number of Wi-Fi hotspot devices and services, if they have need for
them, within a pre-discount budget similar to the E-Rate program's
category two budgets. This approach takes into account the applicant
size, using information that is already collected as part of the
category two budget process, and also relies on the E-Rate program's
historic focus on poverty and rurality by using the applicants'
discount rates to calculate a Wi-Fi hotspot budget. Schools and
libraries at higher discount rate levels will be eligible to request
and receive a greater amount of E-Rate support for Wi-Fi hotspot
devices and services than schools and libraries at lower discount rate
levels.
 In establishing a budgeted approach to the lending program
mechanism, the Commission expects that the limited number of available
Wi-Fi hotspots will more naturally be targeted to students, school
staff, or library patrons with the most need. The budget mechanism will
allow schools and libraries to target the appropriate individuals that
lack broadband access; therefore, the Commission finds it does not need
to adopt a survey requirement or other document collection requirement.
Specifically, except in the one occasion discussed in this document,
this limited lending approach will not require applicants to document
whether a particular student, school staff member, or library patron
has ``unmet need'' as the Commission defined that term in the ECF
program, relying instead on establishing a hotspot budget to prevent
applicants from over-purchasing Wi-Fi hotspots and services and
permitting applicants to use their judgment to determine the need in
their own localities within those limits. Instead, to ensure that use
of the hotspot lending program is consistent with its objectives, the
Commission will require schools and libraries to adopt and provide
notice to the Wi-Fi hotspot recipients of an acceptable use policy
(AUP) that highlights that the goal of the hotspot lending program is
to provide broadband access to students and library patrons who need
it. In combination with the applicant's requirement to pay its non-
discounted share of costs, schools and libraries will be incented to
right-size their Wi-Fi hotspot and service requests. However, the
details of such a hotspot lending program--such as length of lending
periods and how to target the appropriate students and library
patrons--will be left to the applicant to determine and tailor the
hotspot lending program to their local needs. For these reasons, the
Commission can streamline the procedures that caused applicants the
most challenges in the ECF program, benefiting applicants, service
providers, and the Administrator.
 The Commission finds adopting this approach to be a reasonable
mechanism for limiting how many Wi-Fi hotspots and connections can be
requested by an applicant. Specifically, applicants will be limited to
a budget based on their

[[Page 67308]]

full-time student count or library square footage, and their category
one discount rate. In doing so, the Commission establishes bright line
limits that are fair and equitable--allowing eligible schools and
libraries to request Wi-Fi hotspots and service, but limiting the pool
of Wi-Fi hotspots and service lines an applicant can request based on
its discount rate and school or library size. This will allow schools
and libraries to request funding for a Wi-Fi hotspot lending program
that can provide wireless internet service to its students, school
staff, and library patrons when it is needed most. The Commission
prohibits one situation based on its experience in the ECF program--
using Wi-Fi hotspots as part of a one to one (1:1) hotspot initiative,
where every student receives a Wi-Fi hotspot. The Commission recognizes
that even under the limiting mechanism, applicants might have a
sufficient Wi-Fi hotspot budget that they could try to focus them all
to a 1:1 initiative at a single low-income school in a district or a
particular grade (e.g., all juniors). Generally, applicants are
prohibited from seeking E-Rate support for a 1:1 hotspot initiative
like this and will be required to certify on the FCC Form 471
application that the hotspots and service will not be used for a 1:1
hotspot initiative. If E-Rate-funded Wi-Fi hotspots are used as part of
a 1:1 initiative--either in practice by providing all of the devices to
a single school in the district or in conjunction with Wi-Fi hotspots
funded via other sources, applicants must document clearly (i.e.,
individual survey results or attestations) that each individual student
needed a Wi-Fi hotspot, in accordance with the AUPs, and may not rely
on general or estimated findings about income levels. Funding
disbursements for applicants without specific documentation to support
a 1:1 Wi-Fi hotspot initiative will be subject to denial and/or
recovery.
 Wi-Fi Hotspot and Services Funding Caps. The Commission first
adopts pre-discount funding caps on the amounts that can be requested
for services and hotspot equipment in the E-Rate program. Specifically,
the Commission adopts a pre-discount $15 per month limit on recurring
mobile wireless internet service and a pre-discount $90 per Wi-Fi
hotspot limit, based on the median cost of monthly services and Wi-Fi
hotspots purchased in the ECF program. Taxes and State electronic waste
fees are not included in the cap, while other reasonable costs such as
delivery fees, activation, and configuration costs are included in the
capped amounts. All taxes and fees should be separately identified on
invoices and requested on a separate funding line. In the NPRM, the
Commission sought comment on cost control mechanisms, including funding
caps on Wi-Fi hotspots or services. Some commenters support a cap on
the Wi-Fi hotspots and services, with some suggesting that the averages
from the ECF program would be an appropriate place to start. Others
disagreed, suggesting that competitive bidding and the applicants' non-
discounted share of costs requirement would be sufficient, with some
cost-effectiveness checks during the Program Integrity Assurance (PIA)
review process.
 On balance, the Commission agrees with commenters suggesting that
funding caps will more effectively ensure equitable distribution of Wi-
Fi hotspots, drive more cost-effective purchasing within the E-Rate
program, and reduce the likelihood that these costs become
unsustainable. The Commission also expects that clear funding caps will
lead to a more streamlined review of these funding requests,
simplifying administration of these requests. For example, the
Commission disagrees with commenters that unreasonable costs are easily
taken up in the PIA reviews, when the data the Commission have from the
ECF program and the record in this proceeding shows a large variation
in costs depending on service provider, technology type, and how
contracts are structured. Setting funding caps will also reduce
concerns about applicants selecting multiple service offerings in
instances where a single service provider will not be able to cover the
entire coverage area. In these instances, the program's competitive
bidding rules would otherwise be less effective in ensuring cost-
effective purchasing when applicants may need multiple service
providers in order to provide coverage options in various geographic
parts of the student or library patron community. By using a funding
cap, applicants that select multiple service providers will still be
capped at a cost-effective price, even if they require selection of
service offerings that may be more expensive.
 Consistent with the ECF program, applicants are permitted to select
a Wi-Fi hotspot or service that costs more than the funding caps, but
E-Rate commitments will not exceed the funding caps. The Commission
expects the E-Rate program's competitive bidding rules to aid
applicants in selecting the most cost-effective service offerings, but
it also directs USAC to examine costs that do not appear to be cost-
effective, based upon other costs within the program or other
commercially available offerings. Although the Commission is adopting
funding caps for recurring services and Wi-Fi hotspots to help control
overall costs to the E-Rate program, the Commission expects applicants
to request E-Rate support based on actual, commercial-based costs. For
example, an applicant cannot request funding at the cap levels, but
purchase Wi-Fi hotspots and recurring services at lower costs and allow
service providers to keep the difference in costs as their profit or
windfall. The Commission will also require service providers to certify
that the costs of the Wi-Fi hotspots do not exceed commercial value.
USAC is permitted to modify or reduce such funding requests, as
appropriate, to reflect the actual, market-based price of commercially-
available Wi-Fi hotspots and to seek recovery in the event of a later
determination that the E-Rate funded costs were higher than the actual
costs of the requested Wi-Fi hotspots and/or recurring services.
 Calculating Budgets. Next, the Commission establishes a formula to
calculate a three-year pre-discount Wi-Fi hotspot and service budget,
limiting the amount of E-Rate support that can be requested by an
applicant for Wi-Fi hotspots and recurring service over three funding
years. E-Rate Central suggests adopting a formula modeled after the
category two budgets that limits applicants to 20 hotspots per 100
students and 5.5 hotspots per 1,000 library square feet, adjusted by
discount rate. Using this proposed formula and multiplying the result
by the three-year cost of the funding caps ($630), applicants will
calculate a three-year Wi-Fi hotspots and service budget. This is the
maximum amount of pre-discount funding permitted for Wi-Fi hotspots
and/or service over three funding years. E-Rate Central proposed
limiting the quantity of Wi-Fi hotspots and services, but there are
important benefits to calculating a maximum Wi-Fi hotspot budget for
several reasons. One, a budget will allow schools and libraries greater
flexibility in spending by allowing applicants to request funding for
the most appropriate mix of Wi-Fi hotspots and service, depending on
their needs. Two, a budget will provide applicants better incentives to
make cost-effective purchases by permitting them to purchase higher
quantities if there are lower costs. Three, budgets will also
facilitate use of existing Wi-Fi hotspots purchased through the ECF
program or with other Federal funds that are still functional by
permitting

[[Page 67309]]

applicants to purchase higher quantities of service requests, if
needed. Applicants that select lower-cost Wi-Fi hotspots, or that find
ways to maintain Wi-Fi hotspots for longer, will be able to request a
larger quantity of E-Rate supported hotspots or lines of service
depending on their individual needs and budget.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] TR20AU24.000

 Calculating Independent School and School District Hotspot Budgets.
Independent schools and school district applicants will calculate their
Wi-Fi hotspot and service budgets by multiplying their student counts
by 20% (i.e., 20 hotspots per 100 students), and adjusting by their
category one discount rates. This number is rounded up to the nearest
ten. The applicant then multiplies that rounded number by $630 to
determine the three-year budget. For example, an independent school
with 500 students and a 90% discount rate would have a three-year, pre-
discount budget of $56,700, while a school district with 500 students
and a 40% discount rate would have pre-discount budget of $25,200.
Unlike the ECF program, these limits will reduce the number of hotspots
that could be requested from the start, requiring schools and districts
to make choices about how to distribute and prioritize access for
students with the greatest need or set lending terms that allow
students to access devices at times when need is high. To the extent
that the formula needs adjustments, the Commission provides a means for
future changes as discussed, but expect that the benefits of a single
formula applicable to all school applicants will be simpler and more
administrable than attempting to find a precise number for different
types of applicants and will greatly decrease burdens on applicants and
the Administrator than if different formulas were adopted dependent
upon type of school applicant.
 Calculating Independent Libraries and Library System Hotspot
Budgets. Likewise, independent libraries and library systems would
calculate their Wi-Fi hotspots and service budgets using their square
footage, allowing 5.5 devices per 1,000 square feet, adjusted by their
category one discount rates. This number is rounded up to the nearest
ten. The applicant then multiplies that rounded number by $630 to
determine the three-year pre-discount budget. For example, an
independent library of 10,000 square feet at the 90% discount rate
would have a three-year pre-discount budget of $31,500, while a library
system with 100,000 square feet and a 90% discount rate would have a
three-year pre-discount budget of $315,000. Smaller libraries would
thus be eligible for at least 10 devices and services lines, while
larger library systems would be eligible for more. Like schools, the
Commission adopts this formula in order to allow libraries to plan for
and determine how and whether to request E-Rate support for a library
hotspot lending program. The Commission adopts the factor suggested in
the comments, which is roughly based on the ratios developed in the
category two budgets for schools and libraries, but also adopt a means
to adjust the formula in the future should the library factor be
insufficient for library patron access, particularly in areas of the
country where there may be higher need, but small libraries, such as
rural-remote areas.
 For purposes of the calculation, full-time student count and square
footage figures will be calculated at the district-wide or library
system level in order to make use of existing information collections
and procedures. Independent schools may apply using entity-level
student counts. In doing this, the Commission seeks to use data that is
already collected on the FCC Form 471 application for the applicants'
category two budgets. Similarly, the Commission will allow an applicant
to rely on a validated category two student count or square footage
figure for purposes of the Wi-Fi hotspot limiting mechanism. Relying on
information already collected and validated for category two purposes
will reduce burdens on applicants and the Administrator. For funding
year (FY) 2025 through FY 2027, schools and school districts with a
validated category two student count could rely on that number (and
similarly, libraries with a validated square footage), but would need
to revalidate student counts in the next three-year Wi-Fi hotspot
funding cycle (i.e., FY 2028 through FY 2030).
 The Commission also will use fixed three-year budget cycles, after
which the budgets will reset, beginning with funding years 2025 through
2027. Based on the experience with category two budgets, the Commission
believes a fixed cycle will reduce applicant confusion and simplify
administration. Entities are allowed to spread out their requests for
Wi-Fi hotspots and services over the three-year timeframe, as long as
the total pre-discount amount does not exceed the budget over the three
funding years. Entities may request support for Wi-Fi hotspot service
even if the associated Wi-Fi hotspots were not directly funded under
the new E-Rate rules. However, applicants may not request more than 45%
of its three-year budget in any year. The Commission finds this
valuable in order to prevent applicants with high numbers of existing
Wi-Fi hotspots from simply using the entire budget in a single funding
year. The Commission will also require that such services must be
competitively bid prior to requesting E-Rate support pursuant to the
program's competitive bidding rules.
 The Commission emphasizes that the hotspot budget represents the
maximum pre-discount amount an applicant may request across three
funding years, rather than an allocation of funding for Wi-Fi hotspots
and service lines for which an applicant is entitled reimbursement.
Applicants should evaluate whether there is need in their own school
and library communities and what can be effectively used and tracked in
compliance with program

[[Page 67310]]

rules. Applicants will also continue to be subject to the E-Rate
program rules requiring that schools and libraries are responsible for
paying the non-discounted share of the costs. The intent of this
hotspot lending program is for the Wi-Fi hotspots to be available for
loan to and for use by students, school staff, or library patrons
without sufficient broadband access at home and other off-campus
locations for educational purposes. Applicants and service providers
will be subject to E-Rate program rules, certifications, and other
requirements designed to protect program integrity, as discussed.
 Applicants may not request funding for Wi-Fi hotspots for future
use or to be stored in case of an emergency, and the Commission will
not allow applicants to purchase Wi-Fi hotspots to store in case of
theft, loss, or breakage. Each Wi-Fi hotspot must be associated with a
line of service. The Commission recognizes the concerns from commenters
about replacing Wi-Fi hotspots, but based on lessons from the ECF
program, determine that a streamlined approach would be simpler to
administer, provide clarity for applicants, and ensure limited E-Rate
program funds are used appropriately. In the event of loss or breakage,
applicants may purchase extra devices with other sources of funding to
use with the E-Rate-supported service or they can request replacement
devices paired with lines of service in the next funding year if they
have not exhausted their budgets. The Commission cautions, however,
that applicants that do not replace lost or broken hotspots must work
with their service providers to discontinue the associated service
within a reasonable amount of time of becoming aware of the issue
(e.g., 30 days). In order to ensure the E-Rate program is not paying
for services that sit unused for these or other reasons, the Commission
will require service providers to exclude or waive any associated early
termination fees for the services to Wi-Fi hotspots being funded with
E-Rate support that are lost, broken, or unused and can no longer be
distributed to students, school staff, or library patrons. The
Commission reminds applicants that they must document information about
lost or broken equipment in the asset inventory containing details
about each Wi-Fi hotspot.
 In combination, the Commission expects this three-year pre-discount
budget mechanism and the funding caps to be effective in ensuring that
schools and libraries with students, school staff, and library patrons
with need have access to E-Rate funding to effectively set up and
request funding for hotspot lending programs, while protecting the
Universal Service Fund from overspending and reducing administrative
burdens, as compared to the ECF program. At the same time, the
Commission is cognizant that a one-size formula for limiting hotspot
requests may not fit every school and library and may need to be
adjusted if it is impacting program participation. As such, the
Commission delegates to the Bureau, working with the Office of
Economics and Analytics, the ability to adjust the limiting mechanism
quantities (i.e., 20 per 100 students and 5.5 per 1,000 square feet) as
well as the funding caps in future funding years or future three-year
budget cycles, after seeking comment on such an adjustment. The
Commission also delegates to the Bureau the authority to resolve
technical, procedural, and administrative issues that may arise in
connection with this formula.
 In the NPRM, the Commission sought comment on what category of
service should be used for wireless internet service and the Wi-Fi
hotspots needed to deliver the service, as well as how to prioritize
such services should demand for E-Rate support exceed the annual
funding cap. Consistent with the existing eligible services list,
wireless internet services will be listed as eligible as a category one
service, and will not be subject to the category two budgets. Wi-Fi
hotspots will be eligible as category one network equipment necessary
to make category one wireless internet services functional. The
Commission agrees with commenters arguing that it should be eligible as
category one, consistent with the treatment of supporting equipment
necessary to sustain connectivity.
 At the same time, in the event that demand for E-Rate support
exceeds available funding, the Commission also adopts a rule to fund
requests for eligible off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and services
after requests for eligible on-premises services, inclusive of both
category one and category two services. Based on recent funding years
and the limits that the Commission is adopting on Wi-Fi hotspot and
recurring service requests, it does not expect the changes it adopts to
cause demand to exceed the E-Rate funding cap. However, the Commission
agrees with commenters that this approach will ensure that on-campus E-
Rate funding is available and predictable for schools and libraries in
future funding years. In making this determination, the Commission also
applies it to requests for funding for off-premises use of school bus
Wi-Fi services. Mobile wireless broadband connectivity for school buses
is also eligible as a category one service, but as an off-premises
wireless internet service, it will be funded after eligible on-premises
services should demand exceed the E-Rate annual funding cap. This
appropriately treats these off-premises wireless internet services and
the equipment needed for the connectivity in the same manner and
ensures that future demand for these off-premises services does not
make access to on-premises broadband connectivity to and within the
schools and libraries less predictable.
 Next, mindful of its obligation to protect the integrity of the E-
Rate program and be a careful steward of these limited funds, the
Commission adopts a number of safeguards aimed at ensuring compliance
with its rules and strengthening program integrity. In deciding whether
and which measures to adopt, the Commission considers a variety of
factors, including, importantly, the intended purpose for which this
funding is available, its experience with the ECF program, and
commenters' concerns regarding the burdens associated with and
feasibility around adopting such protections. The Commission also
relies on and leverage existing tools to ensure compliance with its
rules, such as its audit procedures and competitive bidding, non-
discounted share of costs, and discount rate rules. Coupled with those
protections already built into the design of the mechanism the
Commission establishes for the distribution of Wi-Fi hotspots and
services, it seeks to protect the Fund, and the Commission reiterates
its commitment to identify and pursue instances of waste, fraud, and
abuse, including recovery of improperly disbursed funds where
appropriate.
 In the NPRM, the Commission sought comment on ways to ensure that
the off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and services primarily serves an
educational purpose consistent with the Commission's rules and section
254(h)(1)(B) of the Communications Act. Specifically, the Commission
asked whether requiring schools and libraries to certify on their forms
that E-Rate support is being used primarily for this purpose is
sufficient or if additional safeguards should be imposed to protect
against improper use. Based on its experience with the ECF program and
recognizing that the off-premises use of Wi-Fi hotspots and services
raises novel challenges about ensuring their proper use, the Commission
finds that adopting additional safeguards is necessary to ensure that
E-Rate program funds are used for their intended purpose and to protect
the integrity of the program. In
