FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Accessibility of User Interfaces, and Video Programming Guides and Menus
Document number: 2024-17479
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 66268
Publication date: 2024-08-15

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 158 (Thursday, August 15, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 158 (Thursday, August 15, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 66268-66283]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-17479]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 79

[MB Docket No. 12-108; FCC 24-79; FR ID 235228]


Accessibility of User Interfaces, and Video Programming Guides
and Menus

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) requires manufacturers of covered apparatus and
multichannel video programming distributors to make closed captioning
display settings readily accessible to individuals who are deaf and
hard of hearing. This action will further the Commission's efforts to
enable individuals with disabilities to access video programming
through closed captioning.

DATES:
 Effective date: Effective September 16, 2024.
 Compliance date: Compliance with 47 CFR 79.103(e) is not required
until the Commission has published a document in the Federal Register
announcing the compliance date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, contact Diana Sokolow, [email protected] , of the Policy
Division, Media Bureau, (202) 418-2120.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Third
Report and Order (Order), in MB Docket No. 12-108; FCC 24-79, adopted
on July 18, 2024 and released on July 19, 2024. The full text of this
document will be available at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-79A1.pdf and via ECFS at https://www.fcc.gov/ecfs/ . Documents
will be available electronically in ASCII, Microsoft Word, and/or Adobe
Acrobat. Alternative formats are available for people with disabilities
(Braille, large print, electronic files, audio format), by sending an
email to [email protected] or calling the Commission's Consumer and
Governmental Affairs Bureau at (202) 418-0530 (voice), 1-844-4-FCC-ASL
(1-844-432-2275) (videophone).

Synopsis

 This Order furthers our efforts to enable individuals with
disabilities to access video programming through closed captioning.
Closed captioning displays the audio portion of a television program as
text on the screen, providing access to news, entertainment, and
information for individuals who are deaf and hard of hearing. The
Federal Communications Commission requires the provision of closed
captioning on nearly all television programming, as well as on a large
portion of internet protocol (IP)-delivered programming. Through the
Commission's implementation of the Television Decoder Circuitry Act of
1990 (TDCA) and the Twenty-First Century Communications and Video
Accessibility Act of 2010 (CVAA), it has made significant progress in
enabling video programming to be accessible to persons who are deaf and
hard of hearing. Pursuant to the TDCA, the Commission adopted standards
for the display of closed captions on digital television receivers, and
those standards enable users to customize caption display by changing
the font, size, color, and other features of captions. Subsequently,
pursuant to the CVAA, the Commission adopted display standards for
other video devices, specifically for apparatus designed to receive or
play back video programming transmitted simultaneously with sound.
However, many consumers continue to have difficulty accessing the
closed captioning display settings on televisions and other video
devices--a technical barrier that prevents the use and enjoyment of
captioning. Today we take steps to alleviate this problem and thereby
ensure meaningful access to captioning.
 Specifically, the rule we adopt requires manufacturers of covered
apparatus \1\ and multichannel video programming distributors (MVPDs)
to make closed captioning display settings readily accessible to
individuals who are deaf and hard of hearing. We afford covered
entities flexibility in how they meet this obligation, and the
Commission will determine whether settings are readily accessible to
consumers by evaluating the following factors: proximity,
discoverability,

[[Page 66269]]

previewability, and consistency and persistence. We adopt a compliance
deadline of two years after publication of this Order in the Federal
Register.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \1\ As discussed below, the requirements adopted herein apply to
devices covered by section 303(u) of the Act, in other words,
apparatus designed to receive or play back video programming
transmitted simultaneously with sound, if such apparatus is
manufactured in the United States or imported for use in the United
States and uses a picture screen of any size, except that the
requirements do not apply to third-party, pre-installed applications
that are otherwise covered by section 303(u).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Prior to adoption of the TDCA, consumers needed to purchase a
separate TeleCaption decoder device and connect it to a television set
in order to display closed captions. The TDCA amended section 303 of
the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (the Act), to require that
television receivers contain built-in decoder circuitry designed to
display closed captioning. It also amended section 330 of the Act to
require that the Commission's rules provide performance and display
standards for such built-in decoder circuitry. In the TDCA, Congress
observed that the availability of televisions with built-in decoders
``will significantly increase the audience that can be served by
closed-captioned television'' and outlined the significant benefits of
closed captioning for people who are deaf and hard of hearing as well
as other segments of the population, including children and older
Americans who have some loss of hearing. Congress also mandated in
section 330(b) of the Act that the Commission take appropriate action
to ensure that closed captioning service continues to be available to
consumers as new video technology is developed.
 In 1991, the Commission adopted rules that codified standards for
the display of closed captioned text on analog television receivers.
Following the transition to digital broadcasting, the Commission in
2000 adopted technical standards for the display of closed captions on
digital television receivers ``to ensure that closed captioning service
continues to be available to consumers.'' In particular, the Commission
adopted with some modifications section 9 of EIA-708, an industry
standard addressing closed captioning for digital television, which
allows the caption display to be customized for a particular viewer by
enabling the viewer to change the appearance of the captions to suit
his or her needs. When the Commission adopted the technical standards,
it explained that the ``capability to alter fonts, sizes, colors,
backgrounds and more, can enable a greater number of persons who are
deaf and hard of hearing to take advantage of closed captioning.''
 In 2010, Congress enacted the CVAA to ``update the communications
laws to help ensure that individuals with disabilities are able to
fully utilize communications services and equipment and better access
video programming.'' Section 203 of the CVAA broadened section 303(u)
of the Act, which previously applied to ``apparatus designed to receive
television pictures broadcast simultaneously with sound,'' to cover
``apparatus designed to receive or play back video programming
transmitted simultaneously with sound, if such apparatus is
manufactured in the United States or imported for use in the United
States and uses a picture screen of any size.'' Such apparatus must
``be equipped with built-in closed caption decoder circuitry or
capability designed to display closed-captioned video programming.'' In
2012, the Commission adopted performance and display standards for such
built-in decoder circuitry in accordance with section 330(b) of the
Act, and in particular it adopted functional requirements to ensure
that consumers can modify caption display features for IP-delivered
programming on covered apparatus. These rules require that apparatus
provide functionality that allows users to change the presentation,
color, opacity, size, and font of captions, caption background color
and opacity, character edge attributes, and caption window color. But
the rules do not mandate how users access such features on the device.
In the Commission's subsequent proceedings on implementing the
accessibility requirements of sections 204 and 205 of the CVAA,
Consumer Groups described the difficulties consumers who are deaf and
hard of hearing face in accessing closed captioning display features on
apparatus used to view video programming.
 In November 2015, in a Second Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
(Second FNPRM) in the above-captioned docket, the Commission proposed
to adopt rules that would require manufacturers and MVPDs to ensure
that consumers are able to readily access user display settings for
closed captioning, and on the Commission's authority to do so under the
TDCA.\2\ Among other things, the Second FNPRM asked whether the
Commission should require the inclusion of closed captioning display
settings no lower than the first level of a menu, whether such an
approach would provide industry with sufficient flexibility, and
whether there are ``alternative ways to implement this requirement.''
In January 2022, the Media Bureau released a Public Notice seeking to
refresh the record on the proposals contained in the Second FNPRM.\3\
While some comments in the refreshed record assert that caption display
settings are accessible, others explain that problems with the
accessibility of such settings continue to persist.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \2\ In the Further Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in MB Docket
No. 12-108, the Commission had previously inquired whether sections
204 and 205 of the CVAA provide the Commission with authority to
adopt such a requirement. Given our conclusion herein that our
authority derives from the statutory provisions of the TDCA, as
codified in sections 303(u) and 330(b) of the Act, we find it
unnecessary to reach this issue.
 \3\ The January 2022 Public Notice was published in the Federal
Register. See Federal Communications Commission, Accessibility Rules
for Closed Captioning Display Settings, 87 FR 2607 (Jan. 18, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 In January 2023, the Media Bureau released another Public Notice,
seeking comment on a proposal in the record that the Commission require
compliance with the following factors when determining whether
captioning display settings are readily accessible: proximity,
discoverability, previewability, and consistency and persistence.\4\ On
March 14, 2024, NCTA and a coalition of consumer groups filed in the
record a joint proposal to make caption display settings readily
accessible.\5\ The Media Bureau released a Public Notice seeking
comment on the joint proposal.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \4\ The 2023 Caption Display Settings Public Notice was
published in the Federal Register. See Federal Communications
Commission, Accessibility Rules for Closed Captioning Display
Settings, 88 FR 6725 (Feb. 1, 2023).
 \5\ The proposal's signatories represent the following
organizations: NCTA, National Association of the Deaf, TDIforAccess
(TDI), Communication Service for the Deaf, and Hearing Loss
Association of America.
 \6\ The 2024 Caption Display Settings Public Notice was
published in the Federal Register. See Federal Communications
Commission, Accessibility Rules for Closed Captioning Display
Settings, 89 FR 20965 (March 26, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Below, we first find that we have authority under the TDCA to
require that closed captioning display settings are readily accessible
to consumers. Second, we adopt the requirement that such settings must
be ``readily accessible,'' and we detail factors the Commission will
require when making this determination. Third, we explain our finding
that the public interest benefits outweigh the costs for a requirement
that the closed captioning display settings be readily accessible.
Fourth, we find that the rule we adopt herein applies to the full range
of devices covered by section 303(u) of the Act, and that both
manufacturers of covered apparatus and MVPDs are responsible for
compliance with the rule, except that the requirements do not apply to
third-party, pre-installed applications that are otherwise covered by
section 303(u). Fifth, we discuss the availability of waivers or
exemptions based on achievability and technical

[[Page 66270]]

feasibility. Finally, we establish a compliance deadline of two years
after publication of the Third Report and Order in the Federal
Register.
 Authority. We conclude that the Commission has authority under the
TDCA to require that closed captioning display settings be readily
accessible to consumers. Section 303(u)(1)(A) of the Act authorizes the
Commission to require that ``apparatus designed to receive or play back
video programming transmitted simultaneously with sound'' must ``be
equipped with built-in closed caption decoder circuitry or capability
designed to display closed-captioned video programming.'' Section
330(b) of the Act directs the Commission to adopt rules to ``provide
performance and display standards for such built-in decoder circuitry
or capability designed to display closed captioned video programming''
and, ``[a]s new video technology is developed,'' to take such action as
it ``determines appropriate to ensure that closed-captioning service .
. . continue[s] to be available to consumers.''
 We find that sections 303(u) and 330(b) authorize the Commission,
in implementing the TDCA, to consider the practical usability of closed
captioning features by consumers and to adopt ``performance and display
standards'' that will make closed captioning ``available to consumers''
by ensuring the usability of the display options. We find that
meaningful access to user display settings ``is essential to making
closed captioning `available' to consumers'' within the meaning of the
TDCA.\7\ As Consumer Groups explain, ``[i]f a consumer cannot readily
locate and use display settings, then closed captioning itself is not
truly `available' because the consumer cannot ensure that captions are
rendered in a readable and accessible format,'' and, thus the directive
and purpose of the statute will not be fulfilled. Given ``the increased
volume and variety of both the programming and devices available to
consumers'' today, it is ``more important now than ever'' that the
Commission modify its rules to ensure that closed captioning is
meaningfully--not just nominally--available to viewers in order to
serve Congressional intent.\8\ The record shows that expecting
consumers to ``search[] for settings which are buried in menus'' is an
``intimidating and frustrating experience.'' \9\ Thus, simply including
captioning circuitry somewhere in a device is not enough to satisfy the
requirements of the statute; for the captions to be ``available'' as
Congress intended, consumers must be able to adjust the caption display
settings in a manner that makes the captions accessible--i.e.,
``available'' to the consumer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \7\ See Consumer Groups 2016 Comments at 3.
 \8\ Id.
 \9\ Id. at 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 We find that the structure, text, purpose, and history of the TDCA
support Commission authority to regulate consumer access to closed
captioning display settings. First, the statutory structure and text
support this interpretation. Section 303(u)(1)(A) directs the
Commission to adopt regulations that, among other things, require (if
technically feasible) that covered devices ``be equipped with built-in
closed caption decoder circuitry or capability designed to display
closed-captioned video programming.'' Section 330(b) directs the
Commission to adopt ``performance and display standards'' and to take
such action as it deems necessary to ensure that closed captioning
continues to be ``available,'' as new technology is developed. Congress
did not define the term ``available'' for purposes of section 330(b).
We believe that the best reading is to interpret ``available'' to mean
that consumers can readily access the various functions and features of
closed captioning capability. We find that this reading is supported by
the statute as a whole and the surrounding text. Specifically, section
330(b) identifies certain requirements that Commission rules ``shall
provide'' in implementing section 303(u), including ``performance and
display standards,'' a requirement that is sufficiently broad to
encompass regulation of how closed captioning is accessed by consumers.
Indeed, Consumer Groups discuss the meaning of the word ``performance''
in the phrase ``performance and display standards,'' explaining that
``[a]n interpretation of the statute that would prohibit the Commission
from setting standards for easy access to configuration controls would
undermine'' Congress's accessibility goals, and the ``grant of
authority to implement performance standards'' provides the Commission
with ``substantial discretion'' in adopting requirements ``to specify
how users might interact with functions required by those performance
standards.'' We agree. By exercising our authority in this manner, we
fulfill the statutory requirement to include in our rules
``performance'' standards for closed captioning. In addition, section
330(b) directs the Commission ``[a]s new video technology is
developed'' to ``take such action as [it] determines appropriate to
ensure that closed-captioning service . . . continue[s] to be available
to consumers.'' The ``take such action as [it] determines appropriate''
mandate further supports a broad, rather than narrow, view of the
Commission's authority to ``ensure that closed-captioning service . . .
continue[s] to be available to consumers''--an objective advanced by
ensuring access to closed caption display options. We thus believe this
interpretation of the statute best reflects the ordinary meaning of the
statute and best serves the statutory purpose, as discussed below.
 Second, our interpretation is consistent with the express purpose
of the TDCA, which is to increase the number of consumers who can avail
themselves of closed captioning, with increased demand spurring the
provision of more captioned programming. In enacting the TDCA, Congress
stated that ``to the fullest extent made possible by technology,''
persons who are deaf and hard of hearing ``should have equal access to
the television medium.'' Third, we observe that the legislative history
reveals that Congress believed the TDCA would increase the audience for
closed captioned programming and thereby create market incentives for
investment in closed captioned programming. If a covered apparatus has
the ability to process and display closed captions but does so in a way
that makes it practically infeasible or undesirable for consumers to
use that capability, the intent of broadening the potential audience
for captioned programming is undermined. By requiring that closed
captioning performance and display functionality be ``readily
accessible,'' we fulfill the purpose of the TDCA and Congressional
intent as reflected in the legislative history by ensuring that
captions are meaningfully available, and we can increase the likelihood
that the audience for closed captioned programming will continue to
grow as unmet needs are fulfilled, consistent with the statutory
purpose.
 We do not agree that relying on sections 303(u)(1)(A) and 330(b) of
the Act here is ``a belated Commission reinterpretation of the TDCA.''
\10\ To the contrary, the Commission historically has recognized and
exercised authority under sections 303(u) and 330(b) of the Act, prior
to the enactment of the CVAA, in a manner that supports its exercise of
that authority to regulate access to closed captioning display options
here. Previously, the Commission concluded that ``[i]t is

[[Page 66271]]

essential'' that closed captions be readable, and it relied on sections
303(u) and 330(b) of the Act to adopt closed captioning rules that
required consumers to be able to modify settings such as font size and
color. Interpreting the TDCA to authorize regulations ensuring that
consumers can easily access the required display settings to make
closed captions readable, therefore, is entirely consistent with our
prior interpretations. For the same reason, there is no logical basis
to conclude that Congress, with respect to the TDCA modifications it
adopted via the CVAA, interpreted the TDCA as not having granted the
Commission authority to regulate access to display settings, as some
commenters advocate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \10\ CTA 2016 Comments at 6-7; CTA 2022 Comments at 9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Further, we reject the argument that the penultimate sentence of
section 330(b) does not support the adoption of new requirements here
because currently there is ``no threat to the availability of closed-
captioning service.'' \11\ To the contrary, we find that the
requirements we are adopting herein are a proper exercise of our
authority under section 330(b) because the record shows that the
development of new technology for viewing video programming has made it
more difficult for consumers to access the necessary caption display
settings. Specifically, consumers today watch video programming on a
multitude of different devices, and ``it is difficult for consumers to
readily anticipate where display settings are located because the
location varies depending on the device used.'' \12\ With the
proliferation of online video programming, a consumer that views
captioned video programming using the same application or website on
multiple devices may adjust the display settings for one device, only
to find that the settings need to be adjusted again when the
programming is viewed on a different device.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \11\ See NCTA 2016 Comments at 4. That sentence reads: ``As new
video technology is developed, the Commission shall take such action
as [it] determines appropriate to ensure that closed-captioning
service . . . continue[s] to be available to consumers.'' NCTA
claims that ``the legislative history shows that this particular
sentence was not intended to provide additional authority to the
Commission, but instead reflects Congress' desire to ensure that the
particular technical requirements Congress directed the Commission
to adopt would be revised as necessary to keep pace with future
technology changes.'' We disagree with NCTA's interpretation of the
legislative history. The legislative history that NCTA cites merely
indicates an intention to permit the Commission not to impose the
same requirements for both older and newer technologies so long as
closed captioning remains widely available to consumers.
 \12\ Consumer Groups 2016 Comments at 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 We also disagree with commenters who argue that the directives of
sections 303(u) and 330(b) are satisfied as long as closed captioning
circuitry or capability is included somewhere in their devices, that
the statute's use of the term ``available'' should be read narrowly to
exclude consideration of the accessibility of the closed captioning by
consumers,\13\ and that section 330(b) does nothing more than
``authorize the Commission to update specifications as necessary to
keep up with new video technologies.'' \14\ As explained above,
Congress used broad language in section 330(b), authorizing the
Commission to ``take such action as [it] determines appropriate'' to
ensure the continued availability of closed captioning. We thus reject
ACA's assertion that the Commission's authority under section 330(b)
``is limited to updating the specific technical requirements identified
in the TDCA'' to avoid requiring manufacturers to adhere to ``outdated
technical requirements.'' Further, our interpretation best serves the
statutory purpose of ensuring that persons who are deaf and hard of
hearing ``should have equal access to the television medium.'' Thus, we
believe our adoption of a rule ensuring the accessibility of closed
captioning display functions falls within the broad scope of this
language. The language also informs our interpretation and
implementation of our authority under section 303(u) to ensure that
video apparatus is ``equipped'' with closed captioning capabilities,
which requires both that the apparatus possesses the necessary
capabilities and that consumers are able to access them.\15\ Thus, our
advancement of the objectives identified in section 330(b) also
supports our use of section 303(u)(1)(A) authority to adopt the
requirements of this order.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \13\ NCTA cites as support for its statutory analysis the
approach the Commission took in the TDCA Report and Order and the
DTV Closed Captioning Order, but both of those orders are
distinguishable. First, the TDCA Report and Order was a pre-digital
order that also predated the amendment of the TDCA to extend beyond
television sets. Second, the DTV Closed Captioning Order applied
only to DTV receivers.
 \14\ ACA 2016 Reply at 6.
 \15\ Interpreting the second to last sentence of section 330(b)
to, at a minimum, inform our interpretation and implementation of
section 303(u) is consistent with the remaining text of section
330(b). Among other things, that language directs the Commission to
adopt rules implementing section 303(u) that ``provide performance
and display standards for [ ] built-in decoder circuitry or
capability designed to display closed captioned video programming.''
As explained above, the rules we adopt here readily fit within the
scope of ``performance and display standards.''
 \16\ NCTA overstates the significance of certain language from
the legislative history of the TDCA as allegedly demonstrating that
the Commission is precluded from interpreting the second to last
sentence of section 330(b) as a grant of authority. See NCTA 2016
Comments at 4, n.13. By its terms, that excerpt is an ``example'' of
the relevance of the second to last sentence of section 330(b),
rather than an exhaustive description of the role of that provision.
That language from the TDCA Senate Report also reinforces the view
that, at a minimum, the considerations identified in section 330(b)
inform our interpretation and implementation of our authority under
section 303(u). Moreover, this legislative history demonstrates our
authority to take steps reasonably necessary, as demonstrated above,
to ``ensure'' that closed captioning continues to be ``widely
available'' to consumers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 We further reject arguments that the statutory language does not
permit the Commission to regulate the manner in which consumers are
able to access and use such circuitry or capability. AT&T, for example,
points to language in section 330(b) directing the Commission to ensure
that covered apparatus ``be able to receive and display closed
captioning which have been transmitted by way of line 21 of the
vertical blanking interval,'' consistent with specific ``signal and
display specifications.'' Yet, that text is preceded by the phrase,
``Such rules shall further require,'' which belies the notion that
Congress intended to use that language to limit the Commission's
authority to the implementation of the identified specifications. To
the contrary, we conclude that the reference in section 330(b) of the
Act to ``performance and display standards,'' which Congress did not
define, includes the regulation of how consumers are able to access and
use closed captioning. To interpret the language more narrowly, as some
commenters advocate, would have the perverse result of allowing a
manufacturer or MVPD to bury those settings so deep in a complicated
series of menus that they are not readily accessible, undermining the
purpose of the statute to ensure they are ``available to consumers.''
Further, the reference that AT&T highlights in the statute to the
``line 21 of the vertical blanking interval'' relates only to analog
transmission. There is no vertical blanking interval in digital
transmissions. The digital transition occurred in 2009 for the majority
of stations, and the requirement contained in this sentence cannot
transfer directly into a digital environment. Thus the requirement
contained in this sentence cannot reasonably be read to limit the
Commission's authority here. The directive in section 330(b) that the
Commission ``take such action as [it] determines appropriate'' supports
a broad view of the Commission's authority to ensure that closed
captioning ``continue[s] to be available to consumers.''

[[Page 66272]]

 Further, Congress's enactment in the CVAA of sections 303(aa) and
(bb) of the Act does not undercut the Commission's exercise of its
authority under sections 303(u) and 330(b) of the Act. Section 303(aa)
contains accessibility requirements for certain digital apparatus
functions and features, while section 303(bb) contains accessibility
requirements for certain navigation device functions and features.
First, we reject suggestions that sections 303(aa) and (bb) are more
specific than sections 303(u) and 330(b) and thus are controlling with
regard to Commission authority to regulate consumer access to closed
captioning display settings. These arguments invoke the general canon
of interpretation that ``specific statutory language should control
more general language when there is a conflict between the two.'' \17\
Such an interpretation would represent a narrowing of the authority
that the Commission previously understood itself to have and that it
has exercised, and there is no indication that Congress intended the
CVAA to have such an effect. It is more consistent with the
accessibility objectives of the CVAA to conclude that Congress intended
sections 303(u), (aa), (bb), and 330(b) of the Act to be available
collectively as a source of Commission authority to pursue disability
access objectives.\18\ While sections 303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2)
specifically address access to closed captioning activation, they are
silent regarding access to closed captioning display options.\19\ Had
Congress intended to curtail the Commission's authority to take further
action under section 330(b) to promote the continued availability of
closed captioning service, it could have done so explicitly. It did
not, and we find it unlikely that Congress intended to do so sub
silentio.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \17\ NCTA v. Gulf Power, 534 U.S. 327, 335-336 (2002).
 \18\ The stated purpose of the CVAA is ``[t]o increase the
access of persons with disabilities to modern communications, and
for other purposes.''
 \19\ Similarly, the provisions in sections 204 and 205 of the
CVAA that were not incorporated in sections 303(aa) and (bb) of the
Act are silent regarding access to closed captioning display
options. Contrary to CTA's suggestion, sections 204 and 205 did not
``express[ ] an intent to limit the Commission's authority'' in this
regard. In addition, sections 303(aa)(1) and (2) apply to an
unenumerated universe of ``functions'' to be made accessible to
individuals who are blind or visually impaired, and thus also are
not more specific than sections 303(u)(1)(A) and 330(b) regarding
the requirements for closed captioning display options that we adopt
here.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Second, contrary to the suggestion of some commenters, we find that
Congress's decision to require closed caption activation via a
mechanism reasonably comparable to a key, button, or icon does not mean
that it considered and rejected such a requirement for closed
captioning display settings.\20\ Rather, as stated above, we find that
Congress intended the relevant provisions of the Act--section 303(u),
as amended by the CVAA; sections 303(aa) and (bb), added to the Act by
the CVAA; and section 330(b), added to the Act by the TDCA--to be
available collectively as a source of Commission authority regarding
disability access issues. Given Congress's interest in expanding access
to video programming through the CVAA, we do not believe that it
intended the provisions of that statute to negate the express language
of section 330(b) to ensure that closed captions continue to be
available to consumers as new video technology is developed, nor the
overall intent of the TDCA to bring more programs that are closed
captioned into the homes of Americans. Congress required closed caption
activation via a certain mechanism in the CVAA, but Congress left it to
the Commission's discretion to determine whether and to what extent to
regulate other matters pertaining to the ability of consumers to access
closed captioning on video apparatus pursuant to its earlier grant of
authority, including specifically through establishment of
``performance and display standards.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \20\ This argument invokes the ``expressio unius est exclusio
alterius'' canon of interpretation, which ``presum[es] that an
omission is intentional where Congress has referred to something in
one subsection but not in another.'' NAB v. FCC, 569 F.3d 416, 421
(D.C. Cir. 2009) (citing Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23
(1983)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Third, we disagree with commenters who contend that Congress would
not have needed to adopt provisions in the CVAA directing the
Commission to require closed caption activation through a mechanism
reasonably equivalent to a button, key, or icon if the Commission
already had authority pursuant to the TDCA to regulate access to closed
captioning display settings. There are legally meaningful differences
in the Commission's authority under section 303(u) as compared to
sections 303(aa) and (bb) of the Act, which indicate that Congress
intended to give the Commission new authority to accomplish a
particular purpose, rather than supplant the Commission's authority to
adopt closed-captioning regulations pursuant to a specific legal
standard under section 303(u). For example, section 303(u)(1)(A)
directs the Commission to adopt closed captioning requirements that
apply if compliance is ``technically feasible,'' whereas sections
303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2) contain no such limitation.\21\ Additionally,
the Commission has statutory authority to exempt certain apparatus from
the requirements of section 303(u) that it cannot exercise with respect
to the requirements of sections 303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2). Further, the
CVAA established deadlines for the Commission to adopt rules initially
implementing the requirements of sections 303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2) that
differ from those for implementing the CVAA's revisions to section
303(u). There is no logical basis to conclude that the ``button, key,
or icon'' requirement in sections 303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2) presupposes
the absence of authority in sections 303(u)(1) or 330(b) to adopt
different regulations to ensure that closed captioning performance and
display functions continue to be ``available'' to consumers. Thus, we
conclude that enactment of sections 303(aa)(3) and (bb)(2) does not
diminish our authority to adopt the new rule set forth herein.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \21\ The Commission previously concluded that section 303(bb)(2)
contains no limiting language and therefore imposes an unconditional
obligation, noting that it does not contain ``upon request''
language or any reference to specific types of individuals found
elsewhere in section 205 of the CVAA; lacks language found elsewhere
that allows entities to provide required functionalities using
separate equipment or software; and is not qualified by the phrase
``if achievable,'' in contrast with other provisions. Section
303(aa)(3) likewise lacks any limiting language.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Finally, as a separate and independent basis of authority, in
addition to the TDCA, we find authority to adopt accessibility
requirements under sections 4(i) and 303(r) of the Act. The Commission
is specifically delegated authority under the Act to require that
covered apparatus must ``be equipped'' with closed caption capability
and to adopt rules as it ``determines appropriate to ensure that
closed-captioning service . . . continue[s] to be available to
consumers'' ``[a]s new video technology is developed.'' Ensuring that
the required caption capabilities are actually accessible by consumers
is essential to fulfill these statutory requirements. Otherwise, if a
consumer cannot readily locate and use display settings to ensure that
captions are rendered in a readable and accessible format, then closed
captioning itself is not truly ``available'' as required under the
statute. The rules we adopt today are thus necessary to carry out the
specific requirements set forth in sections 303(u) and 330(b) of the
Act.
 Access to Closed Captioning Display Settings Must Be ``Readily
Accessible.'' As proposed in the Second FNPRM, we adopt a rule that
requires covered

[[Page 66273]]

manufacturers and MVPDs to ensure that consumers are able to readily
access user display settings for closed captioning on covered apparatus
pursuant to our authority under the TDCA. Congress directed the
Commission to provide performance and display standards for built-in
decoder circuitry or capability designed to display closed captioned
video programming and to take action to ensure that closed captioning
continues to be available to consumers as video programming technology
evolves. The rule we adopt herein serves these statutory directives. As
discussed below, we afford covered entities (MVPDs and manufacturers)
flexibility in how they meet this obligation, and the Commission will
determine whether settings are readily accessible to consumers by
evaluating the following factors, as described in the March 2024 joint
proposal: proximity, discoverability, previewability, and consistency
and persistence.\22\ Below we explain the public interest benefits of
these new requirements. We also describe which devices and entities are
covered by the rule, set forth exemptions for achievability and
technical feasibility, and set a compliance deadline of two years from
publication of the rule in the Federal Register.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \22\ Although the March 2024 joint proposal does not explicitly
reference the previously proposed four factor framework, we believe
it fits within that framework. Accordingly, we adopt the contents of
the joint proposal as clarifying or modifying the meaning of the
previously proposed factors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 ``Readily Accessible.'' ``Readily Accessible'' Requirement in
General. We first require manufacturers and MVPDs to ensure that
consumers are able to readily access user display settings for closed
captioning on covered apparatus. To determine whether particular
settings are readily accessible, the Commission will require compliance
with the following factors, which we further define below: proximity,
discoverability, previewability, and consistency and persistence.\23\
Failure to comply with any of the factors may be deemed a violation of
the Commission's rules.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \23\ We note that ITI expresses vague concerns that the proposal
uses terms, definitions, and requirements that ``do not necessarily
reflect internationally-accepted practices for this technology . . .
.'' Information Technology Industry Council (ITI) 2023 Comments at
2. See also CTA/ITI 2023 Reply at 3-4 (stating that any new rules
should ``[h]armonize with existing international standards to avoid
confusion and imposing additional burdens on companies''); Letter
from Rachel Nemeth, Sr. Director, Regulatory Affairs, and Brian
Markwalter, Senior Vice President, Research & Standards, Consumer
Technology Association, to Marlene H. Dortch, Secretary, FCC, MB
Docket No. 12-108, at 2 (Apr. 28, 2023). Given the lack of specific
information in the record as to precisely what rules the Commission
should adopt in this area to ensure consistency with international
standards, we are unable to take any further action in response to
the cited pleadings.
 \24\ While ACA Connects expresses concern that some of the
factors could be contradictory, we believe that is no longer the
case given the meaning of the factors we adopt below. In the event
that an allegation of non-compliance arises, the covered entity will
need to demonstrate how it has complied with the applicable
requirements. For example, if there is an allegation that a covered
entity has not provided the required employee training discussed
below, the entity could, for instance, offer information by
providing training materials and a training schedule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 The readily accessible requirement, which the Commission will
evaluate based on the four factors, will ensure that consumers who are
deaf and hard of hearing can easily access closed captioning display
settings, while still giving covered entities flexibility in the manner
of compliance.\25\ While display settings already may be readily
accessible for some devices, using such settings generally has not been
easy for consumers.\26\ As Consumer Groups explain, ``these functional
requirements provide a workable middle ground between strict design
mandates and the laissez faire approach called for by industry
commenters, allowing the industry substantial flexibility while
requiring it to finally address the long-standing gaps in the
accessibility of closed captioning display setting interfaces.'' \27\
We believe that this approach will alleviate the challenges faced by
consumers who are deaf and hard of hearing in accessing closed
captioning and will ensure that these viewers can adjust the font,
size, color, and other features of closed captions wherever they are
watching video programming on devices without the undue complexity
experienced today. This approach is also consistent with how the
Commission has implemented accessibility requirements for closed
captioning activation mechanisms on video devices pursuant to sections
204 and 205 of the CVAA.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \25\ The adoption of flexible factors that we will require in
determining if caption display settings are readily accessible
should alleviate ACA Connects' concern that rigid standards could
``squelch innovation.'' Similarly, we expect the flexibility
inherent within the factors to alleviate ITI's concern that
stringent requirements could lead to ``a cluttered, overly-complex
user interface'' that could confuse users and have a particular
negative impact on individuals with cognitive difficulties.
 \26\ For example, Consumer Groups note that changing closed
captioning settings for the most popular streaming service requires
many users to engage in a 10-step process that involves leaving the
application and navigating the service's website.
 \27\ But see Letter from J. David Grossman, Vice President,
Regulatory Affairs, CTA, and Brian Markwalter, Senior Vice
President, Research & Standards, CTA, to Marlene H. Dortch,
Secretary, FCC, MB Docket No. 12-108, at 4 (June 30, 2022) (claiming
that these factors ``represent a very heavy regulatory lift that
neither the Commission nor industry has properly investigated''). We
disagree with CTA's claim, both because any regulatory burden will
be alleviated by the flexible nature of the factors, and because the
reply comments and subsequent 2023 and 2024 comments and replies did
not demonstrate that applying these flexible factors will be unduly
costly or otherwise unduly burdensome to industry. To the contrary,
we intend the factors to clarify for industry how the Commission
will evaluate whether particular settings are readily accessible.
 \28\ With the exception of a Petition for Reconsideration filed
by Consumer Groups regarding use of voice control and gestures for
closed captioning activation, no party filed an appeal of the Report
and Order and Further Notice. We need not address the argument that
we lack sufficient notice to adopt the proposed factors, because the
Media Bureau subsequently issued the 2023 Caption Display Settings
Public Notice and the 2024 Caption Display Settings Public Notice
and published both documents in the Federal Register, giving notice
to all interested parties that this proposal was up for
consideration. We further note that the Commission's authority to
adopt the factors stems from the same authority it has to adopt the
readily accessible requirement generally, as discussed above.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Proximity. In determining whether specific closed captioning
display settings are readily accessible, the Commission will require
that the settings are ``proximate.'' For this purpose, ``proximity''
requires that covered entities ``will place . . . the closed caption
display settings . . . in one area of the settings (either at the
operating system or application level) that is accessed via a means
reasonably comparable to a button, key, or icon.'' \29\ Consumer Groups
initially argued that this factor should require access to closed
captioning settings in the first level of a menu.\30\ Industry objected
to this approach as too rigid. Consumer Groups then modified their
proposed definition of ``proximity,'' clarifying that it is intended to
ensure that consumers need not navigate a lengthy set of steps and/or
switch devices or applications to access closed caption display
settings.

[[Page 66274]]

The subsequent March 2024 joint proposal did not specifically reference
that modification and instead further refined the approach to provide
that caption display settings should be available in one area of the
settings that can be accessed via a means reasonably comparable to a
button, key, or icon. We find that requiring proximity pursuant to the
revised definition is in the public interest because it will ensure
that consumers do not need to complete many steps or switch devices or
applications to access closed caption display settings, and it is
hereby required by our rules. We believe that the presence of ready
access to caption display settings is paramount to the utility of such
settings, and the ``proximity'' requirement will further that aim.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \29\ Letter from Mary Beth Murphy, Vice President & Deputy
General Counsel, NCTA--The internet & Television Association, et
al., to Marlene H. Dortch, Secretary, FCC, MB Docket No. 12-108, at
1 (Mar. 14, 2024) (NCTA/Consumer Groups Mar. 14, 2024 Ex Parte). We
recognize that the joint proposal was to ``place all accessibility
functions--including, but not limited to, the closed caption display
settings and caption on/off--in one area of the settings. . . .''
The rules established in this Order, however, do not apply to any
accessibility functions other than closed captioning display
settings. In addition, the Commission's rules already require that
closed captioning and audio description ``can be activated through a
mechanism that is reasonably comparable to a button, key, or icon.''
47 CFR 79.109(a)(1)-(2), (b). We encourage covered entities to make
all accessibility functions, including closed captioning display
settings and caption on/off, available in the same location.
 \30\ We recognize that commenters previously evaluated some of
what we now deem ``proximity'' as part of the ``discoverability''
factor. The meaning of ``proximity'' that we adopt here is tailored
to fit the joint proposal within the four-factor framework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Under the approach we adopt today, industry is afforded flexibility
in how precisely to ensure that closed captioning display settings are
made readily accessible pursuant to the proximity factor, so long as
the settings are available in one area that is accessible via a means
reasonably comparable to a button, key, or icon. Making closed
captioning display settings available solely or primarily through the
use of voice control likely would not be considered proximate. In an
Order on Reconsideration, the Commission previously found that closed
captioning activation mechanisms that rely solely on voice control do
not fulfill the requirement of sections 204 and 205 of the CVAA and our
implementing rules that such mechanism be reasonably comparable to a
button, key, or icon. The Commission was persuaded by a Petition for
Reconsideration filed by Consumer Groups indicating that voice
activation is not simple and easy to use for many individuals who are
deaf and hard of hearing. We believe that a similar rationale applies
here. We cannot find that caption display settings are reasonably
accessible if many of the individuals who are intended to benefit from
the settings, in other words those consumers who are deaf and hard of
hearing, would not actually be able to access them. As in the Order on
Reconsideration, we clarify that covered entities are not prohibited
from using voice controls to provide access to the area of the settings
that contains the closed captioning display settings as long as there
is an alternative way that is reasonably comparable to a button, key,
or icon for individuals who are deaf and hard of hearing to readily
access closed captioning display features. In addition, CTA indicated
that at least one device manufacturer was considering a long press of a
button on the remote to bring up closed captioning display settings.
Compliance with the factors we adopt today is a fact-specific
determination, and as a result, we decline to rule definitively on
whether any particular means of providing closed captioning display
settings is ``readily accessible.'' We agree with CTA that the long
press of a remote control button may be consistent with the proximity
requirement, which requires a mechanism reasonably comparable to a
dedicated button, key, or icon, but we emphasize that the long press,
like any mechanism, also would need to be evaluated to determine
compliance with each of the other factors to be considered readily
accessible.
 Discoverability. In determining whether specific closed captioning
display settings are readily accessible, the Commission will require
that the settings are ``discoverable.'' For this purpose, to ensure
that the settings are ``discoverable,'' covered entities must: (1)
conduct usability testing to determine if caption display settings can
be easily found by working with consumers and disability groups as part
of the testing process; (2) make good faith efforts to correct problems
identified during the consumer testing process; and (3) train customer-
facing employees on how to advise customers with regard to caption
display settings. This approach is consistent with the March 2024 joint
proposal between NCTA and Consumer Groups. We note that as proposed in
some comments, discoverability would have considered whether it is
simple and intuitive for a viewer to find closed captioning display
settings. Some commenters objected to that formulation as too
subjective. The formulation in the March 2024 joint proposal that we
adopt here has the benefit of being more objective because it requires
entities to conduct usability testing, demonstrate efforts to address
problems that arise during such testing, and train customer-facing
employees. In addition, this approach is not superfluous of any other
existing or new requirement.\31\ We believe that discoverability, the
ability to find the settings, is central to users' ability to benefit
from and receive the value of closed captioning and is therefore in the
public interest and is hereby required by our rules. We decline to
specify the type of employee training that must be provided, instead
concluding that regulated entities should retain flexibility to
determine the type of employee training needed in their particular
circumstances to ensure that settings are discoverable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
