FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Sponsorship Identification Requirements for Foreign Government-Provided Programming
Document number: 2024-15259
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Media Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 57775
Publication date: 2024-07-16

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 136 (Tuesday, July 16, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 136 (Tuesday, July 16, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 57775-57793]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-15259]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Part 73

[MB Docket No. 20-299; FCC 24-61; FR ID 228169]


Sponsorship Identification Requirements for Foreign Government-
Provided Programming

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) takes steps to ensure clear and reasonable foreign
sponsorship identification rules, which require radio and television
broadcast stations to inform audiences when programming aired pursuant
to a lease of airtime on the station is sponsored by a foreign
governmental entity. The document replaces a previous requirement of
the rules with a new approach that provides licensees with two options
for demonstrating that they have sought to obtain the information
needed to determine whether the programming being provided by a lessee
is sponsored

[[Page 57776]]

by a foreign governmental entity. The revised approach addresses
concerns broadcasters had regarding the burdens and complexity of the
rule and clarifies when the rule applies.

DATES: Amendatory instruction 2 (47 CFR 73.1212(j)(8) and (k)) is
effective August 15, 2024, and amendatory instruction 3 (47 CFR
73.1212(j)(3)) is delayed indefinitely. The Commission will publish a
document in the Federal Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For additional information on this
proceeding, please contact Radhika Karmarkar of the Media Bureau,
Industry Analysis Division, [email protected] , (202) 418-1523.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Second
Report and Order (Second R&O), FCC 24-61, in MB Docket No. 20-299,
adopted on May 31, 2024, and released on June 10, 2024. The complete
text of this document is available electronically via the search
function on the FCC's website at https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-61A1.pdf .

Synopsis

I. Introduction

 1. The Second R&O took steps to ensure clear and reasonable foreign
sponsorship identification rules. In April 2021, the Commission issued
a Report and Order (First R&O) (86 FR 32221, June 17, 2021) in the
above-captioned proceeding adopting a requirement that radio and
television stations broadcast clear disclosures for programming that is
provided by a foreign governmental entity and set forth the procedures
for exercising reasonable diligence to determine whether such a
disclosure is needed. The Commission took this action in response to
reports that U.S. broadcast stations were transmitting undisclosed
foreign governmental programming, against the backdrop of over ninety
years of sponsorship identification regulations that ensure the public
is informed when airtime has been purchased on broadcast stations in an
effort to persuade audiences.
 2. In the Second R&O, the Commission addressed a ruling by the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, National
Association of Broadcasters, et al., v. FCC, 39 F.4th 817, 820 (D.C.
Cir. 2022) (NAB v. FCC), that vacated one of the foreign sponsorship
identification requirements established in the First R&O. The
Commission replaced the vacated verification requirement with an
approach that avoids the investigatory obligation on the part of
licensees that was at issue in NAB v. FCC. The new approach provides
licensees with two options for demonstrating that they have met their
duty of inquiry in seeking to obtain the information needed to
determine whether the programming being provided by a lessee is
sponsored by a foreign governmental entity. The adopted approach
addresses concerns about burdens and complexity raised by commenters in
response to the second notice of proposed rulemaking (Second NPRM) (87
FR 68960, November 17, 2022) in the above-captioned proceeding.
 3. Furthermore, in this order, the Commission clarified that its
foreign sponsorship identification rules do not apply to sales of
advertising for commercial goods and services to the extent such
programming falls within the exemption contained in 47 CFR 73.1212(f)
of its general sponsorship identification rules. In addition, the
Commission found that its foreign sponsorship identification rules will
not apply to political candidate advertisements, but will apply to
issue advertisements and paid public service announcements (``paid
PSAs''). It also confirmed that the rule changes do not alter its
finding in the First R&O that noncommercial and educational broadcast
stations (NCEs) are not likely to fall within the ambit of the foreign
sponsorship identification rules. The Commission declined to create an
exemption from the rules for religious programming and locally produced
and/or distributed programming. It also concluded that, when a lessee
and licensee enter into recurring leases for the same programming, the
licensee will be required to exercise its reasonable diligence
obligations under the rule only once per year with respect to that
particular lessee and that particular programming. With respect to the
adopted rule changes, the Commission grandfathered lease agreements
already in effect at the time of the required compliance date for these
newly-adopted modifications, determining that such leases will need to
come into compliance either at the time of renewal or when the parties
to the agreement enter into a new lease. Finally, the Commission
clarified the obligations of section 325(c) permittees under the
foreign sponsorship identification rules.

II. Background

 4. Section 317 of the Communications Act and the Commission's
implementing regulations under 47 CFR 73.1212 have long required
broadcast licensees to inform their audiences when programming is being
aired in exchange for payment or compensation to the station. While
section 310(a) of the Act prohibits foreign governments and their
representatives from holding a broadcast license, there is no
limitation on their ability to enter into a contract with the licensee
of a station to air programming of their choosing, or even to lease the
entire capacity of a radio or television station. In the First R&O, the
Commission amended the then existing sponsorship identification rules
by adding a requirement that licensees disclose the identity of any
foreign governmental entities that lease time on their stations. The
disclosure requirements apply to leased programming because the record
in the underlying proceeding identified leased airtime as the primary
means by which foreign governmental entities are accessing U.S.
airwaves to persuade the American public without adequately disclosing
the true sponsor.
 5. The First R&O defined ``foreign governmental entity'' using
existing definitions, statutes, and regulations. Pursuant to 47 CFR
73.1212(j)(2), the term ``foreign governmental entity'' ``shall include
governments of foreign countries, foreign political parties, agents of
foreign principals, and United States-based foreign media outlets.''
Section 73.1212(j)(2)(i) through (iv) of the Commission's rules set out
definitions for ``government of a foreign country'', ``foreign
political party'', ``agent of a foreign principal'', and ``United
States-based foreign media outlet''.
 6. The foreign sponsorship identification rules apply in two
circumstances. First, a prescribed disclosure is required when a
foreign governmental entity has sponsored, paid for, or furnished
programming that is aired on a radio or television station pursuant to
a lease agreement. Section 73.1212(j)(1)(i) requires that foreign
government-provided programming furnished consistent with Sec.
73.1212(a) include the following disclosure: ``The [following/
preceding] programming was [sponsored, paid for, or furnished], either
in whole or in part, by [name of foreign governmental entity] on behalf
of [name of foreign country].'' Second, if a foreign governmental
entity provides the programming for free, or for nominal compensation,
as an inducement to air the programming, the prescribed disclosure is
required if the programming is political or involves discussion of a
controversial issue.
 7. The foreign sponsorship identification rules neither prevent nor
restrict the broadcast of foreign government-provided programming, but
rather, are intended solely to inform

[[Page 57777]]

audiences about the source of any such programming so that they may be
more informed and savvy consumers of the material. As the Commission
stated in the First R&O, ``[t]he principle that the public has a right
to know the identity of those that solicit their support is a
fundamental and long-standing tenet of broadcasting.''
 8. Section 317(c) of the Act requires licensees to exercise
``reasonable diligence to obtain,'' from their employees and persons
with whom they deal directly, information to enable the licensees to
make the required sponsorship identification announcement. To satisfy
this reasonable diligence standard with regard to foreign sponsorship
identification, the current rules under 47 CFR 73.1212(j)(3) require a
licensee to take each of the following actions, both when entering into
a new lease agreement and renewing a lease agreement:

 (1) Inform the lessee of the foreign sponsorship disclosure
requirement.
 (2) Ask the lessee whether it falls into any of the categories
that would qualify it as a ``foreign governmental entity.''
 (3) Ask the lessee whether it knows if any individual/entity
further back in the chain of producing/distributing the programming
to be aired qualifies as a foreign governmental entity and has
provided some type of inducement to air the programming.
 (4) Memorialize the above-listed inquiries and retain such
memorialization in its records for the remainder of the license term
or for one year, whichever is longer.

These requirements apply regardless of whether the programming is
provided pursuant to a lease agreement for consideration under section
317(a)(1) or is provided for free or for nominal compensation under
section 317(a)(2) and contains political programming or programming
involving a controversial issue. The rules also apply to any
programming broadcast pursuant to a section 325(c) permit. The
Commission initially adopted an additional requirement that, as
discussed in further detail below, has been vacated by the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. NAB v. FCC, 39 F.4th
at 820.

 9. While the reasonable diligence requirements of section 317(c)
apply to licensees, section 507 of the Act imposes an obligation on
those involved in the production and/or distribution of program matter
for broadcast to communicate any information known to them about any
money, service or other valuable consideration that any person has paid
or agreed to pay for the inclusion of any matter as part of a program.
The disclosure obligation extends beyond the lessee itself to any
person connected with the production, preparation, or supply of the
programming.
 10. On July 19, 2021, the ABC Television Affiliates Association,
CBS Television Network Affiliates Association, FBC Television
Affiliates Association, and NBC Television Affiliates (collectively,
the Affiliates) filed a Petition for Clarification. The Affiliates
assert that the exemption in the First R&O of ``traditional, short-form
advertising'' from the foreign sponsorship identification rules creates
confusion because the term has no established meaning in the broadcast
industry. In their petition, the Affiliates argue that the Commission
should clarify that the foreign sponsorship identification rules do not
apply when a licensee sells time to advertisers in the normal course of
business, regardless of the advertisement's length.
 11. On August 13, 2021, the National Association of Broadcasters
(NAB), the Multicultural Media, Telecom and internet Council (MMTC),
and the National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters (NABOB)
(collectively, Petitioners) filed a Petition for Review of the First
R&O with the D.C. Circuit. Petitioners challenged the Commission's
authority to impose one of the reasonable diligence requirements
contained in the First R&O. Specifically, in addition to the four
reasonable diligence requirements listed above, the First R&O had
required licensees to confirm the lessee's status, at the time of
entering into a lease agreement and at renewal, by consulting the
Department of Justice's Foreign Agent Registration Act (FARA) website
and the Commission's semi-annual U.S.-based foreign media outlets
reports. On July 12, 2022, the D.C. Circuit vacated this verification
requirement, holding that it exceeded the Commission's authority under
section 317(c). NAB v. FCC, 39 F.4th at 820. The D.C. Circuit stated
that section 317(c) imposes on licensees only a duty of inquiry and not
a duty of investigation. The court left in place the remaining four
requirements needed to satisfy the statutory reasonable diligence
standard.
 12. On October 6, 2022, the Commission released the Second NPRM
containing proposals to address the gap left by the D.C. Circuit's
vacatur of the verification requirement contained in the foreign
sponsorship identification rules. The Second NPRM proposed two
alternatives to replace the vacated requirement that licensees
independently confirm the lessee's status. Under the first proposal,
each licensee had to certify that it had informed its lessee of the
foreign sponsorship identification rules and obtained, or sought to
obtain, a certification from its lessee stating whether the lessee is
or is not a ``foreign governmental entity.'' In turn, the lessee would
submit a certification in response to the licensee's request. To
minimize compliance burdens, the Commission proposed that licensees and
lessees use standardized certification language, as set forth in the
Second NPRM. Consistent with the existing requirement that licensees
upload into their online public inspection files (OPIFs) their lease
agreements, the Commission tentatively concluded that licensees should
upload both their own and their lessees' completed certifications into
their OPIFs, along with the associated lease agreements.
 13. The Second NPRM also contained a second proposal based on an
approach raised during oral argument in NAB v. FCC as a possible
alternative to the rule provision it ultimately vacated. Under this
proposal, in lieu of the licensee independently confirming the lessee's
status by checking the Department of Justice's FARA website, or the
Commission's U.S.-based foreign media outlet reports site, the licensee
would ask the lessee to provide screenshots showing the results of the
lessee's search for its name on these sites. In addition, the Second
NPRM also sought comment on the need to apply the proposals contained
therein to section 325(c) permit holders. Finally, it provided another
opportunity for comment on the Affiliates' Petition for Clarification
regarding the treatment of advertisements.

III. Discussion

 14. The Commission first determined that licensees must pursue one
of two approaches to address the gap left by the D.C. Circuit's vacatur
of the independent verification requirement. It then addressed
questions raised in the record about the application of the foreign
sponsorship identification rules to different types of broadcast
programming. It then explained when licensees must comply with the
newly-adopted requirements and grandfathers lease agreements already in
existence at the time of the compliance date of the new rules for the
duration of the lease term, determining that existing leases will have
to comply with the new rules at the time of renewal or when the parties
enter into a new agreement, whichever is earlier. It clarified that its
foreign sponsorship identification rules will not apply to sales of
advertising for commercial goods and services to the extent that such
programming would

[[Page 57778]]

not otherwise be subject to the general sponsorship disclosure rules,
as set forth in 47 CFR 73.1212(f). The Commission also found that the
foreign sponsorship identification rules will not apply to political
candidate advertisements. It did, however, determine that the foreign
sponsorship identification rules will apply to issue advertisements and
paid PSAs. It found that it is inconsistent with its goal of disclosing
the source of foreign government-provided programming, and in some
instances the First Amendment, to exclude from the ambit of its rules
locally produced and/or locally distributed programming and religious
programming. It also described how the requirements laid out in the
Second R&O will apply to section 325(c) permit holders. Lastly, it
found that its actions will not inhibit diverse entrants from
participating in the broadcast media marketplace.

A. Obtaining Information From Lessees

 15. The Second R&O gives broadcast licensees greater flexibility
than proposed in the Second NPRM with respect to how they must seek to
obtain from lessees the information needed to determine whether a
foreign sponsorship disclosure is needed. Specifically, a licensee may
choose between one of two options to comply with the rule. Neither of
these two options imposes an investigatory duty upon licensees or holds
them responsible for the truth of the information they obtain. Under
the first option, both the licensee and the lessee must complete a
written certification either using the standardized certification
language contained in Appendices C and D of the Second R&O, and set
forth below, or using their own language, as long as the certifications
written in their own language contain the inquiries set out in 47 CFR
73.1212(j)(3), pursuant to the First R&O. Under the second option, the
licensee must ask the lessee to provide screenshots showing the search
results generated by the lessee's search for its own name on two
Federal Government websites.
 16. In all other respects, under this second option, the licensee
must follow the other requirements contained in the existing foreign
sponsorship identification rules. Consistent with the existing foreign
sponsorship identification rules, the licensee must inform the lessee
about the foreign sponsorship disclosure requirement, inquire whether
the lessee is either a ``government of a foreign country'' or a
``foreign political party,'' and inquire about the lessee's knowledge
of anyone further back in the chain of producing/distributing the
programming who qualifies as a ``foreign governmental entity'' and may
have provided an inducement to air the programming such as to trigger
the need for a foreign sponsorship disclosure. See 47 CFR 73.1212(j)(i)
through (iii). Finally, also consistent with the existing foreign
sponsorship identification rules, the licensee must memorialize those
inquiries in some manner. Note, however, that the existing
``memorialization'' requirement has been moved from Sec.
73.1212(j)(3)(v) of the Commission's rules to revised Sec.
73.1212(j)(3)(iv), which replaces the vacated Sec. 73.1212(j)(3)(iv).
 17. Given the concerns raised in the record about the burdens
associated with the proposals in the Second NPRM to replace the
independent verification requirement, the requirements adopted in the
Second R&O offer licensees more flexibility by giving them a choice of
approaches and by allowing them to devise their own certification
language. Moreover, the Commission reduced compliance burdens and made
the new requirements easier to implement by offering simple
certification templates. It also allowed a licensee to inquire about a
lessee's foreign governmental entity status only once a year when the
lessee and programming are the same (e.g., weekly broadcasts of church
services from the same church), assuming there is no change in the
lessee's status and the lessee has not become aware of any change in
the individuals/entities further back in the programming's production/
distribution chain that would trigger the need for a foreign
sponsorship disclosure.
 18. The Commission declined to adopt several proposals contained in
the Second NPRM in order to address concerns raised in the record about
compliance costs and burdens. First, a licensee need not notify the
Media Bureau when a lessee fails to respond to the licensee's queries.
Second, licensees will not be required to retain certifications and
screenshots in the licensees' OPIFs that are hosted by the Commission.
Licensees may either file these records in their OPIFs or in their
internal files. Finally, if a lessee fails to respond, or fails to
respond adequately, to the licensee's request for a certification or
screenshots, the licensee is not prohibited from airing the program.
Nevertheless, if a question arises later about whether a disclosure was
needed, the licensee must be able to demonstrate, in the event of a
fact-specific inquiry by the Commission, that it exercised reasonable
diligence in seeking the information. As explained below, the newly-
adopted requirements are within the Commission's statutory authority
and are consistent with the D.C. Circuit's ruling in NAB v. FCC.
1. Licensees Must Comply With One of Two Approaches
 19. Licensees will be required to comply with either one of the two
approaches described below. Although licensees must choose one of these
approaches, they need not choose the same approach for each lease or
renewal agreement, even when the same lessee is involved. Compliance
with one of these two approaches must be at the time of entering into
any new lease agreement or renewing an existing lease agreement, unless
the once-a-year exception described below applies. The Commission
rejected a suggestion to require certifications of compliance with the
foreign sponsorship identification rules only at the time of a
licensee's renewal application.
 20. Certification Option. One option available to licensees is the
use of certifications, as described below. The Commission found that
the certification option fills the gap left by the D.C. Circuit's
vacatur of a licensee's requirement to conduct an independent check, by
helping to ensure the credibility of the sponsorship information
provided by the lessee in response to the licensee's inquiries. For
those who would prefer not to pursue the screenshot option discussed
below, the certification approach has the benefit of providing an
alternative means of verification. Moreover, certifications have the
value of reminding lessees of the foreign sponsorship identification
rules and ensuring that they provide above board sponsorship
information to broadcasters.
 21. The Commission streamlined significantly the certification
proposal contained in the Second NPRM. Under the adopted certification
option, both a licensee and a lessee must complete a certification
reflecting the communications and inquiries required under the existing
rules. Licensees and lessees will have the option either to use the
streamlined standardized certification language set forth in Appendices
C and D of the Second R&O, and set forth below, or to use language
created by the parties. Rather than the two and a half page
certifications proposed in the Second NPRM, the Commission developed
one-page templates for the licensee and lessee certifications, based on
a straightforward and familiar ``check box'' format. While the
templates do include citations to the legal sources

[[Page 57779]]

defining the various categories of foreign governmental entities, most
licensee and lessee employees should be able to complete the forms
quickly and readily, based upon their existing knowledge and
understanding. The lessee is being asked to sign a certification
regarding its own status. The lessee should already know if it is a
registered FARA agent, or is listed as a U.S.-based foreign media
outlet on the Commission's website, because these registrations/
listings are self-reported. Similarly, a lessee should already know if
it is a government of a foreign country or a foreign political party.
With regard to those further back in the chain of producing and/or
distributing the programming, the lessee is being asked only about its
actual knowledge at the time it signs the certification. It is highly
unlikely that either licensee or lessee should have to engage in any
type of research to respond to the queries contained in the
certifications. These are the same inquiries the Commission adopted in
the First R&O, only formatted now as a certification.
 22. If licensees and lessees prefer not to use the Commission's
templates, they may use their own certification language, provided that
language addresses the points listed in 47 CFR 73.1212(j)(3)(i) through
(iii). Several commenters expressed concerns that licensees already
have developed their own certifications based on the existing foreign
sponsorship identification rules and that revising these certifications
would be costly. The Commission is persuaded that self-generated
certifications can fulfill its certification requirements provided
these certifications contain the information and inquiries currently
required by the foreign sponsorship identification rules. Specifically,
a licensee's certification should confirm that the licensee:

 (1) informed the lessee of the foreign sponsorship disclosure
requirement;
 (2) asked the lessee whether it falls into any of the categories
that would qualify it as a ``foreign governmental entity;''
 (3) asked the lessee whether it knows if any individual/entity
further back in the chain of producing and/or distributing the
programming to be aired qualifies as a foreign governmental entity
and has provided some type of inducement to air the programming;
 (4) sought a written certification in response from the lessee;
and
 (5) obtained the necessary information for a disclosure if one
is required.

A lessee's certification should convey the information needed to
determine whether a disclosure is required and the information needed
for a broadcast disclosure if one is required.

 23. Regardless of whether the Commission's templates or a
licensee's and lessee's own certifications are used, both the
licensee's and lessee's certifications must be dated and signed by an
employee or other representative of the entity who can attest to the
fact that these actions were taken. Irrespective of whether a licensee
chooses to use the template certification language or its own language,
licensees are encouraged to include a provision in their lease
agreements requiring the lessee to notify the licensee about any change
in the lessee's status such as to trigger the foreign sponsorship
identification rules. Because these certification requirements
encapsulate the extant information and inquiry requirements adopted in
the First R&O, it is unlikely that any preexisting certification
language that licensees have employed will require much revision, if
any.
 24. Screenshot Option. As an alternative to the certification
option, licensees may choose to ask their lessees for screenshots of
lessees' search results of two Federal Government websites. This option
essentially replaces the verification requirement that the D.C. Circuit
vacated, with the key difference being that the lessee conducts the
searches instead of the licensee. The D.C. Circuit determined that it
was beyond the scope of section 317(c) to require a licensee to
independently verify a lessee's statement that the lessee was not
listed in the Department of Justice's FARA database as a FARA agent or
in the Commission's U.S.-based foreign media outlet reports.
Consequently, consistent with the hypothetical raised during oral
argument before the D.C. Circuit in NAB v. FCC, the Commission now
determined that licensees may ask their lessees to perform those
searches and provide screenshots of the search results. Hence, instead
of asking the lessee to provide a responsive certification regarding
its status, a licensee exercising this option would ask, consistent
with the current foreign sponsorship identification rules, whether the
lessee is a registered FARA agent or is listed in the Commission's
U.S.-based foreign media outlet report. If the lessee responds ``no,''
the licensee would then ask the lessee to provide screenshots showing
the results of lessee's searches of both of these websites. As
discussed below, licensees choosing this option must still comply with
all other aspects of the current rule, as they have been required to do
since the compliance date of the First R&O. Moreover, consistent with
the First R&O, licensees are encouraged to include in their lease
agreements a requirement for lessees to provide notice of any change in
status so as to trigger the need for a foreign sponsorship disclosure.
 25. Some commenters have objected to the screenshot approach based
on erroneous assumptions about what such a search requires. The FARA
searches are simple name searches, initiated by merely entering a name
in a search box. As with the requirement that the D.C. Circuit vacated,
if the name search does not generate any results, no further search is
needed. If the name search does generate results, the broadcaster's
duty is to exercise reasonable diligence to ascertain whether the
lessee is subject to a disclosure requirement--precisely what the
statute requires.
 26. Moreover, lessees are looking for their own names. A lessee is
not doing a FARA database search to learn whether it is registered,
such as to necessitate experimenting with different iterations of its
name. A lessee, or someone within lessee's organization, would know
whether it is a FARA registrant, or U.S.-based foreign media outlet. As
such, the lessee will only be providing screenshots if, in response to
licensee's queries, the lessee states that it is neither a FARA agent
nor a U.S.-based foreign media outlet. In short, the name search only
entails confirming that the lessee's status is neither a FARA
registrant or a U.S.-based foreign media outlet. The FARA database has
different search fields. The FARA website provides for an ``Active
Registrants'' search link, and the Commission recommends that lessees
use this link because its rules only cover those FARA agents who are
currently registered on the Department of Justice FARA site.
 27. Similarly, the Commission's website lists the names of all the
entities that have reported as U.S.-based foreign media outlets, and
all that is required is a screenshot of this list to show whether the
lessee's name appears on the list at the time of the licensee's
required inquiries. No searches or copying of multiple Commission
reports are required, as the list appears on the Commission's U.S.-
based foreign media outlet web page. Lessees need only go to the
following link at the time of entering into a lease agreement or at
renewal and take one photo: https://www.fcc.gov/united-states-based-foreign-media-outlets .
2. Leases Renewed Within a One-Year Period
 28. In response to several commenters' request that the Commission
clarify the scope of the

[[Page 57780]]

term ``lease,'' the Commission affirmed its position in the First R&O
that the term applies to any agreement, written or not, where a
licensee grants to another party the right to program on its station in
exchange for some form of consideration. The term applies irrespective
of the terms or duration of the agreement, and regardless of whether
the parties label or view the agreement as a time brokerage agreement,
a local marketing agreement, or something else. Therefore, an agreement
is not excluded from the definition of ``lease'' for purposes of the
foreign sponsorship identification rules merely because it is an
informal, short term, and/or week-to-week type of agreement. The
Commission addressed the rules' applicability to certain types of
programming, but it clarified that applicability of the rules is not
determined by the title, terms, or duration of an agreement.
 29. Nevertheless, in response to commenter concerns about
frequently having to repeat the certification/screenshot process for
short term leases, the Commission concluded that, where a licensee and
the same lessee enter into recurring leases for the same programming
over a one year period, the licensee need only exercise its reasonable
diligence obligations, including the certification or screenshot
process, once per year. This modification of the proposals contained in
the Second NPRM addresses concerns raised in the record about the
burdens associated with the production of multiple certifications/
screenshots over a limited period of time when the lease concerns both
the same lessee and same programming. An example of what is meant by
``same lessee'' and ``same programming'' in this context would be House
of Worship X leasing time for the live broadcast of its weekly
religious service, every Sunday from 11 a.m. till 12 p.m. While the
specific broadcasts would differ week to week, the lessee would
continue to be House of Worship X and the program would be its live
religious service broadcast. By contrast, if House of Worship X decides
to use its regular time slot to provide something other than its weekly
religious service--e.g., a panel discussion with various civic
leaders--that would be considered different programming that would not
fall within the one year exemption, and, thus, would require licensee
and lessee to engage in the reasonable diligence requirements laid out
in the Commission's rules.
3. Lack of Adequate Response From Lessee
 30. The Commission decided not to adopt the notification
requirement proposed in the Second NPRM that proposed to require
licensees to notify the Media Bureau about a lessee's failure to
respond. The Commission recognized that there may be instances when,
despite a licensee's efforts to comply with the foreign sponsorship
identification rules, a lessee may fail to respond, or may fail to
respond adequately, to a licensee's queries or request for a
certification/screenshots. Thus, if a licensee does not obtain a
response, or obtains an inadequate response, from the lessee to its
reasonable diligence inquiries, it may continue to air the lessee's
programming and will not be required to report such non-responses to
the Commission. If, however, it is determined at a later date that the
programming should have included a foreign sponsorship disclosure, the
Commission may conduct a fact-specific inquiry to determine whether the
licensee met its obligation under section 317(c) to ``exercise
reasonable diligence to obtain'' the necessary information, such as by
not making further inquiry of the lessee.
4. Recordkeeping Requirement
 31. Licensees must retain all of their certifications and
screenshots for the length of the license term or one year, whichever
is longer, pursuant to the record retention requirement contained in 47
CFR 73.1212(j)(3)(v). As noted above, under the screenshot approach,
licensees must still comply with the pre-existing requirement to inform
lessees of the foreign sponsorship identification rules, pursuant to
Sec. 73.1212(j)(3)(i), and make the inquiries contained in Sec.
73.1212(j)(3)(ii) through (iii) of the rules. Also, consistent with the
pre-existing rules, under the screenshot approach a licensee must still
memorialize in some way its compliance with Sec. 73.1212(j)(i) through
(iii).
 32. Although the Second NPRM proposed that licensees retain the
certifications and screenshots in their OPIFs, based on commenter
concerns, the Commission was persuaded that licensees should have
greater flexibility regarding the manner in which these documents are
stored. Licensees must already upload their lease agreements into their
OPIFs, along with records of any foreign sponsorship identification
disclosures. As a result, the public already has a mechanism to
determine which programs are provided by foreign governmental entities.
Thus, the Commission found it reasonable to respond to commenter
concerns by providing more flexibility regarding retention of the
certifications and screenshots than initially proposed. Hence,
licensees must retain their certifications and/or screenshots, along
with documentation of inquiries that accompany the screenshots, but may
elect to do so in either their own OPIFs or in their internal files,
provided that licensees make such documents available to the Commission
promptly upon request.
5. Legal Authority
 33. The newly-adopted regulations are consistent with the Act and
the court's decision in NAB v. FCC. The Commission declined to address
challenges by commenters to the existing rules not under review in the
Second NPRM. Commenters' challenges to the Commission's authority fall
into two categories. First, a number of commenters sought to reopen
issues already decided in the First R&O under the guise of challenging
the Commission's authority to implement the proposals at issue in the
Second NPRM. As discussed in more detail below, the Commission
previously established in the First R&O that licensees must inform
their lessees about the foreign sponsorship identification rules and
inquire about the status of lessees and those further back in the chain
of production and distribution of programming. These issues were not
the subject of the Second NPRM. Second, commenters also challenged the
Commission's authority to adopt the specific proposals contained in the
Second NPRM. Below, the Commission first declined to address challenges
to those issues previously settled in the First R&O before addressing
challenges to the Commission's authority to establish the requirements
established in the Second R&O.
 34. Challenges to Previously Settled Issues in the First R&O. More
than two years after the Commission adopted the foreign sponsorship
identification rules, and after themselves challenging a portion of
those rules in court, two commenters filing jointly disputed various
requirements that are fundamental to the foreign sponsorship
identification rules that the Commission established in the First R&O.
For example, they contested the requirement that licensees must inform
their lessees of the foreign sponsorship identification rules--a rule
established in the First R&O. Similarly, they challenged the previously
established

[[Page 57781]]

requirement that a licensee inquire of its lessee whether it has
knowledge of anyone further back in the chain of producing/distributing
the programming who qualifies as a foreign governmental entity and has
provided some type of inducement to air the programming. The Commission
sought comment on these requirements in the first notice of proposed
rulemaking (85 FR 74955, November 24, 2020) and adopted them in the
First R&O without reopening them in the Second NPRM, in which the
Commission made clear that it only intended to address the issues
vacated by the Court. The Commission declined to revisit additional
issues with respect to the existing rules. If commenters wished to
challenge such authority, they had the opportunity to do so in the
earlier administrative proceeding and in the NAB v. FCC litigation, and
should have done so then.
 35. The Second NPRM never suggested that the issues the commenters
seek to reopen were under consideration in the instant proceeding. If
anything, the Second NPRM spoke of the obligations to inform and make
inquiries as established requirements. The questions posed in the
Second NPRM regarding the Commission's authority concerned the
authority to establish the requirements proposed in the Second NPRM and
no other. Nothing in the Second NPRM suggested that the Commission
intended to re-evaluate a licensee's duty to inform its lessee of the
foreign sponsorship identification rules and make certain inquiries of
the lessee.
 36. Compliance with Section 317 of the Act. The Commission has
ample authority to implement the certification and screenshot
requirements established in the Second R&O based on section 317 of the
Act. The certification and screenshot options described above fit
squarely within the NAB v. FCC court's determination that section
317(c) imposes a duty of inquiry, and not a duty of investigation.
Licensees' certifications consist of nothing more than a reduction to
written form of those inquiry requirements established in the First R&O
and codified at 47 CFR 73.1212(j)(3). These inquiries are directed to
the lessee and concern the lessee's own status and its knowledge of
those further back in the chain of producing/distributing the
programming. The screenshot alternative retains in place all the
previously established requirements, except for the vacated
verification requirement. The only difference being that previously, if
the lessee stated it was not a U.S.-based foreign media outlet, or a
FARA agent, the licensee had to verify this answer by reviewing the
Department of Justice's FARA database and the Commission's U.S.-based
foreign media outlet report. In lieu of this, the licensee will now ask
the lessee for screenshots depicting its search results of the
Department of Justice's FARA database and the Commission's U.S.-based
foreign media outlet report.
 37. Commenters argue that licensees only have a duty to inquire.
The Commission's rules require only that a licensee inquire of the
lessee (i.e., the program's sponsor); they do not make licensees
responsible for the truth of the information they obtain from lessees
by imposing independent investigatory or other obligations. With regard
to a licensee's certification option, it is merely required that the
inquiry be in written form. And, consistent with the court's
determination that the statute is narrowly drawn, the newly-adopted
requirements allow licensees to carry leased programming even in the
absence of actually obtaining foreign sponsorship information from the
lessee. However, in such situations, if a question arises later about
whether a disclosure was needed, the licensee must be able to
demonstrate, in the event of a fact-specific inquiry by the Commission,
that it exercised reasonable diligence in seeking the information. The
newly-adopted rules will help identify the types of effort necessary
for licensees to demonstrate reasonable diligence in carrying out their
duty of inquiry. Hence, section 317 gives the Commission ample
authority to require licensees to ask their lessees for certifications
or screenshots in order to determine whether a foreign sponsorship
disclosure is needed.
 38. The Commission disagreed with the view that section 317(b),
when read in the context of the entirety of sections 317 and 507, as
well as the legislative history associated with the passage of these
provisions, suggests that section 317(b) should be read as a brake on
the licensee's duty to make inquiries pursuant to section 317(c).
Unlike Section 317(c), which imposes an obligation upon licensees to
exercise reasonable diligence to obtain information, section 317(b)
imposes an obligation on the station to air an appropriate disclosure
if it receives a report that payments were made to employees, or
persons involved in the production or preparation of the program, in
regard to material included in the programming to be broadcast by the
station. The Commission does not interpret section 317(b) to be a limit
on the inquiries the licensee must make pursuant to section 317(c).
Moreover, commenters' interpretation would contravene the Commission's
mandate under section 317(e) to carry out the statute's provisions.
 39. Compliance with Administrative Procedure Act (APA). The
Commission has clearly and consistently articulated that licensees'
responsibilities as trustees of the nation's airwaves include
sponsorship identification based on the fundamental principle that the
public has the right to know whether the broadcast material has been
paid for and by whom. Commenters assert that the proposed rules violate
the APA, that the Commission has only identified a few instances of
foreign government sponsored programming, and that one of the stations
cited is no longer airing such programming. These assertions miss the
point that almost by definition when foreign governmental sponsorship
is undisclosed, neither the Commission nor the American public will
know about it. Moreover, Federal agencies have authority for
``precautionary or prophylactic responses to perceived risks'' based on
documented abuses. See Chamber of Commerce of U.S. v. SEC, 412 F.3d
133, 141 (D.C. Cir. 2005) (quoting Certified Color Mfrs. Ass'n v.
Mathews, 543 F.2d 284, 296 (D.C. Cir. 1976)). Furthermore, foreign
governments are continuing to disseminate programming over U.S.
broadcast media and, thus, there is a continued need for robust foreign
sponsorship identification rules. Hence, it is reasonable to conclude
that the reports of foreign government attempts to disseminate
programming via broadcast television and radio call for targeted action
to ensure audiences are aware when a foreign government or its
representatives are seeking to persuade the American public. Regardless
of the number of reported instances of undisclosed foreign government-
provided programming, Congress and the Commission have consistently
expressed their strong interest in the identification of foreign
government sponsored programming on the airwaves.
 40. In response to commenters' concerns that the rules proposed in
the Second NPRM would be overly burdensome for broadcasters, the
Commission emphasized how limited its action is in the Second R&O. It
replaced the vacated name search requirement with a certification
requirement and an alternative screen shot approach, which is
essentially the name search requirement in a form that comports with
the statute as interpreted by the D.C. Circuit in NAB v. FCC. The
Commission also has significantly modified its initial proposals with

[[Page 57782]]

regard to these new rules. As discussed above, the standardized
certification language appended to the Second R&O has been reduced
significantly and now provides a simple check-box format. Additionally,
application of the Commission's standardized certification language is
now one of two options available to licensees. Similarly, in response
to commenter objections about uploading certifications and other
documentation to their OPIFs, the Commission decided to permit
licensees to instead maintain this documentation in their private files
if they choose.
 41. Moreover, in response to commenter concerns about having to
repeat the certification or screenshot requirements on a weekly basis
for religious programmers, many of whom may not have the resources to
enter into long-term leases, the Commission modified the frequency with
which the certification/screenshot process must be conducted for such
leases. Similarly, concerns about uploading documents associated with
short term leases to the OPIFs have been addressed by permitting
licensees to retain their certifications/screenshots in their internal
files. With regard to the argument that new requirements would further
complicate or burden existing business relationships, the Commission
grandfathered existing leases until they are either up for renewal or
the parties enter into a new lease. Finally, the Commission decided not
to adopt the Second NPRM's proposal to have licensees report to the
Commission when lessees have failed to respond to licensee requests for
certifications/screenshots.
 42. Thus, the reasonable diligence requirements are tailored
appropriately to accomplish the goal of ensuring the accurate detection
and disclosure of foreign government-provided programming while also
mitigating the burden of compliance on broadcasters. Transparency
regarding the source of broadcast programming, particularly foreign
government-provided programming, gives broadcast audiences the
information they need to fully appreciate the programming. Moreover, an
expectation of transparency regarding the source of programming also
enhances audience trust in broadcast programming overall--unlike other
media, broadcast audiences can feel confident that either their
programming is provided by their local licensee, or the source of other
programming is being disclosed. The Commission's careful tailoring
executes a balanced approach, minimizing the overall burden of
compliance on broadcasters while concurrently supporting the objectives
of accurate detection and disclosure, so as to ensure that the American
broadcast audience is informed about the source of its programming.

B. Application of Foreign Sponsorship Identification Requirements to
Different Types of Programming

 43. The Commission clarified that its foreign sponsorship
identification requirements will not apply to advertising for
commercial products or services to the extent such advertising falls
within the exemption established in 47 CFR 73.1212(f). It also
clarified that the foreign sponsorship identification rules will not
apply to political candidate advertisements. It did, however, determine
that the foreign sponsorship identification rules will apply to issue
advertisements and paid PSAs. It also confirmed that the rule changes
contained in the Second R&O do not alter its finding in the First R&O
that the foreign sponsorship identification rules should not apply to
noncommercial and educational broadcast stations (NCEs). The Commission
declined to create an exemption from its foreign sponsorship
identification rules for religious programming and locally produced
and/or distributed programming. It also addressed the application of
its rules to section 325(c) permit holders.
1. Advertisements for Commercial Goods and Services
 44. The Commission clarified that its long-standing sponsorship
identification requirements for advertising for commercial products or
services, as currently set out in 47 CFR 73.1212(f), also apply in the
context of foreign sponsorship identification. Accordingly, the
Commission dismissed the Petition for Clarification as moot because it
addressed the issues raised in that petition in the Second R&O. It
recognized that the use of the term ``traditional, short-form
advertising'' in the First R&O inadvertently created unnecessary
confusion about the application of the foreign sponsorship
identification rules. While the intention behind using the term may
have been to provide greater clarity, due to the resulting confusion,
the Commission reversed its previous decision to use that term and
relied instead on the well-established exemption from sponsorship
disclosure contained in 47 CFR 73.1212(f).
 45. Section 73.1212(f) provides that in the case of broadcast
matter advertising commercial products or services, an announcement
stating the sponsor's corporate or trade name, or the name of the
sponsor's product, when it is clear that the mention of the name of the
product constitutes a sponsorship identification, shall be deemed
sufficient for the purpose of Sec. 73.1212 and only one such
announcement need be made at any time during the course of the
broadcast.
 46. If broadcast matter for a commercial product or service meets
the requirements for a disclosure exemption under 47 CFR 73.1212(f),
the licensee need not make the inquiries contained in 47 CFR
73.1212(j), nor is the licensee required to air the disclosure set
forth in 47 CFR 73.1212(j)(1)(i). For an advertisement to fall under
the commercial exemption provisions of 47 CFR 73.1212(f), it must
include the sponsor's corporate or trade name, or the name of the
sponsor's product, when it is clear that the mention of the name of the
product constitutes a sponsorship identification. By clarifying that
the foreign sponsorship identification rules do not trump the pre-
existing sponsorship identification rules for advertising, the
Commission addressed the concerns raised by commenters about the
terminology used in the First R&O with regard to advertising.
 47. The Second NPRM sought comment on whether to establish a ``safe
harbor'' for advertisements of a certain length. Based on the record,
the Commission found that it is better not to place any minimum or
maximum time limit on the broadcast matter that is subject to the
exemption established in 47 CFR 73.1212(f). Rather, the Commission was
persuaded to follow long-standing Commission precedent that
distinguishes programming that is entitled to the disclosure exemption
provided by Sec. 73.1212(f). This clarification should address the
questions that arose in response to the Commission's use of the term
``short-form advertising'' in the First R&O. With this additional
clarification about the applicability of Sec. 73.1212(f), the
Commission addressed the concerns raised in the record about the length
of various advertisements.
 48. The Commission noted, however, that its foreign sponsorship
identification rules continue to apply to any broadcast matter that
does not fit within Sec. 73.1212(f). Just as the general sponsorship
identification requirements contained in Sec. 73.1212 apply to
programming that does not fall within the exemption of Sec.
73.1212(f), so too will the foreign sponsorship identification
requirements apply to such programming. Thus, to the extent foreign
government-provided programming is not for a commercial
