FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Modernizing and Expanding Access to the 70/80/90 GHz Bands; Report and Order
Document number: 2024-05390
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Space Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 33242
Publication date: 2024-04-29

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 83 (Monday, April 29, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 83 (Monday, April 29, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 33242-33264]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-05390]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 0 and 101

[WT Docket No. 20-133; FCC 24-16; FR ID 207939]


Modernizing and Expanding Access to the 70/80/90 GHz Bands;
Report and Order

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission
(Commission) continues to play a leading role in fostering innovation
in the provisioning of broadband, including through novel technological
solutions as well as fifth-generation wireless technology (5G). Meeting
the non-stop growth in demand for wireless broadband connectivity is
more important than ever due to the outsized impact the internet has on
its work, education, health care, and personal connections. Recognizing
this reality, and to help close the digital divide, the Report and
Order adopts new rules and updates preexisting ones. The Commission
also updates its rules to permit the use of smaller and lower-cost
antennas to facilitate the provision of backhaul service and mandates a
channelization plan . Finally, the Commission adopts changes to the
link registration process in certain bands requiring certification of
construction of registered links to promote more efficient use of this
spectrum and improve the accuracy of the link registration database.

DATES: Effective May 29, 2024, except for the addition of Sec.
101.147(z)(3) at instruction 9, which is effective on September 1,
2024. The amendments to Sec. Sec. 101.63(b) at instruction 5,
101.1523(a) and (e) at instruction 12, and 101.1528(a)(11), (b)(10),
and (d) at instruction 14 are delayed indefinitely. The Federal
Communications Commission will publish a document in the Federal
Register announcing the effective date for the amendments to Sec. Sec.
101.63(b), 101.1523(a) and (e), and 101.1528(a)(11), (b)(10), and (d).

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Jeffrey Tignor, Wireless
Telecommunications Bureau, Broadband Division, at
 [email protected] or 202-418-0774.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Report
and Order in WT Docket No. 20-33, FCC 24-16; adopted on January 24,
2024 and released on January 26, 2024. The full text of this document
(as corrected by Erratum released on April 10, 2024) is available at
 https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-24-16A1.pdf .

Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis

 As required by the Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980, as amended
(RFA), an Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) was
incorporated into the Modernizing and Expanding Access to the 70/80/90
GHz Bands, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (70/80/90 GHz NPRM) released
in June 2020 (85 FR 40168, July 6, 2020). The Commission sought written
public comment on the proposals in the NPRM, including comments on the
IRFA. No comments were filed addressing the IRFA. This present Final
Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (FRFA) conforms to the RFA.

Congressional Review Act

 The Commission will submit the Report and Order to the
Administrator of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs,
Office of Management and Budget, for concurrence as to whether this
rule is ``major'' or ``non-major'' under the Congressional Review Act,
5 U.S.C. 804(2). The Commission will send a copy of this Report and
Order to Congress and the Government Accountability Office pursuant to
5 U.S.C. 801(a)(1)(A).

I. Background

 1. In the United States, the 71-76 GHz, 81-86 GHz, 92-94 GHz, and
94.1-95 GHz bands (collectively, the 70/80/90 GHz bands) are allocated
on a co-primary basis for Federal and non-Federal use, as follows.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \1\ Additional allocations for Federal and non-Federal use for
Space Research are on a secondary basis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Band Non-Federal use Federal use
------------------------------------------------------------------------
71-74 GHz....................... Fixed, Fixed Fixed, Fixed
 Satellite, Satellite,
 Mobile, and Mobile, and
 Mobile Satellite. Mobile Satellite.

[[Page 33243]]


74-76 GHz \1\................... Fixed, Fixed Fixed, Fixed
 Satellite, Satellite, and
 Mobile, Mobile.
 Broadcasting, and
 Broadcasting
 Satellite.
81-84 GHz....................... Fixed, Fixed Fixed, Fixed
 Satellite, Satellite,
 Mobile, Mobile Mobile, Mobile
 Satellite, and Satellite, and
 Radio Astronomy. Radio Astronomy.
84-86 GHz....................... Fixed, Fixed Fixed, Fixed
 Satellite, Satellite,
 Mobile, and Radio Mobile, and Radio
 Astronomy. Astronomy.
92-94 GHz, 94.1-95 GHz.......... Fixed, Mobile, Fixed, Mobile,
 Radio Astronomy, Radio Astronomy,
 and Radiolocation. and
 Radiolocation.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

 In the 71-76 GHz (70 GHz) and 81-86 GHz (80 GHz) bands Fixed,
Mobile, and Broadcasting services must not cause harmful interference
to, nor claim protection from, Federal Fixed-Satellite Service
operations located at 28 military installations. In addition, in the 80
GHz band, and in the 92-94 GHz and 94.1-95 GHz bands (collectively, the
90 GHz band), licensees proposing to register links located near 18
radio astronomy observatories must coordinate their proposed links with
those observatories. The 94-94.1 GHz frequencies are allocated for
Federal use for Earth Exploration Satellite (active), Radiolocation,
and Space Research (active) and for non-Federal use for Radiolocation.
Additionally, the adjacent 86-92 GHz band is allocated for Federal and
non-Federal Earth Exploration-Satellite (passive), Space Research
(passive), and Radio Astronomy services and is subject to footnote
US246.
 2. In 2003, the Commission established service rules for non-
Federal use of the 70/80/90 GHz bands through a two-step, non-exclusive
licensing regime. Users first obtain a nationwide, non-exclusive
license for the entire 12.9 gigahertz of the 70/80/90 GHz bands and
then register individual links in a database administered by third-
party database managers. Since 2004, the Wireless Telecommunications
Bureau (WTB) has designated four entities to be database managers;
there are currently two: Comsearch and Micronet Communications, Inc. In
order for a link to be registered, it must be coordinated successfully
with Federal operations--typically through the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration's (NTIA) online,
automated mechanism. If a proposed link does not interfere with
existing Federal operations then it is given a ``green light;'' if it
may interfere with existing Federal operations, then it is given a
``yellow light,'' indicating that the licensee must file a registration
application for the link with the FCC for coordination with NTIA. The
``green light''/``yellow light'' system protects the sensitive nature
of the locations of military installations. Also, the licensee must
provide an analysis to the third-party database manager demonstrating
that the proposed link will neither cause harmful interference to, nor
receive harmful interference from, any previously registered non-
government link. Licensees are afforded first-in-time priority for
successfully registered links relative to links that are successfully
registered at a later point in time. Registered links must be
constructed within 12 months of their registration. Under part 101,
non-Federal licensees may use the 70/80/90 GHz bands for any point-to-
point, non-broadcast service.
 3. In June 2020, the Commission adopted the aforementioned 70/80/90
GHz NPRM in this proceeding, seeking comment on both adopting new rules
and updating preexisting rules to further enable non-Federal uses of
the 70/80/90 GHz bands. Among a range of issues and proposals--which
the Commission said it would work with NTIA to evaluate--the 70/80/90
GHz NPRM sought comment on requests from Aeronet Global Communications,
Inc. (Aeronet) to authorize point-to-point links to endpoints in motion
in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands to facilitate broadband service to ships
and aircraft in motion, as well as on whether to classify those links
as ``mobile'' service (the Aeronet Petitions). Although the Aeronet
Petitions proposed that endpoints in motion operations be permitted in
the 70, 80 and 90 GHz bands, several parties that commented on the
Aeronet Petitions expressed concerns about co-existence with other
services in the 90 GHz band. The 70/80/90 GHz NPRM did not propose to
authorize endpoints in motion in the 90 GHz band. Noting that the 70/
80/90 GHz bands could provide a ``unique spectrum resource'' for ``the
provisioning of broadband services to airplanes, ships, and other
antennas in motion,'' the Commission sought comment on technical and
operational rules to allow these new service offerings in the 70 GHz
and 80 GHz bands and to mitigate interference to incumbents and other
proposed users of these bands and adjacent bands.
 4. The 70/80/90 GHz NPRM also proposed several changes to the
antenna standards for the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands to provide greater
flexibility in deploying wireless backhaul, noting industry's
assessment of its needs. The 70/80/90 GHz NPRM sought comment as well
on whether adopting a channelization plan would promote more efficient
use of the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands. In addition, the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM
asked about whether the Commission should make changes to the link
registration rules for the 70, 80, and 90 GHz bands. Parties including
aeronautical and satellite companies, radio astronomy interests,
equipment manufacturers, fixed and mobile wireless entities, and
organizations focused on meteorology filed in response to the 70/80/90
GHz NPRM. Commenters discussed Aeronet's proposals, the suitability of
the bands for backhaul, and a range of ways to improve the bands'
overall functionality (such as channelization and updates to the
relevant antenna standards and link registration process).
 5. Following the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, in October 2021 WTB issued a
Public Notice seeking to further develop the record on the use of High
Altitude Platform Stations (HAPS Public Notice) or other stratospheric-
based platform services in the 70/80/90 GHz bands. The Commission's
rules define a ``High Altitude Platform Station'' as a ``station
located on an object at an altitude of 20 to 50 km and at a specified,
nominal, fixed point relative to the earth.'' Fifteen Comments and five
Reply Comments were filed in response to the HAPS Public Notice, with
participants ranging from past commenters on the original 70/80/90 GHz
NPRM to additional governmental entities and public interest groups,
among others.
 6. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the Commission committed to coordinate
with NTIA prior to adopting any rules in this proceeding that would
affect Federal users, given that allocations for the 70 GHz and 80 GHz
bands include both Federal and non-Federal use. In response to the 70/
80/90 GHz NPRM, NTIA established a technical interchange group (TIG)
with representatives from the affected Federal agencies, including
National Aeronautics and Space Administration,

[[Page 33244]]

the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the National
Science Foundation, the Department of the Air Force, and NTIA itself
(collectively, the Federal Agencies) (Federal Agencies Letter).
Commission staff participated in regular information exchange meetings
with the TIG. The Federal Agencies, through NTIA, submitted a summary
of their analyses and a set of proposed interference mitigation
measures to the record. On October 18, 2023, the Bureau issued a Public
Notice seeking to refresh the overall record in this proceeding and
seeking comment, in particular, on the Federal Agencies' proposals
(Refresh Public Notice). Nine parties--eight of which had already
participated in the record to date--filed comments in response to the
Refresh Public Notice.

II. Report and Order

 7. After reviewing the record, the Commission adopts rules to allow
for point-to-point links to endpoints in motion--specifically, links on
aircraft and on ships--in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands under its part
101 rules. The Commission also adopts changes to its rules to
facilitate the use of the 70 and 80 GHz bands for backhaul, including
through the use of smaller antennas, and to improve the accuracy of the
link registration database for the 70/80/90 GHz bands. Specifically,
the Commission adopts proposals to increase maximum antenna beamwidth
from 1.2 degrees to 2.2 degrees; reduce minimum antenna gain from 43
dBi to 38 dBi while retaining the proportional EIRP reduction
requirement; eliminate the co-polar and relax the cross-polar
discrimination requirements at angles less than 5 degrees; revise the
co-polar and cross-polar discrimination requirements at angles between
5 degrees and 180 degrees; and allow minor modifications to
registrations in the 70/80/90 GHz bands without the loss of first-in-
time rights. The Commission further adopts a channelization plan
consistent with Recommendation ITU-R F.2006. Finally, the Commission
adopts a requirement that licensees certify that each link is
constructed and operating within 12 months of successful registration
in the link registration system (LRS) administered by third-party
database managers.

A. Enabling Point-to-Point Communications to Aircraft and Ships

 8. Pursuant to the Aeronet Petitions--one addressing aeronautical
service, the other maritime service--the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM proposed to
authorize point-to-point links to endpoints in motion on aircraft and
on ships in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands. The 70/80/90 GHz NPRM sought
comment on this proposal, with a focus on potential impacts on other
services, including radio astronomy service (RAS), Earth Exploration-
Satellite Service (passive) (EESS), FSS, and terrestrial fixed point-
to-point links in the Fixed Service (FS).
 9. As noted above, in the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM the Commission
committed to coordinate with NTIA prior to adopting any rules in this
proceeding that would affect Federal users; this coordination
ultimately resulted in the work of NTIA's TIG and the submission of the
Federal Agencies Letter, which was one of the topics specifically noted
in the Commission's Refresh Public Notice. Both the Federal Agencies
Letter and the responsive filings in the record have advanced the
Commission's efforts to enable innovative new uses of this band in both
the aeronautical and the maritime contexts, while ensuring adequate
interference protection for incumbents and other authorized services in
these and adjacent bands.
 10. In order to facilitate increased provision of broadband service
and enhanced competition in the aviation and maritime markets, the
Commission adopts rules authorizing point-to-point links to endpoints
in motion on aircraft and on ships, pursuant to specifications and
restrictions described below. These rules will permit increased
broadband access in this space while protecting important incumbent and
Federal operations.
1. Authorization and Framework
 11. Classification of Services. The Aeronet Petitions requested
that the Commission categorize Aeronet's proposed services as fixed
services. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, however, the Commission instead
proposed to classify service to endpoints in motion as a mobile
service, because its rules define ``fixed service'' as a
``radiocommunication service between specified fixed points,'' which
endpoints in motion inherently are not. Several commenters supported
the Commission's approach, including Boeing, the Fixed Wireless
Communications Coalition (FWCC), and Loon, which also requested that
the Commission makes sure any definition of ``mobile'' include mobile
components of HAPS systems as well. The Wireless internet Service
Providers Association (WISPA) alone opposed mobile classification, on
the grounds that one endpoint of the transmission is fixed, and
therefore the service does not reach ``full mobility,'' and also
because the appropriate comparison is with the Fixed Satellite Service,
which may provide service to Earth Stations in Motion (ESIMs) without
being reclassified as ``Mobile-Satellite Services.'' WISPA also argued
that if the Commission does classify services to endpoints in motion as
mobile, the Commission should classify them as aeronautical mobile and
maritime mobile specifically, as those terms are defined in the
Commission's existing rules.
 12. The Commission finds WISPA's arguments unpersuasive. Other
mobile services, for example cellular service, ubiquitously involve
transmissions from one fixed point (the base station) to a variety of
mobile points (the cell phone), without risking reclassification as a
fixed service. As between ``mobile'' and ``aeronautical mobile,'' the
Commission notes that a classification as simply ``mobile'' encompasses
aeronautical use. Similarly, as between ``mobile'' and ``maritime
mobile,'' a classification as simply ``mobile'' encompasses maritime
use. Given the otherwise favorable record, and the Commission's
existing rules, the Commission concludes that the service the
Commission authorize, involving transmissions to and from aeronautical
endpoints in motion, is a mobile service.
 13. As noted in the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the Commission's
authorization of a mobile service in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands
constitutes a revisiting of the Commission's previous actions in the
Spectrum Frontiers proceeding. At that time, the Commission declined to
authorize mobile use in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands, but reserved the
right to revisit the issue of possible methods of promoting coexistence
between fixed links and mobile operations as mobile deployments
increased in other millimeter-wave bands, as technology developed, and
as additional options or frameworks for coexistence of fixed and mobile
services in the same band were brought forth. In the six years since
the 2017 Spectrum Frontiers Order, there have been considerable
advances in both technology and sharing paradigms--and Aeronet and
other parties have continued to submit new analyses on possible
coexistence. The Commission therefore conclude that revisiting the
Commission's previous stance on this matter is warranted and
appropriate. The Commission notes that the mobile services that the
Commission permits pursuant to its decisions in this Report and Order
are subject to significantly different rules and requirements than the
part 30 rules the Commission contemplated in 2017.
 14. Limitation to 70 GHz and 80 GHz Bands. In the 70/80/90 GHz
NPRM, the

[[Page 33245]]

Commission noted various concerns already in the record regarding
potential harmful interference to Enhanced Flight Vision Systems (EFVS)
and Foreign Object Detection (FOD) systems from Aeronet's proposed
service in the 90 GHz band and, on that basis, proposed to allow
endpoint-in-motion operations only in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands,
while continuing to seek comment on the issue. Since then, additional
concerns have been raised by numerous other entities regarding proposed
aeronautical use of the 90 GHz band, due to both potential
incompatibility with proposed use by EFVS and FOD systems, and
potential harmful interference to radio astronomy and remote sensing
receivers in the 86-92 GHz band and at 94.0-94.1 GHz. Given the many
concerns raised in the record, and the relatively greater interest
expressed in expanding use of the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands, the
Commission concludes that the risk of harmful interference to incumbent
and adjacent services outweighs the benefit to consumers of allowing
service to aeronautical endpoints-in-motion in the 90 GHz band. As
proposed in the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the Commission therefore authorizes
endpoint-in-motion service only in the 70 and 80 GHz bands. At this
juncture, the new service covers: (1) in the aeronautical space,
ground-to-air and air-to-ground transmissions between ground stations
and aircraft, and air-to-air transmission between aircraft in flight;
and (2) in the maritime space, ship-to-shore, shore-to-ship, shore-to-
aerostat, aerostat-to-ship, aerostat-to-shore, and ship-to-ship
transmissions. For purposes of both the Report and Order and Further
Notice, the Commission considers the term ``aerostat'' to mean an
airborne transmitter operating within a small specified area, below
1,000 feet of elevation, regardless of method of propulsion.
 15. Coordination, Licensing, and Registration. In the 70/80/90 GHz
NPRM, the Commission sought comment generally on what changes to the
70/80/90 GHz coordination, licensing, and registration framework might
be necessary in order to facilitate the operation of endpoints in
motion under part 101. The Commission also proposed to incorporate such
operations, to the extent ultimately authorized, into the current
framework of non-exclusive, nationwide licensing used for fixed point-
to-point operations in these bands. The record is fairly thin on the
specifics of the appropriate licensing framework; most commenters
focused on whether the Commission should authorize this service as an
initial matter. However, several commenters did voice support for
including any new service in the existing third-party database
management system.
 16. In order to allow service to aeronautical and maritime
endpoints in motion to deploy efficiently and without causing harmful
interference to incumbent operations and other services in these bands,
the applicable licensing mechanism must support adequate coordination
with those other services without being unduly burdensome on both
incumbent and new operators. To this end, the Commission will require
prospective operators of service to aeronautical and maritime endpoints
in motion to first apply for and receive a nationwide, non-exclusive
license. This license will establish the prospective operator's
qualification to be a licensee and will serve as a blanket license for:
(1) on the aeronautical side, air-to-air operations, and as a
prerequisite to register ground-to-air (GTA) stations and associated
air-to-ground (ATG) transmission; and (2) on the maritime side, as a
prerequisite to register ship-to-shore, shore-to-ship, shore-to-
aerostat, aerostat-to-ship, and aerostat-to-shore transmissions. The
Commission clarifies that as of the effective date of the rules, the
Commission is adopting, all nationwide, non-exclusive licenses for the
70/80/90 GHz service will include the service areas set forth in
section 101.1501, as revised.
 17. In the matter of coordinating and registering individual
aeronautical stations and links, the Commission proposed in the 70/80/
90 GHz NPRM to require coordination and registration for not only GTA
stations and ATG transmissions, but also air-to-air links between two
aircraft in motion. The Commission also sought comment on how all types
of links should be represented or described in their registrations, as
the current system, designed for fixed point-to-point links on the
ground, does not account for potential differences in altitude or the
varying orientation of links to endpoints in motion. Several commenters
noted the potential difficulty of coordinating air-to-air links, due
not only to these different characteristics, but also their temporary
and transient nature. Aeronet proposed coordinating three-dimensional
polyhedrons for air-to-air links, which DSA supports, within a
horizontal altitude band from 10,000 to 50,000 feet. However, concerns
in the record about potential harmful interference from air-to-air
transmissions stem mainly from such transmissions' specific angle,
direction, or distance from specific sites (most of which would not be
addressed by registration of polyhedrons) that can be addressed
directly with specific limitations. Due to the difficulties of
adequately representing the potential interference from these links in
the existing database structure, and in light of the various
interference mitigation measures the Commission also adopts (discussed
below) to answer those concerns, the Commission will not require
registration or coordination of individual air-to-air links.
 18. In the matter of coordinating and registering individual
maritime stations and links, the Commission proposed in the 70/80/90
GHz NPRM to require coordination and registration for not only ship-to-
shore and shore-to-ship transmissions, but also ship-to-ship and ship-
to-node (i.e., as described in this item ship-to-aerostat). The
Commission also sought comment on how all types of links should be
represented or described in their registrations, as the current
system--designed for two-dimensional fixed point-to-point links on the
ground--does not account for potential differences in three-dimensional
space-to-endpoints in motion. As explained immediately above,
commenters focused on the potential difficulty of coordinating air-to-
air links, and Aeronet proposed a system of three-dimensional
polyhedrons for the same. Similar in-depth discussion around maritime-
related links did not develop in the record.
 19. After receiving the nationwide license, aeronautical operators
will coordinate with Federal operators and register GTA stations and
associated ATG transmissions and must not operate such facilities until
registration has successfully been completed. Air-to-air operations
will not be separately registered but may only operate under a
nationwide license if the communication is associated with a registered
GTA or ATG registration. All GTA and ATG operations, including
operations transmitting to or from aeronautical endpoints in motion and
associated ground stations, will be afforded protection from other
operations on a first-in-time basis, and must afford those other
operations the relevant first-in-time protections in turn.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

 \2\ The Commission notes the request of CTIA and others that the
Commission grants priority to fixed service in these bands over new
uses. Fixed service in these bands has been co-primary with other
services, including mobile service, for some time. Adopting new
service rules for these existing allocations does not change the co-
primary status of the fixed service. Additionally, incorporating
these new aeronautical and maritime services into the existing
registration regime with first-in-time protection effectively
protects all existing operations, including fixed operations, from
all deployments in these services. That subsequent deployments will
be protected from each other on a first in time basis is also
consistent with the co-primary nature of the allocations.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 33246]]

 20. After receiving the nationwide license, maritime operators will
coordinate with Federal operators and register shore-to-ship
transmitters, shore-to-aerostat transmitters, ship-to-shore
transmitters, and aerostat relay stations. As with GTA and ATG
transmissions, all such maritime operators must not operate any
facilities until registration has successfully been completed. All such
maritime operations will be afforded protection from other operations
on a first-in-time basis and must afford those other operations the
relevant first-in-time protections in turn.
 21. The Commission delegates authority to WTB to establish specific
procedures to be followed for coordinating and registering aeronautical
and maritime stations and their associated transmissions, to be set
forth in a future publication or publications. The Commission note, in
relation to technical discussion raised by certain parties in the
docket, that validation of new aeronautical and maritime systems'
ability to not cause interference may involve processes beyond the
third-party database system. Additionally, the Commission delegates
authority to WTB and the Office of Engineering and Technology (OET) to
establish a process, in coordination with NTIA, for demonstrating that
technologies for point-to-endpoint-in-motion communications to aircraft
and ships are capable of meeting the specific technical and operating
requirements adopted in this Report and Order. The Commission instructs
WTB and OET to take such actions as authorized by sections 0.241(l) and
0.331(g) of its rules, which the Commission adopts, and to do so
expeditiously.
2. Technical and Operational Rules
 22. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the Commission sought comment on what
changes to its current rules might be necessary to facilitate the
contemplated aeronautical and maritime services, while protecting
incumbent and Federal operations. The Commission also sought comment
generally on any interference mitigation measures not specifically
mentioned that might be necessary to protect other operations.
 23. In response to the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, some commenters argued--
focusing on the aeronautical context in particular--that a more
developed record would be necessary to support the authorization of
aeronautical mobile service along the lines proposed by Aeronet, given
the potential for interference to incumbent and other potential
services. Other commenters disagreed. Maritime service was largely
unaddressed in the record. A small number of parties--including SpaceX,
T-Mobile, and Verizon--raised more specific, albeit still highly
generalized, objections to the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM's proposed maritime
authorizations, citing in part concerns over potential impacts on fixed
wireless backhaul, among other issues. Others generally endorsed the
adoption of the proposed maritime regime.
 24. Since the initial comment period to the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM,
additional submissions to the record, including detailed contributions
from NTIA and other Federal agencies, have enhanced the depth of the
record. The Commission's increased understanding of potential
interactions between Aeronet's proposed service and incumbent,
adjacent, and other potential operations (including sensitive
operations such as weather satellites in the EESS) now allows us to set
forth a series of technical and operational rules calculated to protect
all services from harmful interference within the 70 GHz and 80 GHz
bands and adjacent to them.
 25. Except as noted below, the aeronautical and maritime mobile
services the Commission authorize will be governed by part 101 of its
rules. Though part 101 currently encompasses only fixed services, the
Commission finds it appropriate to place the service rules governing
aeronautical and maritime mobile services in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz
bands within the same rule part. In addition, operators of these new
services must coordinate with operators in the existing FS, and part
101 is the logical home for rules related to that coordination. The
technical and operational rules the Commission sets forth below are
sufficient to accommodate the different technical characteristics of
these aeronautical and maritime transmissions.
 26. Guard Bands. The Commission did not specifically seek comment
in the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM on the potential use of guard bands as means
of protecting services in adjacent bands from harmful interference.
Several commenters suggest them, particularly to protect both EESS
satellites and RAS facilities in the 86-92 GHz band. However, the
analysis submitted by the Federal Agencies, which includes NASA and
NOAA, instead relies upon specified out of band emissions (OOBE) limits
to protect EESS. Because the Federal Agencies' analysis supports
coexistence between the new aeronautical and maritime services and
services in adjacent bands without the use of a guard band, no
commenters objected to the lack of guard bands in response to the
Refresh Public Notice, and based on the Commission's engineering
analysis of the Federal Agencies' recommendations, the Commission
declines to adopt guard bands as an interference protection measure
here.
 27. Transmission Power Levels. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the
Commission sought comment on Aeronet's request to increase the maximum
allowable mobile equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) for the
70 GHz and 80 GHz bands from +55 dBW to +57 dBW. CORF and satellite
operators objected to this proposal, on the grounds that an increased
power level would unacceptably increase the risk of harmful
interference to FSS and RAS operations. Qualcomm supported the
increase, arguing that atmospheric attenuation in these bands should be
sufficient to mitigate interference concerns. Aeronet argues that the
proposed increase is minimal and that the highly directional nature of
transmissions in its proposed service will work to avoid incidents of
harmful interference. The Federal Agencies' analysis of potential
interference into Federal operations assumes +57 dBW, and suggests that
the recommended interference mitigation measures in its report would be
sufficient to protect Federal operations from an aeronautical mobile
service operating at that power level.
 28. The Commission acknowledges the concerns of satellite operators
and the RAS community about potential interference from the services
that this item contemplates, as discussed in more detail below.
However, the Federal Agencies' analysis addresses potential harmful
interference to both RAS and FSS operations, and the Commission find it
persuasive based on its review of the record and its independent
analysis. As the Commission also adopts the interference mitigation
measures recommended in that report, the Commission adopts a maximum
EIRP level of +57 dBW for transmissions in these new aeronautical and
maritime mobile services.
a. Transmissions Between Aircraft and Ground Stations
 29. In introducing a new aeronautical mobile service to these
bands, care must be taken to ensure compatibility with

[[Page 33247]]

existing and other authorized services, both in the 70 GHz and 80 GHz
bands, and adjacent to them. The record reflects a variety of concerns
about the potential impact on these other services. To address these
concerns, the Commission adopts a number of interference mitigation
measures specifically related to transmissions between ground stations
and aircraft in flight, described below. Ground-to-air and air-to-
ground transmissions are limited to the 80 GHz and 70 GHz bands,
respectively; ground stations must be located a minimum distance away
from RAS facilities, fixed stations, and FSS earth stations; specific
OOBE limits above 86 GHz must be observed; and minimum and maximum
elevation angles for ground-to-air transmissions are required.
 30. Several commenters expressed concern regarding air-to-ground
transmissions in the 80 GHz band, due to the potential for such
transmissions to cause harmful interference to RAS operations. No
party, including Aeronet, has argued that downlink transmissions in the
80 GHz band are necessary to provide aeronautical service, provided
that the 70 GHz band is available for that purpose. AT&T notes in its
comments that a channel plan that designates different parts of the 70
GHz or 80 GHz bands for uplink versus downlink signals would be
beneficial to reduce self-interference to air-to-ground and ground-to-
air mobile systems. In addition, having air-to-ground transmissions in
the 70 GHz band and ground-to-air transmissions in the 80 GHz band
creates directional consistency with the bands designated for space-to-
Earth (71-76 GHz) and Earth-to-space (81-86 GHz) in the FSS service.
Aeronet's technical study indicates compatibility with the FSS services
while assuming air-to-ground transmissions in the 70 GHz band and
ground-to-air transmissions in the 80 GHz band. SpaceX supported
Aeronet's study. The Commission therefore authorizes air-to-ground
transmissions only in the 70 GHz band.
 31. Many commenters suggested that some separation distance between
aeronautical ground stations and operations of other services,
including RAS stations, FSS earth stations, and fixed point-to-point
links, would be either advisable or necessary to reduce the risk of
harmful interference. The Federal Agencies' analysis provides specific
values for such separation distances: greater than 10 km for licensed
FSS earth stations, 10 km for fixed point-to-point transmitters, and
150 km for RAS operations. That analysis also asserts that in order to
protect RAS operations, ground stations should not transmit in the
direction of an RAS facility, or receive transmissions from aircraft in
that direction, such that the transmission enters the appropriate
``zone of avoidance'' around the facility. In response to the Refresh
Public Notice, NRAO raised concerns that this 150 km separation
distance may be inadequate to protect RAS operations in the 76-81 GHz
band specifically.
 32. The Commission finds the conclusions of the Federal Agencies'
analysis persuasive. No other party has submitted alternative
suggestions for separation distances with respect to Federal
operations. With regard to NRAO's concerns, the Commission notes that
as the Technical Interchange Group that produced the Federal Agencies
Letter specifically considered interference into the 76-81 GHz band,
and as NSF, with which NRAO is affiliated, participated in the TIG and
endorsed its output, the Commission will defer to the expertise of NSF
in this matter. Accordingly, the Commission adopts a minimum separation
distance of 150 km between RAS facilities and aeronautical ground
stations.
 33. With respect to FS and FSS, although the 10 km distances were
calculated specifically with Federal operations in mind, the Commission
finds that a 10 km distance separation should apply with respect to
non-Federal operations in these services. With respect to FSS, the
record generally supports the 10 km separation distance without
objection. For example, Aeronet's study showing compatibility between
its system and FSS concluded that a 10 km separation distance would be
sufficient to prevent interference, and SpaceX supports this
conclusion. With respect to FS, Aeronet contends that applying a 10 km
separation requirement for ground stations is unnecessary and possibly
counterproductive given that Aeronet expects to, in some cases, be able
to co-locate with backhaul links. FWCC and CTIA, on the other hand,
assert that the 10 km separation distance is necessary to protect non-
Federal FS stations. Based on the Commission's assessment of the
record, the Commission does not find any technical reason to adopt a
different separation distance between ground stations and non-Federal
FS stations than the Commission adopts for the separation between
ground stations and Federal FS stations. Moreover, in response to
Aeronet's concern that a 10 km separation distance could preclude co-
location of ground stations with backhaul links, the Commission notes
that ground stations can be separated less than 10 km from backhaul
links pursuant to coordination agreements, and the Commission
encourages all parties to explore more efficient interference
protection parameters in the context of those discussions. The
Commission finds that a 10 km coordination requirement strikes the
appropriate balance for sharing between the longstanding use of the
bands under the fixed allocation and the new uses under the co-primary
mobile allocation--including ground stations with antennas that are not
static.
 34. While Comsearch assumed a larger coordination area around FS
stations than 10 km, the Commission notes that its analysis uses
conservative assumptions to calculate an area on the ground that could
be illuminated by an aircraft antenna (for example, the Comsearch
analysis assumes an aircraft altitude of 50,000 ft, whereas most
commercial aircraft typically fly between 31,000 and 38,000 feet). This
worst-case calculation does not take into account a number of factors
that would reduce the interference potential, most notably the
directional nature of transmissions from the aircraft. Considering the
relative potential interference between ground stations and FSS versus
FS, the Commission notes the following: (1) the elevation angle of FSS
earth station receive antennas makes them more likely to be co-linear
with the air-to-ground link; (2) due to the long path from space-to-
Earth, the desired signal at a satellite earth station from a satellite
would typically be weaker than the desired signal at an FS receiver
from its transmitter (in other words, the C in the C/I ratio would be
higher for any FS station); and (3) the Federal FSS study assumed an
interference threshold of I/N = -12.2 dB would be required to protect
FSS, whereas the typical interference threshold for FS is 1.0 dB of
degradation of the static threshold of the protected receiver, which
equates to an I/N of -6 dB. These factors all indicate that FS would be
less susceptible to interference from air-to-ground or ground-to-air
links than FSS. The Commission therefore concludes that there is no
need for the separation distance between ground stations and FS
stations to be any greater than the separation distance between ground
stations and FSS stations. Accordingly, the Commission adopts a minimum
separation distance 10 km between proposed aeronautical ground stations
and any registered fixed point-to-point transmitter or FSS earth
station, Federal or non-Federal, in the absence of a coordination
agreement with the fixed station or FSS earth station operator.

[[Page 33248]]

 35. Commenters in the record evidenced significant concern
regarding protection of EESS sensors above 86 GHz from harmful
interference due to spurious emissions from the 80 GHz band. The
Commission sought comment on what interference mitigation measures
might be necessary to protect EESS services operating in the 86-92 GHz
band. CORF, ESA/EUMETSAT, and the World Meteorological Organization
suggest that the OOBE limits in the Commission's rules should be
updated to conform to the standard set forth in ITU-R Resolution 750.
The Federal Agencies, based on an independent analysis incorporating
specific details of Aeronet's proposed system, recommend an OOBE limit
of -38.5 dBW in any 100 megahertz of the passive band 86-92 GHz for
ground-to-air transmissions.
 36. The Commission finds the recommendation of the Federal Agencies
to be persuasive. The Commission acknowledges that this OOBE limit is
slightly more lenient than that urged by CORF and others. However, the
Federal Agencies' analysis takes into account specific characteristics
of Aeronet's proposed system. The Commission is therefore confident
that their resulting conclusions are sufficient to adequately protect
EESS operations. The Commission adopts an OOBE limit of -38.5 dBW in
any 100 megahertz of the passive band 86-92 GHz for ground-to-air
transmissions.
 37. Minimum and Maximum Elevation Angles. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM,
the Commission sought comment on a minimum elevation angle of five
degrees for transmissions from ground stations, consistent with the
parameters in Aeronet's initial petition. Some commenters suggest that
lower elevation angles, such as three or even 1.5 degrees, would be
sufficient to prevent harmful interference. Hughes argues that lower
elevation angles might require larger separation distances between
these aeronautical ground stations and FSS ground stations, thereby
hampering future deployment of FSS service. Geneva Communications is
generally supportive of some minimum elevation angle in order to
protect incumbent Fixed users, and FWCC supports a 5 degree minimum
specifically. Loon argues that any minimum elevation angle would favor
some systems or business models over others, and thereby restrict
competition. Comsearch's analysis of the potential impact of Aeronet's
proposed service on other services in the 70/80/90 GHz bands concludes
that a minimum elevation angle of five degrees significantly mitigates
the potential for interference into fixed point-to-point links. Aeronet
subsequently indicated that a minimum elevation angle of five degrees
could impact deployment timing and costs compared to a lower angle such
as three degrees.
 38. The Commission adopts a minimum elevation angle of five degrees
for ground stations in this aeronautical service. This is consistent
with Aeronet's initial petition and with the record before us. The
Commission notes that the Federal Agencies Clarification Letter stated
that one study initially conducted by the Federal Agencies assumed 3
degree minimum elevation angles. However, in the record before the
Commission, Aeronet has only proposed a 5 degree minimum elevation
angle, both in its own Petition and in studies that Aeronet
commissioned. The OOBE limit of -38.5 dBW in any 100 megahertz of the
passive band 86-92 GHz for ground-to-air transmissions, as recommended
in the Federal Agencies Clarification Letter, accounts for a 5 degree
minimum elevation angle.
 39. The Commission finds Loon's argument against any minimum
elevation angle unpersuasive. Elevation angle is routinely an area of
potential concern in bands where terrestrial service coexists with
services operating at altitude; for example, part 25 of the
Commission's rules, which provides the default rules for satellite
operations, requires that satellite earth stations not transmit at
elevation angles below five degrees in any band shared with a
terrestrial radio service. Adopting a similar restriction on
aeronautical services is motivated by similar interference protection
concerns and remains a technology-neutral requirement. Given the
concerns raised in the record about lower elevation angles, the
Commission concludes that five degrees is the most appropriate value.
That said, the Commission recognizes the benefits to efficient spectrum
use, and ultimately consumers, of permitting parties to agree to less
stringent interference mitigation measures than required under its
rules. Accordingly, WTB will consider any request for waiver of this
rule through the Commission's existing regulatory processes, subject to
coordination with NTIA to ensure that Federal incumbents are protected
from harmful interference and, as Aeronet suggests, ``coordination with
other potentially impacted parties based on real-world data.''
 40. The Commission also adopts a maximum elevation angle of forty-
five degrees for aeronautical ground stations. Though this parameter
was not included in Aeronet's petition, it is the maximum elevation
angle used by the Federal Agencies in their analysis of potential
harmful interference to Federal operations, and these assumptions about
likely operational parameters were based on input from Aeronet. Because
this analysis shows that elevation angles of up to forty-five degrees
can (under certain other parameters) coexist successfully with Federal
operations, and because the Commission lacks evidence in the record
that transmissions above that angle of elevation will not cause harmful
interference to Federal or other satellite operations, the Commission
adopts a maximum elevation angle of forty-five degrees.
 41. Together, these technical parameters and interference
mitigation measures will ensure that operators in this aeronautical
mobile service will be able to successfully operate, while also
protecting operators in other services.
b. Transmissions Between Aircraft in Flight
 42. Air-to-air transmissions present a unique set of
characteristics in terms of the potential for interaction with other
services, in both the same and adjacent bands, and accordingly,
considerable attention has been paid to how harmful interference from
such transmissions might be avoided. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the
Commission sought comment generally on potential interference
mitigation measures. Many commenters raised concerns about the
potential for harmful interference into other services, particularly
RAS sites above 86 GHz. In response to these concerns, Aeronet,
Comsearch, and other commenters suggested a variety of potential
mitigation measures. In particular, the Federal Agencies submitted a
report with both suggested interference mitigation measures and
underlying analysis supporting them, which they suggest would be
sufficient to protect Federal operations both in the 70/80 GHz bands
and in adjacent bands from harmful interference from air-to-air
transmissions.
 43. After reviewing the record, and as discussed in more detail
below, the Commission adopts the following technical and operational
restrictions on transmissions between aircraft in flight, in order to
reduce the risk of harmful interference to other services. Air-to-air
transmissions will be authorized in both the 70 GHz and 80 GHz bands.
The Commission establishes an OOBE limit of -29.7 dBW in any 100
megahertz of the passive band 86-92 GHz, to protect EESS (passive)
operations. In the 80 GHz band, the Commission sets a

[[Page 33249]]

maximum allowed EIRP signal level towards any of a specified list of
RAS sites, varying by transmission frequency and distance from the
site. In the 70 GHz band, the Commission adopts a similar limit on EIRP
signal levels toward specified military installations. Finally, the
Commission adopts both altitude restrictions and a minimum slant path
distance requirement in order to reduce the risk of harmful
interference to in-band services, particularly fixed point-to-point
links.
 44. Several commenters raised concerns in the record that air-to-
air transmissions in the 80 GHz band might produce unwanted emissions
into the band above 86 GHz that might cause harmful interference to
services in that band, particularly RAS observatories and EESS
operations. The Commission agrees with commenters on the importance of
protecting RAS and EESS operations in the 86-92 GHz band. However,
based on the analysis by the Federal Agencies, the Commission concludes
that the interference mitigation measures the Commission adopts, which
include restrictions on transmissions in the direction of RAS sites,
are sufficient to allow air-to-air transmissions in both the 70 GHz and
80 GHz bands.
 45. In the 70/80/90 GHz NPRM, the Commission sought general comment
on what interference mitigation measures might be necessary to protect
EESS and RAS services operating in the 86-92 GHz band. Among the
measures proposed by commenters relating to air-to-air transmissions
were limiting those transmissions to the 70 GHz band and updating the
OOBE limits to reflect recent ITU standards. Several commenters also
discussed the need for any air-to-air transmissions to avoid pointing
directly at an RAS receiver. The Federal Agencies' analysis recommends
an OOBE limit of -29.7 dBW in any 100 megahertz of the passive band 86-
92 GHz for air-to-air transmissions in order to protect EESS sensors,
and a set of restrictions on EIRP levels toward any RAS site depending
on the distance of the transmitter to the site. Aeronet has represented
both in the Commission's record and to the Federal Agencies that their
proposed system has the capability to automatically avoid transmission
towards specified stationary areas or coordinates corresponding to RAS
sites, which would enable them to comply with such a requirement.
 46. The Commission adopts an OOBE limit of -29.7 dBW in any 100
megahertz of the passive band 86-92 GHz for air-to-air transmissions,
as suggested by the Federal Agencies. The Commission also adopts a
requirement that air-to-air transmissions, in both the 70 GHz and 80
GHz bands, not take place within the main beam of an RAS observatory,
and that if this cannot be assured, no transmissions should take place
within the radio horizon of the observatory. This restriction was also
suggested by the Federal Agencies. The Commission adopts these
requirements in order to protect passive services in the adjacent bands
(i.e., 76-81 GHz, and above 86 GHz). The Federal Agencies' analysis
uses ITU recommendations as their starting point, and comprehensively
considers various factors that may influence both harmful interference
from aeronautical operations specifically, and aggregate interference
from those operations, in addition to previously authorized services.
Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the resulting
recommendations will be sufficient to protect EESS operations.
 47. The Commission takes protection of RAS operations very
seriously, and accordingly assign significant weight to the concerns
expressed in the record, and especially in the Federal Agencies'
analysis, which discusses protection of RAS operations in detail. In
order to safeguard these operations, the Commission will follow the
recommendations of the Federal Agencies in requiring the following
interference protection measures. First, as a general matter no
transmissions may occur within the main beam of an RAS station. In
addition, aircraft within the radio horizon of any RAS station must
limit the EIRP level towards the RAS stations of any air-to-air
transmission, as set forth in Fig. 1.
