FCC RULEMAKING RELEASE
Rule subject: Connect America Fund, Alaska Connect Fund, ETC Annual Reports and Certifications, Telecommunications Carriers Eligible To Receive Universal Service Support, Universal Service Refor
Document number: 2024-06292
Issuing agency: Federal Communications Commission
Responsible Bureau: Wireline Competition Bureau
Federal Register citation: 89 FR 25147
Publication date: 2024-04-10

Federal Register, Volume 89 Issue 70 (Wednesday, April 10, 2024)


[Federal Register Volume 89, Number 70 (Wednesday, April 10, 2024)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 25147-25163]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [ www.gpo.gov ]
[FR Doc No: 2024-06292]


=======================================================================
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION

47 CFR Parts 36, 51, and 54

[WC Docket Nos. 10-90, 23-328, 14-58, 09-197; WT Docket No. 10-208; FCC
23-87; FR ID 204795]


Connect America Fund, Alaska Connect Fund, ETC Annual Reports and
Certifications, Telecommunications Carriers Eligible To Receive
Universal Service Support, Universal Service Reform--Mobility Fund

AGENCY: Federal Communications Commission.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: In this document, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC
or Commission) adopts a Report and Order (Order) amending existing
rules and requirements governing the management and administration of
the

[[Page 25148]]

Commission's Universal Service Fund (USF) high-cost program. The
modifications adopted in the Order streamline processes, align
timelines, and refine certain rules to more precisely address specific
situations experienced by carriers.

DATES: Effective May 10, 2024, except for the amendments to Sec. Sec.
36.4 (amendatory instruction 2), 54.205 (amendatory instruction 7),
54.313 (amendatory instruction 10), 54.314 (amendatory instruction 11),
54.316 (amendatory instruction 13), 54.903 (amendatory instruction 18),
and 54.1306 (amendatory instruction 22), which are delayed
indefinitely. The Commission will publish a document in the Federal
Register announcing the effective date.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For further information, please
contact, Nissa Laughner, Attorney Advisor, Telecommunications Access
Policy Division, Wireline Competition Bureau, at [email protected]
or 202-418-7400.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: This is a summary of the Commission's Order
in WC Docket Nos. 10-90, 23-328, 14-58, 09-197 and WT Docket No. 10-
208; FCC 23-87, adopted on October 19, 2023, and released on October
20, 2023, with an Erratum issued by the Wireline Competition Bureau on
Feb. 13, 2024. The full text of this document is available at the
following internet address: https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/FCC-23-87A1.pdf .

I. Adopting High-Cost Program Administrative Improvements

 1. The Commission adopts its proposal to revise Sec. 54.313(i) of
its rules to streamline the process for submitting annual high-cost
information and certifications by requiring that such filings be made
only with the universal service program administrator, i.e., the
Universal Service Administrative Company (USAC). Currently, this rule
requires high-cost support recipients to file this information with the
Commission, with USAC, and with the relevant state commission or
relevant authority in a U.S. Territory, or Tribal government, as
appropriate, resulting in redundant and unnecessary administrative
burdens on high-cost support recipients. In addition to relieving
recipients of these burdens, this rule change is warranted because the
Commission can take advantage of technological advances to make this
information more readily available to all interested parties by using
the benefits of a centralized, online collection of information and
improving access and records management. Several commenters support
this change, and the Nebraska Public Service Commission asks the
Commission to ensure that states retain full access to the annual
reports. The Commission agrees that states should retain full access to
the annual reports and it directs USAC to continue to provide access to
this information to the States, U.S. Territories, and Tribal
governments electronically via links to the data on USAC's website.
Accordingly, the Commission finds that modifying Sec. 54.313(i) of its
rules to limit submission of the annual high-cost report to USAC is
well warranted.
 2. The Commission similarly adopts its proposal to revise Sec.
54.314 of its rules to require states that desire Eligible
Telecommunication Carriers (ETCs) to receive high-cost support and ETCs
not subject to state jurisdiction to file annual reports with USAC
only, rather than both USAC and the Commission's Office of the
Secretary (OSEC). Several commenters support this modification, and
none opposes. The Commission notes that its staff coordinates routinely
with USAC, so this modification should have no impact on its ability to
review and monitor these filings as part of its program oversight. The
Wireless internet Service Providers Association (WISPA) supports this
modification but only if reports are made publicly available so that
funding recipients can ensure that the certification has been received
and can demonstrate this to third parties, such as potential investors.
The Commission finds that WISPA's request is reasonable. The Commission
thus modifies its rules to require the submission of annual
certifications under Sec. 54.314 of the Commission's rules with USAC
only and commit to making this information publicly available.
 3. Third, the Commission adopts its proposal to more closely align
support reductions with an ETC's failure to certify by the deadlines
established in its rules. Current rules provide that support reductions
do not occur until January of the year following the year when the ETC
misses a reporting deadline. The revised rules the Commission adopts in
this document will instead reduce support in the month immediately
following the notice of support reduction to the eligible
telecommunications carrier from USAC or as soon as feasible thereafter.
Because support reductions are based on the number of days late, and
payments usually occur mid-month, in situations where a filing is not
received in time for USAC to calculate the requisite support reduction
for the next month's payment, USAC will implement the support reduction
as soon as feasible. No commenter opposes this change and CTIA--The
Wireless Association (CTIA) agrees that requiring USAC to implement
late filing support reductions more promptly by reducing support in the
month immediately following the issuance of a notice of support
reduction or as soon as feasible immediately thereafter avoids
confusion and improves accountability.
 4. The Commission modifies the reporting requirements for
performance testing to require all high-cost support recipients serving
fixed locations to report and certify performance testing results on a
quarterly basis, rather than annually. High-cost support recipients
must perform broadband performance testing one week out of each
quarter. All high-cost support recipients, including those that are in
compliance with speed and latency requirements, will be required to
report and certify the results of the performance tests quarterly
rather than annually. This modification will allow the Commission to
better assess whether carriers are on track to meeting the Commission's
performance measures requirements and to determine whether there are
significant problems with a carrier's network that may interfere with
consumer service. The Wireline Competition Bureau (Bureau) will
continue to assess compliance with program requirements based on the
annual testing results (i.e., annual calculations), and carriers found
not compliant will have support withheld until the carrier achieves a
full quarter of compliance. No commenter opposes this modification, and
NTCA--The Rural Broadband Association (NTCA) supports quarterly
certification of performance test results for all high-cost support
recipients, stating that reporting and certifying a carrier's
performance testing results on a quarterly basis so the burden is
minimal while also ensuring access to results enhances the Commission's
oversight.
 5. Carriers are required to report and certify locations in the
High Cost Universal Broadband portal (HUBB) by March 1st annually but
some carriers may not have reported locations when scheduled to begin
performance pre-testing or testing. As a result, the Commission
recognizes that certification of HUBB locations on March 1st may impede
the carrier's ability to complete some of its testing. In these
circumstances, the Bureau may exercise discretion when assessing the
scope of a carrier's compliance or when implementing support
withholdings.

[[Page 25149]]

 6. Currently, the Commission requires quarterly reporting of
carriers' pre-testing data, reflecting the results of tests conducted
prior to the commencement of the official test period. Those quarterly
testing results must be reported and certified within one week after
the end of the quarter in which the tests are conducted, to provide
insight into carriers' experience with the testing process. The
Commission adopts a similar schedule of quarterly reporting filings for
all high-cost carriers' testing. Once effective, all high-cost carriers
will be required to report and certify their quarterly performance
testing results within two weeks, rather than within one week, after
the end of the quarter in which the tests are conducted. The Commission
provides two weeks to offset the fact that, for administrative ease, it
declines to adopt any grace period: first quarter testing results will
be due April 15th, second quarter results will be due July 15th, third
quarter results will be due October 15th, and fourth quarter results
will be due January 15th. The Commission directs the Bureau to announce
when quarterly reporting and certification will go into effect.
 7. The Commission believes that establishing a specific reporting
schedule will provide certainty, promote accountability, and conform
with timelines for other testing protocols to minimize confusion. Given
that carriers will be certifying locations quarterly, support
withholding for non-compliance may be implemented sooner than when
reports were due by July 1st annually. This will ensure that the
withholding is closer in time to the determination of noncompliance and
encourage the non-compliant carrier to improve its performance so that
it can regain the withheld support.
 8. Under this new quarterly certification schedule, the Commission
implements support reductions for late performance measures reporting
based on the current framework under Sec. 54.313(j) that reduces
support based on the number of days late, but factoring in that it is
requiring quarterly filing certifications. Support reductions due to
late filings will be assessed at the end of the fourth quarter and will
be based on total number of days late divided by four, then rounded to
the nearest whole number. When that number is between 1 and 7, a
carrier will have its support reduced an amount equivalent to seven
days in support; when that number is 8 or higher, a carrier will have
its support reduced on a pro-rata basis equivalent to the period of
non-compliance (i.e., the number of days), plus the minimum seven-day
reduction.
 9. The Commission declines to relieve privately held rate-of-return
carriers that receive Alternative Connect America Model (A-CAM) support
or Alaska Plan support of the requirement to file annually a report of
the company's financial conditions and operations. NTCA had sought this
relief for all privately held rate-of-return carriers that receive A-
CAM support or other fixed support mechanisms, such as the Alaska Plan,
and the Commission sought comment on this issue in the Administrative
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), 87 FR 36283, June 16, 2022.
 10. Although NTCA and the Alaska Telecom Association (ATA) support
eliminating this requirement, the Commission is not persuaded by their
arguments. Moreover, the Commission has determined that the public
interest benefits of collecting the information--understanding the
efficacy of the model and helping to ensure that support is sufficient
but not excessive--outweigh any burdens.
 11. The Commission concluded in the USF/Intercarrier Compensation
(ICC) Transformation Order, 76 FR 73830, November 29, 2011, that it is
not necessary to require publicly traded companies to submit financial
information because it could obtain such information directly for
Securities and Exchange Commission registrants. At the same time, it
declined to impose such a requirement on privately held price cap
carriers receiving model-based support because the Commission
``expect[ed] that a model developed through a transparent and rigorous
process will produce support levels that are sufficient but not
excessive.''
 12. NTCA argues that A-CAM carriers are similarly ``recipients of
fixed support, which the Commission has already recognized leads them
to being `disciplined by market forces' and which should be the
dispositive factor here.'' However, what the Commission actually stated
was that ``support awarded through competitive processes,'' not model-
based support, ``will be disciplined by market forces.'' And while the
Commission concedes that, as NTCA notes, ``it is not true across the
board'' that recipients of Connect America Fund (CAF) Phase II model-
based support were publicly traded companies, the vast majority were,
and as such their financial information was publicly available. Given
these circumstances, it was sound policy not to require this
information in that context. In contrast, there are many more rate-of-
return carriers receiving A-CAM support, and many more of them are
privately held and, thus, their information is not readily available to
the Commission. The availability of support recipients' financial
information enables the Commission to evaluate whether model-based
support is actually sufficient but not excessive. Moreover, all high-
cost support recipients have an obligation to use such support only for
its intended purpose, and financial information helps the Commission
validate compliance with this requirement. Thus, the Commission finds
that the availability of the financial information of A-CAM carriers
will help it evaluate whether A-CAM produces support levels that are
sufficient but not excessive, and as such, it is important for the
Commission to continue to collect such information.
 13. ATA argues that Alaska Plan carriers' support is ``parallel to
model-based support in that it is frozen at a set level'' and
``intended to be sufficient to support a carrier's performance
obligations, but is not excessive because the support was frozen at a
historic cost-based level which has in effect declined over time as
costs increased.'' However, just because Alaska Plan support is frozen,
does not ensure that the support is not excessive. The Commission finds
that the continued availability of the financial information of Alaska
carriers enables it to evaluate whether Alaska Plan carriers' support
is sufficient but not excessive.
 14. The Commission adopts its proposal to modify its rules to
create a consistent, one-time grace period for all compliance filings
with grace periods. Specifically, the Commission establishes a grace
period that allows filers to submit compliance filings ``within four
business days'' of the relevant due date without risking a finding of
non-compliance for missing the filing deadline. Establishing a uniform
grace period will reduce confusion and is supported by all commenters
who addressed the issue, although WISPA prefers that the grace period
be set at five business days instead of four. The Commission finds that
a four-day grace period is adequate. As the Commission explained in the
Administrative NPRM, it proposed to establish a set grace period to
eliminate confusion. Currently, several Commission rules identify a
specific date, after the due date, by which carriers could file reports
without a support reduction if they had not previously missed a
deadline, while other rules identified the grace period as three or
four days after the filing deadline. The Commission also clarifies that
the due date is day zero, so the day after the due date is day one. For

[[Page 25150]]

example, where a filing is due March 1, recipients must file by the end
of March 5 or be subject to a support reduction. Consistent with the
Commission's Computation of Time rule, if March 5 falls on a weekend or
holiday, the filing must be made by the end of the next business day to
avoid the support reduction. The Commission also clarifies that, by
this rule modification, it is not establishing a new opportunity to
utilize a grace period for carriers that have already taken advantage
of the one-time grace period available to them.
 15. The Commission modifies its rules to adopt uniform deployment,
certification, and location reporting deadlines for all CAF Phase II
auction support recipients (including recipients of support allocated
through New York's New NY Broadband program). In doing so, the
Commission codifies and makes permanent the Bureau's decision to waive
recipient-specific reporting deadlines based on the date of
authorization in favor of uniform reporting deadlines for all of these
recipients, finding that this approach alleviates unnecessary
administrative burdens and better facilitates Commission oversight. Two
commenters support this change, and none oppose it. Accordingly, the
Commission modifies its rules to provide that all CAF Phase II auction
support recipients must comply with deployment milestones by deadlines
occurring at the end of the specified calendar year (rather than the
date the Bureau authorized the support recipient to receive support)
and must meet annual certification and location reporting requirements
(annual deployment report) as of March 1st annually, including
reporting necessary to demonstrate compliance with the prior year
milestone. In addition, the Commission modifies Sec. 54.316(b)(7) of
its rules regarding the certification deadlines for the Bringing Puerto
Rico Together Fund stage 2 fixed program and the Connect USVI Fund
stage 2 fixed program to make explicit the annual March 1st deadline,
as specified in the respective authorization public notices, which
aligns those programs' rules with the rules for other high-cost support
mechanisms.
 16. The Commission declines to amend Sec. 54.316(a) of its rules
to require ETCs receiving high-cost support and subject to defined
deployment obligations to report the ``maximum speeds actually being
offered, advertised, or delivered to customers.'' The Commission agrees
with WISPA and CTIA, the only commenters to weigh in on this proposal,
that such an amendment would result in collection of information
similar to data the Commission already collects through its performance
testing program and in fulfillment of its Broadband Data Collection
(BDC) responsibilities. Through the performance testing program, the
Commission assesses compliance with public service requirements,
including speed and latency standards, by requiring high-cost support
recipients to perform a minimum of one download test and one upload
test per testing hour at a certain number of randomly chosen testing
locations and to report this information to the Commission. Ultimately,
the Commission will use this information to assess performance
throughout the provider's entire supported service area. In addition,
under the BDC, each facilities-based provider of fixed broadband
internet access service must report maximum advertised download and
upload speeds at the location level (with reference to the Broadband
Serviceable Location Data Fabric). For these reasons, the proposed
modification of Sec. 54.316(a) would result in a largely redundant
reporting requirement, and the Commission declines to adopt it.
 17. The Commission adopts its proposal to amend Sec. 54.316(a)(1)
of its rules to more accurately reflect the deployed locations
reporting obligations of support recipients. Currently, this rule
directs ``recipients of high-cost support with defined broadband
deployment obligations'' to ``provide to [USAC] on a recurring basis
information regarding the locations to which the [ETC] is offering
broadband service in satisfaction of its public interest obligations. .
. .'' All filers subject to this requirement have a specific annual
deadline for submitting this information, and the Commission finds that
this section's reference to ``recurring'' filings is superfluous.
Accordingly, the Commission modifies the rule to remove this language.
 18. The Commission modifies its voice and broadband rate
certification rules to clarify the reporting period. Specifically, the
Commission makes explicit that carriers submitting the annual FCC Form
481 are certifying compliance with both the annual voice and broadband
pricing benchmarks adopted in the prior calendar year ending the last
day of December. As explained in the Administrative NPRM, when the
Commission moved the annual FCC Form 481 filing deadline to July 1st,
the Commission moved the date for the relevant voice rates to the rates
in place as of June 1st the year the report was filed, as opposed to
the prior year. Maintaining the rule's unique time period for voice
rate certifications creates unnecessary confusion. Prior to the
adoption of the rate floor provision, all certifications in Form 481
applied to the preceding calendar year, a uniformity to which the
Commission returns with the adoption of this rule modification. For
example, the support recipient submitting a Form 481 on July 1, 2024,
will certify compliance during 2023 with voice and broadband benchmarks
set for the 2023 calendar year (as announced in 2022). The Commission
further updates the rule to reflect that the annual public notice
announcing the benchmarks is issued by the Bureau and Office of
Economics and Analytics.
 19. Relatedly, in its comments, Teleguam Holdings LLC (GTA) asserts
that the Commission should release its reasonable comparability
benchmark rates earlier in the year (or extend the filing deadline for
this certification) in order to allow support recipients sufficient
time to modify their rates. The Commission agrees with GTA that release
of these benchmark rates too close to the year-end can impose on
support recipients, especially smaller companies, significant
administrative burdens in effectuating rate changes at the start of the
applicable year. Therefore, the Commission will endeavor to release
these rates earlier in the year.
 20. The Commission amends Sec. 54.316(a) of its rules to make
clear that it will permit high-cost support recipients to report and
certify locations that should have been reported for a prior reporting
year, even after the reporting deadline for that year, in future annual
deployment reports and to count these locations (hereinafter ``late-
reported locations'') toward their defined deployment obligations. To
ensure that support recipients are motivated to submit complete and
timely annual deployment reports, the Commission adopts a support
reduction mechanism that will apply to all late-reported locations due
to be reported after the effective date of the Order. For the
submission of late-reported locations that should have reported before
the effective date of the Order, the Commission exercises its
discretion to not apply this mechanism.
 21. Under Sec. 54.316(a) of the Commission's rules, support
recipients reporting in the HUBB have a duty to report all qualifying
locations to which the support recipient deployed service during the
relevant reporting period (the prior year) by March 1st, including
locations that, if reported, would result in a carrier exceeding an
interim or final milestone. As explained in the

[[Page 25151]]

Administrative NPRM, there is currently no mechanism by which support
recipients can later submit and certify locations toward satisfaction
of defined deployment obligations if the recipient missed the reporting
deadline for those locations. Creating such a mechanism also better
facilitates compliance with support recipients' general duty under
Sec. 1.17 of the Commission's rules to correct or amend information
reported to the Commission and helps ensure that the Commission may
effectively assess these recipients' progress in deploying service.
 22. In the Administrative NPRM, the Commission proposed a formula
for a support reduction mechanism for late-reported locations that
would take into account the relative due diligence of support
recipients in identifying and reporting locations. Specifically, the
Commission proposed ``a support reduction mechanism where recipients'
support will be reduced for [late-reported] locations based on the
percentage of a recipient's total locations for the reporting year
being reported after the deadline and the number of days after the
deadline.'' The Commission adopts this formula with certain
modifications to address concerns raised by commenters and to balance
accountability with administrative burden.
 23. As an initial matter, the Commission rejects NTCA's argument
that any support reduction is unnecessary because support recipients
are already sufficiently motivated to report and amend their filings to
avoid possible default consequences and to gain the benefits of
demonstrating to the public their deployment efforts. While,
ultimately, support recipients may need to submit late-reported
locations to avoid default, they would have no particular motivation to
do so unless and until default is imminent, absent any consequence for
late reporting. Indeed, acceptance of late-reported locations for the
purpose of counting these locations toward defined deployment
obligations at any time during the deployment period without
consequence would encourage a lackadaisical approach to identifying and
reporting locations on a timely basis and potentially could delay or
disrupt verifications of compliance with milestones. Further, many
support recipients are likely to delay deployment to the most difficult
to serve areas where locations can be more difficult to assess, e.g.,
where newly deployed areas are missing postal addresses. Support
recipients may thus be motivated to delay reporting of certain easily
identifiable locations in other earlier deployed areas in order to
increase the likelihood of passing verification for later milestones,
i.e., by closing the non-compliance gap or increasing the probability
of passing under the statistical measures used in the verification
process. Finally, customers' goodwill toward their service providers is
unlikely to be greatly affected by reporting delays unless the number
of unreported locations is substantial and/or causes a milestone
failure, and therefore, this concern is unlikely to be a significant
factor in motivating support recipients to accurately assess and timely
report or amend their annual deployment reports.
 24. In their comments, GCI Communication Corp. (GCI) and NTCA
object to the use of the support reduction mechanism as proposed in the
Administrative NPRM, asserting that it would result in large
variability in support reductions and have a disproportionately
negative impact on those support recipients with fewer locations to
serve and/or slower deployments at the beginning of their deployment
term. While the Commission acknowledges that carriers with fewer
deployed locations in a given year risk a larger support reduction for
submitting late-reported locations for that year, it also notes that
the time and effort associated with identifying and correctly reporting
deployed locations should generally scale based on the number of
locations deployed in a given year. In other words, as the number of
deployed locations reported in a given year increases, so too do the
burdens on carriers assessing locations and the associated likelihood
of omitting a deployed location. Accordingly, this ratio is a
reasonable measure of the relative due diligence by the reporting
carrier warranting its incorporation in the support reduction formula.
 25. GCI also asserts that ``[t]he penalties for providers who
timely certified their deployed locations and need to add additional
locations should not be worse than the penalties for failure to deploy
on time,'' i.e., a scaled withholding of support during a set time
frame (cure period) during which time the carrier may recover withheld
support upon demonstration of compliance. The Commission rejects GCI's
attempt to analogize late reporting to delayed deployment. The cure
period serves the Commission's overriding interest in maximizing
deployment benefits by providing noncompliant carriers with the time to
come into compliance by continuing to build the network. Carriers that
seek to report late-reported locations do not need a cure period to
provide them with additional time to file the locations. There may be
circumstances where the support recipient has acted in good faith when
deploying its network and reporting locations, only to learn of
reporting errors during the verification process, such as the reporting
of ineligible locations as eligible locations. In these circumstances,
the support recipients may come into compliance by reporting locations
newly deployed within the cure period (without support reduction) and/
or reporting late-reported locations subject to the support withholding
the Commission adopts here. Accordingly, all carriers reporting late-
reported locations, whether they are in the cure period or not, are
similarly situated in terms of support reduction consequences.
 26. The Commission does, however, recognize that in certain
circumstances application of the proposed formula would result in a
significant support reduction that could threaten the ability of the
support recipient to complete deployment, meet performance standards,
and satisfy public interest obligations. The Commission also recognizes
that some limited modification to the withholding formula would produce
greater consistency in the amount of support withheld among support
recipients with similar obligations and receiving similar support
amounts, thus addressing some of GCI's expressed concerns. Accordingly,
the Commission modifies the proposed formula to provide for a maximum
per-day, per-location reduction of seven dollars ($7). The Commission
also caps the duration multiplier at 15 days if the late-reported
locations are filed as of the next reporting deadline after the
locations should have been filed and at 30 days (for each instance of
late reporting) if the late-reported locations are filed at any time
thereafter. Further, the Commission adopts a one-time de minimis
exception from support withholding for late-reported locations deployed
in any single year that are less than five percent of the locations
that were filed in the relevant reporting year. The Commission thus
acknowledges GCI's and NTCA's concerns regarding the likelihood that
carriers will make a minimum number of ``inevitable'' errors in
reporting despite the exercise of due diligence, while also striking an
appropriate balance to ensure that support recipients will make best
efforts to avoid such errors.
 27. Finally, and contrary to the Commission's tentative conclusion
in the Administrative NPRM, it adopts a one-time grace period for
amending an

[[Page 25152]]

annual filing with additional locations consistent with the grace
period afforded support recipients that fail to submit their annual
filing in Sec. 54.316(c)(2)(iii) of its rules. The Commission finds
that such one-time grace period, like that granted for late annual
filings, places a minimum burden on the resources dedicated to program
administration and evaluation of location information while
accommodating the potential for a one-time administrative error. This
is a particularly opportune time for the adoption of this grace period
as carriers have been in the process of assessing their deployed
locations for the mandatory BDC filings. The Commission will apply the
support reduction for the filing of late-reported locations in the next
month immediately following the notice of support reduction to the
eligible telecommunications carrier from USAC or as soon as feasible
thereafter.
 28. To encourage support recipients to complete annual reviews of
already served areas to identify unreported or misreported locations
and to immediately report those locations even if the support recipient
does not perceive such locations as necessary to meet interim
deployment milestones, the Commission will not apply the support
reduction consequence to any locations that were deployed in years
prior to the effective date of this rule change but reported after the
effective date of this rule. The Commission thus dismisses as moot all
pending petitions for waiver to allow such reporting.
 29. In addition, the Commission will not reduce support for late-
reported locations reported after the support recipient has
demonstrated compliance with the final milestone. Reducing support
under these circumstances, where the benefit to carriers of such
reporting is significantly less, would likely result in some support
recipients failing to amend their filings. In addition, after the
conclusion of the deployment period (including any cure period), the
Commission will have a lesser stake in motivating timely reporting of
every deployed location with a support reduction mechanism because such
reporting will not threaten to disrupt verification processes. The
Commission makes clear, however, that its approach to late-reported
locations adopted here is independent of the obligation to amend
filings under Sec. 1.17 of its rules that attaches from the moment of
filing and which could lead to forfeiture consequences, even in the
absence of intentional misreporting and even after the demonstration of
compliance with final deployment requirements. Support recipients have
a continuing obligation to timely amend every annual deployment report
upon discovery of an inaccuracy or omission.
 30. In this document the Commission amends its rules to provide a
simpler process for rate-of-return local exchange carriers (LECs)
seeking to merge, consolidate, or acquire one or more rate-of-return
study areas to calculate the new entity's Access Recovery Charge (ARC),
CAF--Intercarrier Compensation (ICC) support, and reciprocal
compensation and switched access rate caps. The Commission finds that
the rule revisions proposed in the Administrative NPRM will
significantly reduce the administrative burdens on rate-of-return LECs
seeking to increase efficiencies and productivity through these
transactions and provide predictability to carriers considering such
transactions, ultimately benefiting consumers. The limited record
received on the rule revisions proposed in the Administrative NPRM
supports the proposed revisions, with one commenter agreeing that the
proposals ``reflect a practical and effective step forward to
streamline the merger and acquisition process. . . .'' No party opposes
these proposed changes. Accordingly, the Commission now adopts those
proposed changes and revises its rules to eliminate the need for a
rate-of-return LEC that is involved in a merger, consolidation, or
acquisition with another rate-of-return carrier to obtain a waiver of
the applicable intercarrier compensation rules when certain conditions
apply. The Commission also adopts a streamlined process that will apply
in those cases where carriers are still required to seek a waiver of
the Commission's rules.
 31. In the USF/ICC Transformation Order, the Commission capped
rate-of-return carriers' reciprocal compensation and interstate
switched access rates and most intrastate switched access rates at the
rates in effect on December 29, 2011. At the same time, the Commission
adopted a multi-year transition for reducing most terminating switched
access rates to bill-and-keep. As part of these reforms, the Commission
adopted the ARC, which allows rate-of-return carriers to recover from
end-users a portion of the intercarrier compensation revenues lost due
to the Commission's reforms, up to a defined amount (Eligible Recovery)
for each year of the transition. If the projected ARC revenues are not
sufficient to cover the entire Eligible Recovery amount, rate-of-return
carriers may elect to collect the remainder in CAF ICC support.
 32. The calculation of a rate-of-return LEC's Eligible Recovery
begins with its Base Period Revenue. A rate-of-return carrier's Base
Period Revenue is the sum of certain terminating intrastate switched
access revenues and net reciprocal compensation revenues received by
March 31, 2012, for services provided during Fiscal Year (FY) 2011, and
the projected revenue requirement for interstate switched access
services for the 2011-2012 tariff period. A rate-of-return LEC's Base
Period Revenue is calculated only once, but is adjusted during each
step of the intercarrier compensation recovery mechanism calculations
for each year of the transition. Specifically, the Base Period Revenue
for rate-of-return carriers has been reduced by five percent each year,
beginning in 2012, the first year of reform. A rate-of-return carrier's
Eligible Recovery is equal to the adjusted Base Period Revenue for the
year in question, less, for the relevant year of the transition, the
sum of: (1) projected terminating intrastate switched access revenue;
(2) projected interstate switched access revenue; and (3) projected net
reciprocal compensation revenue. Eligible Recovery is also adjusted to
reflect certain demand true-ups.
 33. The Commission's existing rules for calculating Eligible
Recovery do not address the adjustments that are necessary when study
areas are merged after one company acquires all or a portion of
another. Because a carrier's Base Period Revenue and interstate revenue
requirement are study-area-specific, as are a carrier's capped switched
access rates, combining two study areas requires a decision about how
best to combine two different Base Period Revenues and interstate
revenue requirements, and--when the study areas do not have the same
capped rates--a waiver of the Commission's rules to establish the
proper rate levels.
 34. Since the Eligible Recovery rules have taken effect, several
rate-of-return LECs have partially or fully merged study areas or
acquired new study areas. Because the intercarrier compensation and CAF
ICC rules adopted in the USF/ICC Transformation Order do not
contemplate study area changes, these carriers have had to file
petitions for waiver of portions of Sec. 51.917 of the Commission's
rules to reset the applicable Base Period Revenue associated with the
study areas they have merged or acquired. In this line of waiver
orders, the Bureau has permitted carriers to add together the relevant
interstate revenues from FY 2011 of the merging study areas and the
2011-2012 interstate revenue requirement of the merging study areas.
This calculation then creates a combined Base Period

[[Page 25153]]

Revenue which serves as the baseline for calculating the Eligible
Recovery of the company serving the combined study area going forward.
To facilitate mergers for entities that participate in the National
Exchange Carrier Association (NECA) traffic-sensitive tariff, the
Bureau has granted waivers of Sec. 51.909 of the Commission's rules to
allow NECA to place the consolidated study area in the rate bands that
most closely approximate the merged entities' cost characteristics. The
rate for each rate band then becomes the rate cap for the corresponding
rate element in the merged study area.
 35. In the Administrative NPRM, the Commission observed that the
waiver process imposes costs and administrative burdens on rate-of-
return LECs and, in some cases, may delay the closing of transactions.
The Commission determined that rule revisions reflecting the pattern of
outcomes in prior waiver orders would reduce these costs and
administrative burdens by eliminating the need for carriers to obtain
individual waivers when certain conditions apply. No party disputed
these conclusions or identified any issues with the proposed rule
revisions. In fact, the only comments addressing these proposals were
filed by NECA, which agreed that the proposed rule changes would ease
administrative burdens and provide carriers with predictability when
considering mergers and/or acquisitions.
 36. The Commission concludes that adopting the proposed rules will
reduce regulatory costs and burdens, avoid potential delay, and allow
carriers to assess the effects of a proposed transaction more
accurately. For these reasons, the Commission adopts the rule revisions
proposed in the Administrative NPRM and amends the intercarrier
compensation rules in Sec. Sec. 51.917 and 51.909 to address study
area changes resulting from transactions involving rate-of-return
carriers.
 37. Base Period Revenue calculation. The Commission revises Sec.
51.917 to provide guidance on calculating Base Period Revenues for
rate-of-return study areas affected by a transaction, thereby
permitting rate-of-return carriers to adjust their Base Period Revenues
without the need for a waiver. Specifically, the Commission revises
Sec. 51.917 of its rules to provide that when two or more entire rate-
of-return study areas are merged, the LEC shall combine the Base Period
Revenue and interstate revenue requirements of the merging study areas
for purposes of calculating Eligible Recovery. This approach is
supported by NECA and consistent with the approach the Commission has
taken previously in addressing transactions where study areas have
merged. In the case of a partial study area change, the revised rules
provide that rate-of-return LECs shall allocate the Base Period Revenue
and interstate revenue requirement levels of the partial study area
based on the proportion of access lines acquired compared to the total
access lines in the pre-merger study area of the remaining entity.
 38. Setting rate caps. The Commission revises Sec. 51.909 to
establish procedures for setting new rate caps for merging rate-of-
return LECs and adopt a streamlined waiver process if the rates for the
new combined study area would result in the new entity's CAF ICC
support exceeding a certain threshold. Specifically, for carriers that
file their own tariffs, the new rate cap for each rate element shall be
the weighted average of the preexisting rates in each of the affected
study areas. This approach is consistent with precedent and there was
no opposition in the record to this logical and straightforward
approach to establishing new rate caps for merging rate-of-return LECs
that do not participate in NECA tariffs.
 39. For merging rate-of-return LECs that participate in the NECA
traffic-sensitive tariff and that have to establish a single switched
access rate for a rate element, the revised rules provide that the new
consolidated rate, as determined by NECA pursuant to the rate bands in
its traffic-sensitive tariff, shall be the new rate cap if the merged
entity's CAF ICC support will not increase as a result of the merger by
more than two percent above the amount received by the merging entities
prior to the transaction, using the demand and rate data for the
preceding calendar year. In prior orders, the Bureau allowed NECA to
place the consolidated study area in the rate bands that most closely
approximated the merged entities' cost characteristics and NECA worked
cooperatively with the Bureau to ensure that the most accurate rate
bands are used for the merged entities. Under this approach, the rate
for each rate band will become the rate cap for the corresponding rate
element in the merged study area. The Commission expects that NECA will
continue to evaluate the circumstances of each transaction, select the
appropriate rate bands, and coordinate with the Bureau as appropriate.
 40. The Commission proposed a two-percent threshold based on
recently submitted petitions for waiver, which predicted increases
between zero and two percent to CAF ICC as a result of the waiver. No
party objected to this particular threshold or suggested an alternative
one and increases in CAF ICC support of two percent or less will not
materially impact the CAF ICC fund. Thus, the Commission now adopts the
proposed two-percent threshold for carriers participating in the NECA
traffic-sensitive tariff and eliminates the need for a waiver in
circumstances where the CAF ICC increase is at or below two percent.
 41. Streamlined waiver process. The Administrative NPRM also
proposed revised rules that would streamline the waiver process for
NECA tariff participants if the impact of rate banding exceeds the two-
percent threshold. In such circumstances, the revised rules require
carriers to file a petition for waiver specifying the impact of the
merger, acquisition, or consolidation on the new entity's rates and CAF
ICC support. Any petition for waiver should include information such
as: (1) a description of the merging study areas, or portions of study
areas involved; (2) the intrastate and interstate switched access
demand for each rate element; (3) the relevant pre- and post-merger
intrastate and interstate switched access rates for the study areas
involved, as proposed; (4) the relevant pre-and post-merger intrastate
and interstate switched access revenues, including the effects of
interstate switched access revenue pooling, for the study areas
involved; (5) the effect on CAF ICC resulting from the merger; and (6)
a brief statement of the public interest benefits of the merger. The
petition must be submitted for consideration via the Electronic Comment
Filing System and a courtesy copy must be emailed to the Chief, Pricing
Policy Division, Wireline Competition Bureau.
 42. Under the new streamlined process, once the petition for waiver
is filed, the Bureau will release a public notice announcing receipt of
the waiver petition and establishing a 30-day comment period with an
additional 15-day period for replies. If there is no opposition to the
petition, the waiver will be deemed granted on the 60th day after the
release of the public notice, unless the Bureau or the Commission acts
to prevent the ``automatic'' grant. If an opposition is filed, the
petition will no longer be eligible for the streamlined grant process
and will instead be subject to the Commission's rules for waiver
petitions generally. Because no party opposes this proposal or
suggested changes to the proposed process or waiver requirements, the
Commission adopts this streamlined process and delegates to the Bureau
the authority to

[[Page 25154]]

review, analyze, and approve these petitions for waiver.
 43. For the reasons specified in the Administrative NPRM, the
Commission amends Sec. 54.902 of its rules--which governs the amount
of CAF Broadband Loop Support (BLS) a rate-of-return carrier receives
when it acquires exchanges from another incumbent LEC--to better
reflect the current state of the high-cost program. Currently, Sec.
54.902(a) describes how CAF BLS support is calculated when a rate-of-
return carrier acquires exchanges from another rate-of-return carrier,
while Sec. 54.902(b) specifies that in situations where a rate-of-
return carrier acquires exchanges from a price cap carrier, the
acquired exchanges remain subject to the support amounts and
obligations established for frozen and model-based support. The
Commission modifies Sec. 54.902(a) to provide that only transferred
exchanges that are already eligible for CAF BLS would be eligible for
CAF BLS after their transfers. The Commission further modifies Sec.
54.902(b) to provide that any acquired exchanges subject to Sec.
54.902(b) continue to be subject to the support obligations in place at
the time that the exchange is acquired, including obligations
associated with frozen and auction-based support. As explained in the
Administrative NPRM, these modifications are consistent generally with
the rules as originally adopted, when all rate-of-return carriers were
subject to the Interstate Common Line Support mechanism (which was
renamed CAF BLS when modernized by the Commission in 2016), and
consider changes to the high-cost program after the current rule went
into effect: specifically, the creation of a voluntary pathway for
rate-of-return carriers to select model-based support and the
introduction of auction mechanisms permitting rate-of-return carriers
to acquire exchanges from carriers that are not subject to rate-or-
return or price cap regulation.
 44. The Commission modifies the study area boundary process to
require waivers for all study area boundary changes. The Commission
finds that the original purpose of the study area boundary freeze--to
prevent incumbent LECs from establishing separate study areas made up
of only high-cost exchanges to maximize their receipt of high-cost
universal service support--is best served by providing the Wireline
Competition Bureau (WCB) with the opportunity to review such changes.
By requiring waivers for all study area boundary changes, the
Commission eliminates the exceptions adopted in 1996 by the then Common
Carrier Bureau (now the WCB). Requiring all changes in study area
boundaries to be reviewed by the Bureau will ensure that any proposed
changes are not approved until the effects on the Fund are taken into
account.
 45. Since the exceptions to the study area boundary waiver
requirement were adopted in 1996, the Commission has substantially
reformed how universal service support is awarded. Incumbent LECs now
receive support in different ways, including model-based support and
auction support, in addition to traditional rate-of-return regulation
(legacy support). Under the Commission's current rules, when a carrier
that owns multiple study areas within a state wants to merge these
commonly-owned study areas, the carrier is not required to petition the
Commission. However, allowing carriers to merge study areas that
receive support under different mechanisms creates opportunities for
carriers to manipulate the Commission's support. For example, if a
carrier seeks to merge two study areas in a state, one of which
receives legacy rate-of-return support and another that receives model-
based support, it would be difficult for the Commission to determine
which lines in the new study area are entitled to rate-of-return
support, which typically increases as the number of lines increases.
Similarly, such a merger could create confusion regarding tracking
carrier mandatory build-out obligations by changing the areas in which
they must deploy broadband. For example, an A-CAM carrier receives a
fixed amount of support in exchange for deploying broadband to a
specific number of locations based on costs as determined by a model.
If the A-CAM carrier merges its study area with a legacy rate-of-return
study area in the same state owned by the same carrier, it would then
be harder to track the deployment obligations under each program.
 46. In addition, allowing carriers to add unserved areas to their
study areas, even if those areas are not within an existing study area,
could undermine the Commission's goal of distributing universal service
support in the most efficient manner possible. In furtherance of this
objective, the Commission has encouraged the transition to model-based
support and auction-awarded support over traditional rate-of-return
regulation. If rate-of-return carriers can extend their existing study
area into unserved areas, this could result in the use of legacy
support in additional areas when such areas could be served with
broadband more efficiently using model-based or auction-based support.
 47. The Nebraska Public Service Commission, the only party
commenting on this issue, supports a streamlined mechanism for study
area boundary changes, and suggests that any study area changes that
have been previously approved by a state should be eligible for the
streamlined review process. The Commission notes that it already has
adopted a streamlined process to address all study area waiver
petitions in the 2011 USF/ICC Transformation Order, and this
streamlined process would apply to the waiver applications required
here. The process takes into consideration whether the state commission
having regulatory authority over the transferred exchanges does not
object to the transfer, and whether the transfer is in the public
interest. Evaluation of the public interest benefits of a proposed
study area waiver include: (1) the number of lines at issue; (2) the
projected universal service fund cost per line; and (3) whether such a
grant would result in consolidation of study areas that facilitates
reductions in cost by taking advantage of the economies of scale, i.e.,
reduction in cost per line due to the increased number of lines. Under
the streamlined process, once a carrier submits a petition the Bureau
will issue a public notice seeking comment and noting whether the
waiver is appropriate for streamlined treatment. Absent any further
action by the Bureau, if the waiver is subject to streamlined
treatment, it is granted on the 60th day after the reply comment due
date. Alternatively, if the petition requires further analysis and
review, the public notice will state that the petition is not suitable
for streamlined treatment.
 48. Requiring waivers for all study area boundary changes will help
to avoid the issues created by merging study areas receiving different
types of support or the expanded use of less efficient support
methodologies. Requiring changes in study area boundaries to be
reviewed by the Bureau will ensure that any proposed changes are not
approved until the effects on the Fund are taken into account. Because
the Commission has already established a streamlined process for such
waivers, those requests that do not present any support or other
concerns can be swiftly granted, thereby minimizing the burden on those
carriers proposing mergers that promote efficiency and are clearly in
the public interest.
 49. As proposed in the Administrative NPRM, the Commission
eliminates optional quarterly line count reporting for CAF BLS support
recipients, finding that the mandatory annual line count
