Mechanisms of Upper-Extremity Motor Recovery in Post-stroke Hemiparesis
Trial registration: NCT00125658    Lead sponsor: VA Office of Research and Development    Report id: t03
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 14 participants
Conditions studied: Cerebrovascular Accident
Keywords: biomechanics, Cerebrovascular Accident, electromyography, muscular weakness, recovery of function, reflex variability stroke, upper-extremity kinematics
Study start: 2008-02    Primary completion / completion: 2011-09

SUMMARY
The results of this study will provide sound, scientific evidence of physiologic mechanisms responsible for upper-extremity weakness; evidence of the processes involved in neuromuscular adaptation; and will elucidate the relationship between impairment and motor disability in post-stroke hemiparesis.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This proposal extends the work accomplished in our initial study (project #B2405R, 'Effects of Strength Training on Upper-limb Function in Post-stroke Hemiparesis'). In the present study we will conduct a double-blind, randomized clinical trial of staged rehabilitation for the upper-extremity involving sequential delivery of functional therapy and high intensity resistance training. Therefore, this proposal directly compares the effects of functional and resistance training delivered individually. The researchers' previous work investigated a hybrid therapy of functional and resistance training against functional training alone. All subjects will participate in a 5 week run-in period of no treatment. This no-treatment block will afford multiple baseline measurements and, in addition, will provide information regarding the rate and magnitude of any spontaneous recovery without treatment. Following the second baseline measurement, all subjects will be randomized to upper-extremity rehabilitation in either: Order A - 10 weeks of functional task practice training (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of high-intensity resistance training (Power) or Order B - resistance training (Power) followed by FTP. Re-evaluation will occur following each block of treatment,and retention effects will be evaluated after 6 and 12 months with no additional treatment. Subjects will be evaluated with: outcome measures used broadly in Clinical Neurology and Rehabilitation, a battery of biomechanical performance measures including: strength, muscle activation, reflex modulation, and motor coordination, and with kinematics of free reaching movements. The researchers will investigate persons in the intermediate phase of recovery which they define as between 6 and 18 months post-stroke , having completed all inpatient and outpatient therapies, with remaining residual motor deficits.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: CROSSOVER. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: DOUBLE (PARTICIPANT, OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Control (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
FTP: 30 sessions (90 minute sessions, 3 times per week, 10 weeks) followed by POWER: 30 sessions (90 minute sessions, 3 times per week, 10 weeks)
Interventions: Other: Control
Arm: Experimental (EXPERIMENTAL)
POWER: 30 sessions (90 minute sessions, 3 times per week, 10 weeks) followed by FTP: 30 sessions (90 minute sessions, 3 times per week, 10 weeks)
Interventions: Other: Experimental

INTERVENTION DETAIL
OTHER: Control. Following an initial testing session, you will complete a 5 week no training period. At the end of this period you will then participate in a 20 week therapy program - 10 weeks of Functional Task Practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of Power training (dynamic resistance exercise). Each 10 week block has 30 therapy sessions for a total of 60 sessions, each lasting approximately 1-1/2 hours. Follow up evaluations will be scheduled at 6 months and 12 months after completion of the entire 20 week therapy program.
OTHER: Experimental. Following an initial testing session, you will complete a 5 week no training period. At the end of this period you will then participate in a 20 week therapy program - 10 weeks of Power training (dynamic resistance exercise) followed by 10 weeks of Functional Task Practice (FTP). Each 10 week block has 30 therapy sessions for a total of 60 sessions, each lasting approximately 1-1/2 hours. Follow up evaluations will be scheduled at 6 months and 12 months after completion of the entire 20 week therapy program.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: True.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Clinical diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident
* Single event
* Unilateral hemiplegia
* Between 6 months and 18 months post-event
* Impairment of upper-extremity function
* Ability to produce partial range of motion out of plane of gravity at shoulder, elbow, and wrist
* At least 10 degrees of wrist motion (any 10 degrees), and finger flexion/extension in 2 fingers
* Cognitive ability to follow 3-step commands

Exclusion Criteria:

* Unstable or uncontrolled blood pressure
* Uncontrolled seizures
* Flaccid hemiplegia
* Severe cognitive impairment

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Change in Trunk Displacement. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. Distance (in cm) of trunk lean while performing reach-to-grasp. This information is obtained from kinematics/3D motion capture and is used to inform regarding compensatory use of the trunk as compared to active motion of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand, during reach-to-grasp. Change scores are expressed relative to baseline.
Primary endpoint 2: Change in Shoulder Flexion. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. joint range of motion obtained using kinematics / motion capture. Change scores expressed relative to baseline.
Primary endpoint 3: Change in Elbow Extension Range of Motion. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. joint range of motion obtained using kinematics / motion capture. Change scores are expressed relative to baseline.
Primary endpoint 4: Upper-extremity Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. The Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment is a standardized scale used to measure the magnitude of motor impairment (severity) following stroke. There are separate sub-scales for the upper and lower extremities. Here we used the upper-extremity component; the full range of the scale is 0 - 66 points. Higher scores approaching 66 represent better, and lower scores approaching 0 worse, motor function. There is a significant ceiling effect with the FMA, thus a score of 66 points does not mean an individual with stroke has fully recovered. Data are change scores expressed relative to baseline.
Secondary endpoint 1: Movement Speed. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. peak velocity of movement (cm/s) during reach-to-grasp, obtained using kinematics/motion capture. Data are change scores expressed relative to baseline.
Secondary endpoint 2: Movement Accuracy (Reach Path Ratio, RPR). Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. Measure is derived from kinematics/motion analysis. RPR = ratio of actual reach trajectory relative to an idealized straight line. Data are change scores, expressed relative to baseline.
Secondary endpoint 3: Movement Smoothness. Time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks. Movement smoothness is determined by assessing the number of sub movements (i.e., starts and stops) that can be identified during performance of a task. Here the task was reach-to-grasp. Sub movement are identified from kinematics/3D motion analysis. Sub-movements represent discontinuities or "jerky" movements. For example, skilled reaching is smooth and may reveal a single movement unit; in contrast, unskilled movements will reveal multiple movement units (i.e., starts and stops). As a performer practices and learns the movement, the number of sub movements is reduced. Sub movements can also present in persons with pathology. The unit of sub movements is whole numbers, or counts, of the sub movements. Data are change scores, expressed relative to baseline.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Order A (FTP Prior to Power): Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).
Flow group Order B (Power Prior to FTP): Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Order A (FTP Prior to Power): 8; Order B (Power Prior to FTP): 6
  COMPLETED -- Order A (FTP Prior to Power): 8; Order B (Power Prior to FTP): 6
  NOT COMPLETED -- Order A (FTP Prior to Power): 0; Order B (Power Prior to FTP): 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
Baseline group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- Order A: 0; Order B: 0; Total: 0
  Between 18 and 65 years -- Order A: 6; Order B: 4; Total: 10
  >=65 years -- Order A: 2; Order B: 2; Total: 4
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Order A: 56.5 (spread 17.9); Order B: 64.2 (spread 9.8); Total: 59.8 (spread 15)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Order A: 2; Order B: 0; Total: 2
  Male -- Order A: 6; Order B: 6; Total: 12
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6; Total: 14

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Change in Trunk Displacement
Distance (in cm) of trunk lean while performing reach-to-grasp. This information is obtained from kinematics/3D motion capture and is used to inform regarding compensatory use of the trunk as compared to active motion of the shoulder, elbow, wrist, and hand, during reach-to-grasp. Change scores are expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: centimeters, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: 3.79 (spread 0.97); Order B: -3.62 (spread 1.81)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: 0.66 (spread 2.44); Order B: -4.76 (spread 2.82)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: <.001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Primary Comparison (i.e., FTP vs. POWER) Data are reported as change scores, between the end of treatment block 1(10 weeks) and baseline; thus, this analysis directly compares FTP vs. Power. A negative value represents improvement (i.e., reduced trunk displacement) while a positive value represents an increase in compensatory trunk movement.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: .002 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Order effect, testing OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP). Change scores for trunk displacement at the end of both treatment blocks (20 weeks) relative to baseline (e.g., 20 weeks - baseline) were compared between OrderA and OrderB.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Change in Shoulder Flexion
joint range of motion obtained using kinematics / motion capture. Change scores expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: degrees, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: -2.42 (spread 10.44); Order B: 11.88 (spread 7.78)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: -1.61 (spread 10.81); Order B: 10.37 (spread 9.51)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.13 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests effect of FTP vs. Power. The change in shoulder flexion range of motion was compared between baseline and the end of treatment Block 1 (i.e., 10 weeks).
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.048 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Test the effect of treatment order OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP). The change in shoulder flexion range of motion was compared between the end of treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 3: Change in Elbow Extension Range of Motion
joint range of motion obtained using kinematics / motion capture. Change scores are expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: degrees, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: -8.83 (spread 11.3); Order B: 22.52 (spread 20.3)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: -5.62 (spread 11.64); Order B: 26.20 (spread 30.58)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: .004 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Compares FTP vs POWER by comparing the change in elbow extension range of motion between the end of treatment block 1 (10 weeks) and baseline.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.034 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for the effect of treatment order OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP) by comparing the change in elbow extension range of motion between the end of overall treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 4: Upper-extremity Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment
The Fugl-Meyer Motor Assessment is a standardized scale used to measure the magnitude of motor impairment (severity) following stroke. There are separate sub-scales for the upper and lower extremities. Here we used the upper-extremity component; the full range of the scale is 0 - 66 points. Higher scores approaching 66 represent better, and lower scores approaching 0 worse, motor function. There is a significant ceiling effect with the FMA, thus a score of 66 points does not mean an individual with stroke has fully recovered. Data are change scores expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: 7.0 (spread 9.1); Order B: 6.7 (spread 4.4)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: 10.14 (spread 4.34); Order B: 9.00 (spread 5.80)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: Wilcoxon (Mann-Whitney) -- P-value: 0.564 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests the effects of FTP vs. POWER on motor impairment (UE FMA) by comparing the change in FMA between the end of treatment block 1 (10 weeks) and baseline.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: Wilcoxon (Mann-Whitney) -- P-value: 0.948 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for an effect of treatment order (OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP)) by comparing the change in UE FMA between the end of treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Movement Speed
peak velocity of movement (cm/s) during reach-to-grasp, obtained using kinematics/motion capture. Data are change scores expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: cm/s, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: 3.86 (spread 4.21); Order B: -2.67 (spread 6.99)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: 1.46 (spread 7.20); Order B: 7.15 (spread 7.28)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.056 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for differences between FTP vs. POWER by comparing the change in movement speed between the end of treatment block 1 (10 weeks) and baseline.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: .168 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for effect of treatment order (OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP))by comparing the change in movement speed between the end of overall treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Movement Accuracy (Reach Path Ratio, RPR)
Measure is derived from kinematics/motion analysis. RPR = ratio of actual reach trajectory relative to an idealized straight line. Data are change scores, expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: ratio, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: -0.22 (spread 1.70); Order B: -1.82 (spread 1.38)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: -0.85 (spread 1.72); Order B: -1.59 (spread 1.43)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.078 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for differences in FTP vs. POWER by comparing the change in RPR between the end of treatment block 1 (10 weeks) and baseline.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.4 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests the effect of treatment order (Order A (FTP \> POWER) vs. Order B (POWER \> FTP)) by comparing the change in RPR between the end of overall treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Movement Smoothness
Movement smoothness is determined by assessing the number of sub movements (i.e., starts and stops) that can be identified during performance of a task. Here the task was reach-to-grasp. Sub movement are identified from kinematics/3D motion analysis. Sub-movements represent discontinuities or "jerky" movements. For example, skilled reaching is smooth and may reveal a single movement unit; in contrast, unskilled movements will reveal multiple movement units (i.e., starts and stops). As a performer practices and learns the movement, the number of sub movements is reduced. Sub movements can also present in persons with pathology. The unit of sub movements is whole numbers, or counts, of the sub movements. Data are change scores, expressed relative to baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: sub movements, time frame: baseline, 10 weeks, 20 weeks.
  Group Order A: Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Group Order B: Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order A: 8; Order B: 6
  Measured Treatment effect (10 wks) -- Order A: 0.71 (spread 4.43); Order B: -2.79 (spread 1.38)
  Measured Order effect (20 wks) -- Order A: -1.64 (spread 10.81); Order B: -2.71 (spread 2.40)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.085 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for the effect of treatment (FTP vs. POWER) by comparing the change in movement smoothness between the end of treatment block 1 (10 weeks) and baseline.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Order A vs Order B -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.635 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Tests for the effect of treatment order (OrderA (FTP before POWER) vs. OrderB (POWER before FTP)) by comparing the change in movement smoothness between the end of overall treatment (20 weeks) and baseline.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Order A: serious events in 0 of 8 at risk; other events in 0 of 8 at risk. Participants randomized to Order A received 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP) followed by 10 weeks of upper-extremity power training (Power).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.
Safety group Order B: serious events in 0 of 6 at risk; other events in 0 of 6 at risk. Participants randomized to Order B received 10 weeks of upper-extremity Power Training followed by 10 weeks of functional task practice (FTP).

Single, unilateral stroke, \>6 \<26 months post-event.

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
This was a small clinical trial (total n = 14).

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00125658; report t03; lead sponsor VA Office of Research and Development.]
