A Randomized Clinical Comparison of the Intersurgical I-gel and the Laryngeal Mask Airway Unique in Non-Obese Adult Patients During General Surgery
Trial acronym: I-gel
Trial registration: NCT00706823    Lead sponsor: The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston    Report id: t09
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 50 participants
Conditions studied: Endotracheal Intubation, Supraglottic Airway
Keywords: Endotracheal Intubation, Supraglottic Airway
Study start: 2008-02    Primary completion / completion: 2008-08

SUMMARY
The purpose of this study is to evaluate a new disposable supra-glottic airway device, the i-gel airway (Intersurgical Ltd., Wokingham, England). We propose to test its ease of insertion, position within the airway, drain tube patency and anatomic sealing properties during mechanical ventilation in non-obese anesthetized patients undergoing elective general surgery. The study device will be compared to the current standard in the industry, the LMA Unique.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
During the past decade, several pharyngeal airways have been introduced for airway management, such as the Laryngeal Mask Airway (LMA), the Cobra perilaryngeal airway, the Esophageal Tracheal Combitube (ETC), the EasyTube, the Laryngeal Tube6, and the Streamlined Liner of the Pharyngeal Airway (SLIPA). These airway devices have become very popular because of their ability to maintain an airway without perturbing the trachea and can be used in patients without muscle relaxation who are only lightly anesthetized.

The LMA Classic (cLMA) generally provides an adequate airway, but certain problems remain:

1. In 8-33% of LMA placements, more than one attempt is required.
2. It is sometimes difficult to advance the LMA without extending the neck (which is contraindicated in some patients).
3. The device does not protect the airway from aspiration of gastric contents.
4. It does not provide an airtight seal around the larynx (the usual pressures causing leakage of gas being 15-20 cm H20). Consequently, the device may function poorly during positive-pressure ventilation.
5. The esophagus is included within the rim of the LMA in 10-15% of patients, directly exposing the esophagus to positive airway pressures. This often results in insufflation of the stomach and postoperative discomfort.

The LMA Unique (uLMA) is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.

The i-gel (Intersurgical Ltd., Wokingham, England) is a cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device designed to provide a more effective seal than the uLMA, thus eliminating problems 3-5 described above with the addition of a gastric drain. Made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, the i-gel has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick, easy insertion and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff. In a preliminary study, the peak airway pressures were found to be above 30 cm H2O with a sustained leak pressure of 24 cm H2O versus an average of 18-21 cm H2O seen with the cLMA. According to the 100 patient trial, the i-gel is easier to insert, it has better sealing properties and there is no cuffed inflates.

This clinical study has been designed to compare the i-gel and the uLMA, as to ease of placement, ventilation during mechanical ventilation, proper positioning, seal pressures, the patency of the drain tube, and finally, any complications with their use. Fiberoptic observations through each device will provide information in relation to the epiglottis and the distal opening of the device.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: SINGLE (PARTICIPANT).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: i-gel-SGA (EXPERIMENTAL)
Patients who received i-gel supraglottic device (i-gel airway) for intubation
Interventions: Device: i-gel airway (Intersurgical Ltd., Wokingham, England)
Arm: LMA-Unique (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
Patients who received the Laryngeal Mask Airway-Unique (uLMA) for intubation
Interventions: Device: Laryngeal Mask Airway-Unique

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DEVICE: i-gel airway (Intersurgical Ltd., Wokingham, England). supra-glottic airway device
DEVICE: Laryngeal Mask Airway-Unique. supra-glottic airway device

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 80 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: True.
Inclusion Criteria:

1. The subjects will be adult surgical candidates aged 18-80, ASA I-II, Mallampati I or II, presenting for elective surgery who require general anesthesia in whom tracheal intubation is not necessary.
2. Both male and female patients will be included.

Exclusion Criteria:

Patients will be excluded from the study if they present as Mallampati III or IV, ASA III-V or emergency status. Additionally, they will be excluded if they meet one of the contraindication criteria of the LMA including:

1. obesity, (BMI \> 35 kg/m2)
2. pregnancy
3. history of gastric regurgitation, heart burn, ileus or "full stomach"
4. history of low pulmonary compliance or high pulmonary resistance
5. known history of difficult endotracheal intubation or signs suggesting the possibility of difficult intubation
6. pharyngeal pathology
7. upper airway obstruction due to laryngeal pathology

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Time Required for Intubation. Time frame: duration of intubation. The total time to intubation was measured from the beginning of supraglottic airway device (SGA) insertion to successful endotracheal tube intubation, verified by detection of CO2 on the capnogram (anesthesia machine).
Primary endpoint 2: Leak Pressure. Time frame: duration of intubation. After successful placement, airway leak pressure was assessed by closing the circuit to atmosphere and allowing fresh gas flow to build airway pressure. The pressure at which an audible leak was heard was recorded; airway pressure was not permitted to exceed 40 cm H2O.
Secondary endpoint 1: Level of Difficulty for Intubation. Time frame: duration of intubation. Ease of SGA insertion and intubation was subjectively assessed by the operator on a scale from 1 to 5 (1 = very easy, 2 = easy, 3 = neutral, 4 = difficult, 5 = very difficult).
Secondary endpoint 2: Number of Participants With Oropharyngeal Discomfort. Time frame: post operative, immediately and 24 hrs after intubation. Oropharyngeal discomfort was assessed. including sore throat, hoarseness, and dysphagia.
Secondary endpoint 3: Number of Participants With Successful Gastric Drainage Tube Placement as Assessed by Fiberoptic Scope Visualization. Time frame: after intubation. When the fiberoptic scope was placed in the gastirc drain tube of the i-gel, if the esophageal mucosa was visible and the stomach was readily accessible, then placement was considered succussful.
Secondary endpoint 4: Number of Attempts. Time frame: Before intubation. The number of attempts taken to place the device

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
Flow group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  COMPLETED -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  NOT COMPLETED -- I-gel-SGA: 0; LMA-Unique: 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel SGA for intubation
Baseline group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA-Unique for intubation
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- I-gel-SGA: 0; LMA-Unique: 1; Total: 1
  Between 18 and 65 years -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 23; Total: 48
  >=65 years -- I-gel-SGA: 0; LMA-Unique: 1; Total: 1
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- I-gel-SGA: 38.2 (spread 10.5); LMA-Unique: 35.3 (spread 16.6); Total: 37.28 (spread 13.8)
Baseline measure: Gender (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- I-gel-SGA: 9; LMA-Unique: 6; Total: 15
  Male -- I-gel-SGA: 16; LMA-Unique: 19; Total: 35
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25; Total: 50

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Time Required for Intubation
The total time to intubation was measured from the beginning of supraglottic airway device (SGA) insertion to successful endotracheal tube intubation, verified by detection of CO2 on the capnogram (anesthesia machine).
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: seconds, time frame: duration of intubation.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  Measured value -- I-gel-SGA: 21.04 (spread 12.6); LMA-Unique: 30.04 (spread 14.1)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared I-gel-SGA vs LMA-Unique -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.02 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Leak Pressure
After successful placement, airway leak pressure was assessed by closing the circuit to atmosphere and allowing fresh gas flow to build airway pressure. The pressure at which an audible leak was heard was recorded; airway pressure was not permitted to exceed 40 cm H2O.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: cm of H2O, time frame: duration of intubation.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  Measured value -- I-gel-SGA: 23.08 (spread 7.3); LMA-Unique: 20.88 (spread 4.5)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared I-gel-SGA vs LMA-Unique -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.22 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Level of Difficulty for Intubation
Ease of SGA insertion and intubation was subjectively assessed by the operator on a scale from 1 to 5 (1 = very easy, 2 = easy, 3 = neutral, 4 = difficult, 5 = very difficult).
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: duration of intubation.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  Measured Very Easy -- I-gel-SGA: 11; LMA-Unique: 8
  Measured Easy -- I-gel-SGA: 12; LMA-Unique: 17
  Measured Neutral -- I-gel-SGA: 0; LMA-Unique: 0
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared I-gel-SGA vs LMA-Unique -- method: Fisher Exact -- P-value: 0.22 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Number of Participants With Oropharyngeal Discomfort
Oropharyngeal discomfort was assessed. including sore throat, hoarseness, and dysphagia.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: post operative, immediately and 24 hrs after intubation.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  Measured Postop symptoms present -- I-gel-SGA: 6; LMA-Unique: 10
  Measured Postop symptoms absent -- I-gel-SGA: 19; LMA-Unique: 15

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Number of Participants With Successful Gastric Drainage Tube Placement as Assessed by Fiberoptic Scope Visualization
When the fiberoptic scope was placed in the gastirc drain tube of the i-gel, if the esophageal mucosa was visible and the stomach was readily accessible, then placement was considered succussful.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: after intubation.
  Analysis population: Only the -gel has a gastric drainage tube--the uLMA does not. Thus, only those receiving the i-gel were assessed for this measure.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 0
  Measured Esophageal mucosa visible and stomach accessible -- I-gel-SGA: 22
  Measured Upper esophageal sphincter visible -- I-gel-SGA: 2
  Measured Glottis visible -- I-gel-SGA: 1

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Number of Attempts
The number of attempts taken to place the device
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: Before intubation.
  Group I-gel-SGA: Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
  Group LMA-Unique: Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- I-gel-SGA: 25; LMA-Unique: 25
  Measured 1 attempt -- I-gel-SGA: 17; LMA-Unique: 21
  Measured 2 attempts -- I-gel-SGA: 7; LMA-Unique: 3
  Measured 3 attempts -- I-gel-SGA: 1; LMA-Unique: 1
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared I-gel-SGA vs LMA-Unique -- method: Regression, Logistic -- Odds Ratio (OR): 8.11 -- 95% confidence interval 1.1 to 58.6 -- P-value: 0.03 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group I-gel-SGA: serious events in 0 of 25 at risk; other events in 6 of 25 at risk. Patients who received i-gel for intubation. The i-gel is a disposable, cuffless, single-use supraglottic airway device used for airway management. It is similar to the uLMA with the addition of a gastric drain. The i-gel is made of a gel-like thermoplastic elastomer, has an anatomically-designed mask that allows quick and easy insertion, and can accurately position itself over the laryngeal framework to provide a reliable perilaryngeal seal without the need for an inflatable cuff.
Safety group LMA-Unique: serious events in 0 of 25 at risk; other events in 10 of 25 at risk. Patients who received LMA Unique (uLMA) for intubation. The uLMA is a disposable, inflatable supraglottic airway device that is based on the LMA Classic design, which has been used as the "model" in the industry. It has been listed as a commonly accepted device for routine and rescue airway management and is now listed in the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Difficult Airway Management Algorithm as an airway conduit for tracheal intubation.
Other adverse event -- Oropharyngeal discomfort (Surgical and medical procedures): I-gel-SGA: 6/25; LMA-Unique: 10/25

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00706823; report t09; lead sponsor The University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston.]
