Computer Assisted Navigation in Minimally Invasive Total Knee Arthroplasty: Comparing the Alignment Achieved Using the DePuy Ci Minimally Invasive (Mi) Versus the DePuy Non Navigated Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
Trial registration: NCT00733330    Lead sponsor: DePuy International    Report id: t10
Overall status: TERMINATED    Phase: PHASE4    Enrollment: 86 participants
Conditions studied: Osteoarthritis
Keywords: Arthroplasty, Knee, TKA, TKR, CAS, minimally invasive
Study start: 2005-01    Primary completion / completion: 2010-12

SUMMARY
The primary objective of this investigation is to compare the precision of long leg alignment achieved by the two types of procedure. The secondary objectives of this investigation are to:

Compare the accuracy of long leg alignment achieved by the two types of procedure.

Compare the number of optimal implantations achieved by the two types of procedure.

Compare the clinical performance of the knee replacement in subjects who have undergone one of the two types of procedure.

Compare the functional outcome achieved by subjects who have undergone one of the two types of procedure.

Compare the interface radiographic appearance 5 years post-operatively between the two types of procedure.

Compare the accuracy and precision of long leg alignment achieved by the two types of procedure 5 years post-operatively, i.e., at final follow-up and also the change in accuracy and precision between the final follow-up and baseline.

Compare the Adverse Events experienced by the subjects who have undergone the two types of procedure.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Primary endpoint: to compare the precision of the long leg alignment of the Ci MiTKA vs. the non navigated conventional TKA, specifically 3 months to demonstrate the variability of the mechanical axis.

Secondary endpoints: to compare the precision of the long leg alignment of the Ci MiTKA vs. the non navigated conventional TKA specifically to demonstrate the proportion of procedures that fall within a satisfactory alignment window in either group.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NON_RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Conventional TKR arm (OTHER)
Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
Interventions: Device: Either P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. Complete knee replacement using the conventional surgical approach and manual surgical technique
Arm: MiTKR CAS arm (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
Interventions: Device: Either P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. Complete knee replacement using minimally invasive surgical approach and computer navigation

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DEVICE: Either P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. Complete knee replacement using the conventional surgical approach and manual surgical technique. Orthopaedic implants for total knee replacement implanted with a standard approach using standard instrumentation
DEVICE: Either P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. Complete knee replacement using minimally invasive surgical approach and computer navigation. Orthopaedic implants for total knee replacement implanted with a minimally invasive approach and computer navigation

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 80 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Male or female subjects aged between 18 and 80 years inclusive.
* Subjects who require a primary total knee replacement and are considered by the Investigator to be suitable for the specific knee prosthesis identified in the protocol.
* Subjects who are able to give and have given voluntary, written informed consent to participate in this clinical investigation.
* Subjects who have given consent to the transfer of his/her information to DePuy.
* Subjects who, in the opinion of the Clinical Investigator, are able to understand this clinical investigation, co-operate with the investigational procedures and are willing to return to the hospital for all the required post-operative follow-ups.

Exclusion Criteria:

* Subjects who have a pre-operative limb deformity of equal to or greater than 10° varus or 15° valgus as defined using the anatomical axis.
* Subjects who have a fixed flexion contracture of greater than 10º.
* Subjects who are clinically obese i.e. BMI ≥30.
* Subjects who have, in the opinion of the Investigator, an existing condition that would compromise their participation and follow-up in this study.
* Female subjects who are pregnant or lactating.
* Subjects who are known drug or alcohol abusers or have a psychological disorder that could affect follow-up care or treatment outcomes.
* Subjects who have participated in a clinical investigation with an investigational product in the last 3 months.
* Subjects currently involved in any personal injury litigation, medical-legal or worker's compensations claims.
* Subjects who have previously had a prosthetic knee replacement device (any type) of the affected knee.
* Subjects who present with ankylosis of the hip joint on the side to be treated or previous ipsilateral Upper Tibial Osteotomy/High Tibial Osteotomy.
* Subjects who require simultaneous bilateral total knee replacements.
* Subjects who have had a contralateral TKA performed less than six months before the proposed TKA.
* Subjects who have had a contralateral TKA and that knee was previously entered in the study.
* Subjects who, in the opinion of the surgeon, will require a contralateral TKA within 6 months of the index procedure.
* Subjects in whom the surgeon intends to implant a knee component that is not one of those listed in Table 1.
* Subjects who have inflammatory arthritis.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: To Compare the Precision of the Long Leg Alignment Between the Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 6 - 12 Weeks. Alignment will be measured on long leg weight bearing X-rays performed when the subject has full leg extension (+/-5 degrees)
Secondary endpoint 1: To Compare the Proportion of Procedures That Fall Within a Satisfactory Alignment Window Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: operative. An independent radiographic observer will determine and record alignment.
Secondary endpoint 2: To Compare the Number of Optimal Implantations Achieved From Pre-op to 6-12 Weeks Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 4 - 12 Weeks. Achieved alignment results will be measured on post-op X-rays taken at the time the subject has achieved full extension.
Secondary endpoint 3: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: Pre-op. American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
Secondary endpoint 4: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 4 Weeks. The American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
Secondary endpoint 5: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 8 Weeks. American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
Secondary endpoint 6: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 12 Weeks. American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
Secondary endpoint 7: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 6 Months. American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
Secondary endpoint 8: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.. Time frame: 1 year. American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group MiTKR CAS Arm: Either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. using minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
Flow group Conventional TKR Arm: Either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 32; Conventional TKR Arm: 52
  COMPLETED -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 30; Conventional TKR Arm: 48
  NOT COMPLETED -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 2; Conventional TKR Arm: 4

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
Baseline group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
86 subjects were enrolled, but 2 were intraoperatively excluded and did not receive surgery. Gender data is unavailable on one MiTKR subject.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 66.2 (spread 6.3); Conventional TKR Arm: 65.5 (spread 8.8); Total: 65.8 (spread 7.9)
Baseline measure: Gender (NUMBER, participants)
  Female -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 18; Conventional TKR Arm: 31; Total: 49
  Male -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 13; Conventional TKR Arm: 21; Total: 34
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 16; Conventional TKR Arm: 26; Total: 42
  Australia -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 9; Conventional TKR Arm: 12; Total: 21
  New Zealand -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 7; Conventional TKR Arm: 14; Total: 21

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: To Compare the Precision of the Long Leg Alignment Between the Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
Alignment will be measured on long leg weight bearing X-rays performed when the subject has full leg extension (+/-5 degrees)
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: 6 - 12 Weeks.
  Analysis population: The study was terminated before completion due to business purposes, therefore no radiographs were analyzed.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 0; Conventional TKR Arm: 0

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: To Compare the Proportion of Procedures That Fall Within a Satisfactory Alignment Window Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
An independent radiographic observer will determine and record alignment.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: operative.
  Analysis population: The study was terminated before completion due to business purposes, therefore no radiographs were analyzed and there are no results for this outcome.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 0; Conventional TKR Arm: 0

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: To Compare the Number of Optimal Implantations Achieved From Pre-op to 6-12 Weeks Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
Achieved alignment results will be measured on post-op X-rays taken at the time the subject has achieved full extension.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: 4 - 12 Weeks.
  Analysis population: The study was terminated before completion due to business purposes, therefore no radiographs were analyzed and there are no results for this outcome.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 0; Conventional TKR Arm: 0

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: Pre-op.
  Analysis population: Of the 84 subjects who received surgery, there were 3 missing outcomes for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 31; Conventional TKR Arm: 50
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 54.1 (spread 16); Conventional TKR Arm: 45.3 (spread 13.8)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
The American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: 4 Weeks.
  Analysis population: There were 19 missing outcomes and 1 consent withdrawal for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 20; Conventional TKR Arm: 44
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 63.8 (spread 19.5); Conventional TKR Arm: 66.3 (spread 16.6)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: 8 Weeks.
  Analysis population: There were 19 missing outcomes, 1 consent withdrawal, 1 Lost to Follow Up and 1 protocol violation for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 20; Conventional TKR Arm: 42
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 78.8 (spread 16.8); Conventional TKR Arm: 77.5 (spread 15.6)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: 12 Weeks.
  Analysis population: There were 32 missing outcomes, 1 consent withdrawal, 2 Lost to Follow Up and 1 protocol violation for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 13; Conventional TKR Arm: 35
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 85.5 (spread 17.5); Conventional TKR Arm: 80.9 (spread 15.1)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: 6 Months.
  Analysis population: There were 10 missing outcomes, 1 consent withdrawal, 2 Lost to Follow Up and 1 protocol violation for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. knees in chronological order into the CAS group which will use minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Patients to receive treatment with either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 22; Conventional TKR Arm: 48
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 83.3 (spread 18.2); Conventional TKR Arm: 84.6 (spread 15.1)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: To Compare American Knee Society Knee Score Between Subjects Who Have Undergone Minimally Invasive vs. Conventional Total Knee Arthroplasty.
American Knee Society (AKS) knee score is a 0-100 point score (where 100 indicates excellent knee condition) that evaluates the affected knee. The knee score is composed of Pain, Range of Motion, and Stability.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: points, time frame: 1 year.
  Analysis population: There were 22 missing outcomes, 1 consent withdrawal, 2 Lost to Follow Up, and 3 protocol violations for this endpoint.
  Group MiTKR CAS Arm: Either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. using minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
  Group Conventional TKR Arm: Either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 17; Conventional TKR Arm: 39
  Measured value -- MiTKR CAS Arm: 86.5 (spread 13.4); Conventional TKR Arm: 89.6 (spread 11.5)

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
Safety group MiTKR CAS Arm: serious events in 2 of 32 at risk; other events in 4 of 32 at risk. Either a P.F.C. or L.C.S. using minimally invasive surgery and computer navigation
Safety group Conventional TKR Arm: serious events in 9 of 52 at risk; other events in 7 of 52 at risk. Either a P.F.C. Sigma or L.C.S. knee using the conventional manual surgical technique
Serious adverse event -- Nervous System Disorder (Nervous system disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Arthralgia (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 5/52
Serious adverse event -- Chest Pain (General disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Confusional State (Psychiatric disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Fall (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Haemarthrosis (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Joint Injury (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Joint Swelling (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Knee Arthroplasty (Surgical and medical procedures): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 2/52
Serious adverse event -- Laceration (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Ligament Rupture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Myalgia (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Post Procedural Haematoma (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Postoperative Wound Infection (Infections and infestations): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Pulmonary Embolism (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Rotator Cuff Syndrome (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Thrombosis (Vascular disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 1/52
Serious adverse event -- Cellulitis (Infections and infestations): MiTKR CAS Arm: 1/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 0/52
Other adverse event -- Arthralgia (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 2/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 4/52
Other adverse event -- Joint Swelling (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 3/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 3/52
Other adverse event -- Pain (General disorders): MiTKR CAS Arm: 0/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 3/52
Other adverse event -- Joint Injury (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): MiTKR CAS Arm: 3/32; Conventional TKR Arm: 0/52

REASON THE TRIAL STOPPED EARLY
A sample size recalculation indicated an increase from 154 to 1500 subjects was required so the study stopped as new target was considered unfeasible.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00733330; report t10; lead sponsor DePuy International.]
