Implantation of the Medtronic Melody Transcatheter Pulmonary Valve in Patients With Dysfunctional Right Ventricular Outflow Tract (RVOT) Conduits: A Feasibility Study
Trial registration: NCT00740870    Lead sponsor: Medtronic Cardiovascular    Report id: t11
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 171 participants
Conditions studied: Congenital Heart Defects, Dysfunctional Right Ventricular Outflow Tract Conduits
Study start: 2007-01    Primary completion / completion: 2020-08-21

SUMMARY
The primary objective is to confirm the long-term functionality of implantation of the Medtronic Melody TPV at 5 years is no worse than the historical control established through literature review. The secondary objectives are to evaluate long-term functionality at 10 years and to assess safety, procedural success, and clinical utility of transcatheter implantation of the Melody TPV.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
The primary objective is to confirm the long-term functionality of implantation of the Medtronic Melody TPV at 5 years is no worse than the historical control established through literature review. The secondary objectives is to evaluate long-term functionality at 10 years and to assess safety, procedural success, and clinical utility of transcatheter implantation of the Melody TPV.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Melody TPV Implant (EXPERIMENTAL)
Melody Transcatheter Pulmonary Valve implanted into a dysfunctional RVOT Conduit.
Interventions: Device: Transcatheter Pulmonary Valve replacement

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DEVICE: Transcatheter Pulmonary Valve replacement. Transcatheter valve implantation into a RVOT conduit in patients with complex congenital heart defects where the conduit has become dysfunctional and where the patient needs invasive intervention.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 5 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Age greater than or equal to 5 years of age
* Weight greater than or equal to 30 kilograms
* Existence of a full (circumferential) RVOT conduit that was equal to or greater than 16 mm in diameter when originally implanted, or a stented bioprosthesis with a rigid circumferential sewing ring in the RVOT that has an internal diameter greater than or equal to 18 mm and less than or equal to 22 mm when originally implanted.
* Any of the following by transthoracic echocardiography:
* For patients in New York Heart Association (NYHA) Classification II, III, or IV: Moderate (3+) or severe (4+) pulmonary regurgitation AND/OR Mean RVOT gradient greater than or equal to 35 mmHg
* For patients in NYHA Classification I:Severe (4+) pulmonary regurgitation with RV dilatation or dysfunction AND/OR Mean RVOT gradient greater or equal to 40 mmHg

Exclusion Criteria:

* Active endocarditis
* Major or progressive non-cardiac disease (liver failure, renal failure, cancer)that has a life expectancy of less than one year
* Patient or guardian unwilling or unable to provide written informed consent or comply with follow-up requirements
* Obstruction of the central veins (including the superior and inferior vena cava, bilateral iliac veins) such that the delivery system cannot be advanced to the heart via transvenous approach from either femoral vein or internal jugular vein
* Positive urine or serum pregnancy test 24 hours prior to procedure in female patients of child bearing potential
* Known intravenous drug abuse

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From TPV Dysfunction. Time frame: 5 years. To assess whether long-term functionality of implantation of the Medtronic Melody TPV at 5 years is no worse than the historical control established through literature review. This study is designed to test the null hypothesis that the true freedom from TPV dysfunction at 5 years after Melody implantation (PMelody) is less than or equal to 36% (PControl). To reject the null hypothesis means that freedom from TPV dysfunction at 5 years after Melody implantation (PMelody) is greater than 36% (PControl). The null (H0) and alternative (HA) hypotheses are written as follows:H0: PMelody ≤ PControl and HA: PMelody \> PControl. TPV dysfunction is a composite outcome defined as the following:

* Hemodynamic dysfunction of the TPV

 * Moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation, and/or
 * Mean Right Ventricular Outflow Tract (RVOT) gradient greater than 40 mmHg
* RVOT reoperation for conduit dysfunction or device-related reasons
* Catheter re-intervention on the TPV
Secondary endpoint 1: Freedom From TPV Dysfunction at 10 Years. Time frame: 10 years. The outcome measure for this objective is TPV dysfunction, which is a composite outcome defined as RVOT reoperation for conduit dysfunction or device-related reasons, catheter re-intervention on the TPV, or hemodynamic dysfunction of the TPV (moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation, and/or a mean RVOT gradient greater than 40 mmHg).
Secondary endpoint 2: Procedural Success. Time frame: Within 24 Hours post implant. Procedural success is a composite outcome defined as:

* Melody TPV fixated within the desired location
* Right Ventricle (RV) - Pulmonary Artery (PA) peak-to-peak gradient (measured in the catheterization lab) less than 35 mmHg post-implant
* Less than mild pulmonary regurgitation by angiography post-implant
* Free of explant at 24 hours post-implant
Secondary endpoint 3: Serious Procedural Adverse Event (AE). Time frame: 5 years. A procedure-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the implant procedure by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the implant procedure (e.g. rupture of the conduit or damage to an intra-cardiac or intravascular structure by the delivery system).
Secondary endpoint 4: Serious Procedural Adverse Event (AE). Time frame: 10 years. A procedure-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the implant procedure by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the implant procedure (e.g. rupture of the conduit or damage to an intra-cardiac or intravascular structure by the delivery system).
Secondary endpoint 5: Serious Device-related Adverse Event. Time frame: 5 years. A device-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the TPV by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the the TPV (e.g. embolization of the TPV and any adverse events which follow).
Secondary endpoint 6: Serious Device-related Adverse Event. Time frame: 10 years. A device-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the TPV by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the the TPV (e.g. embolization of the TPV and any adverse events which follow).
Secondary endpoint 7: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From Major Stent Fracture at 5 Years. Time frame: 5 years. Major stent fracture is defined as a stent fracture requiring intervention to prevent permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure.
Secondary endpoint 8: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From Major Stent Fracture at 10 Years. Time frame: 10 years. Major stent fracture is defined as a stent fracture requiring intervention to prevent permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Enrolled: All subjects enrolled (n=171)
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Enrolled: 171
  COMPLETED -- Enrolled: 150
  NOT COMPLETED -- Enrolled: 21
  Withdrawn -- Not Catheterized: Enrolled: 4
  Withdrawn -- Further testing contraindicated implant: Enrolled: 17

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Enrolled Cohort: All subjects enrolled
All stubjects enrolled
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Enrolled Cohort: 21.8 (spread 9.8)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Enrolled Cohort: 64
  Male -- Enrolled Cohort: 107
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- Enrolled Cohort: 171

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From TPV Dysfunction
To assess whether long-term functionality of implantation of the Medtronic Melody TPV at 5 years is no worse than the historical control established through literature review. This study is designed to test the null hypothesis that the true freedom from TPV dysfunction at 5 years after Melody implantation (PMelody) is less than or equal to 36% (PControl). To reject the null hypothesis means that freedom from TPV dysfunction at 5 years after Melody implantation (PMelody) is greater than 36% (PControl). The null (H0) and alternative (HA) hypotheses are written as follows:H0: PMelody ≤ PControl and HA: PMelody \> PControl. TPV dysfunction is a composite outcome defined as the following:

* Hemodynamic dysfunction of the TPV

 * Moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation, and/or
 * Mean Right Ventricular Outflow Tract (RVOT) gradient greater than 40 mmHg
* RVOT reoperation for conduit dysfunction or device-related reasons
* Catheter re-intervention on the TPV
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: 5 years.
  Analysis population: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Group Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 149
  Measured value -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 72.9 [64.4 to 79.6]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Implanted >24 Hour Cohort -- method: Z test -- Kaplan-Meier Rate: 74.2 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Freedom From TPV Dysfunction at 10 Years
The outcome measure for this objective is TPV dysfunction, which is a composite outcome defined as RVOT reoperation for conduit dysfunction or device-related reasons, catheter re-intervention on the TPV, or hemodynamic dysfunction of the TPV (moderate or greater pulmonary regurgitation, and/or a mean RVOT gradient greater than 40 mmHg).
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of subjects, time frame: 10 years.
  Group Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 149
  Measured value -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 52.9 [39.7 to 64.5]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Procedural Success
Procedural success is a composite outcome defined as:

* Melody TPV fixated within the desired location
* Right Ventricle (RV) - Pulmonary Artery (PA) peak-to-peak gradient (measured in the catheterization lab) less than 35 mmHg post-implant
* Less than mild pulmonary regurgitation by angiography post-implant
* Free of explant at 24 hours post-implant
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: Within 24 Hours post implant.
  Analysis population: The attempted implant cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV implantation was attempted (Melody TPV valve opened).
  Group Attempted Implant Cohort: The attempted implant cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV implantation was attempted (Melody TPV valve opened).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Attempted Implant Cohort: 150
  Measured value -- Attempted Implant Cohort: 94.7

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Serious Procedural Adverse Event (AE)
A procedure-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the implant procedure by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the implant procedure (e.g. rupture of the conduit or damage to an intra-cardiac or intravascular structure by the delivery system).
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: Percent of subjects, time frame: 5 years.
  Analysis population: The catheterized cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization for possible implantation of the Melody TPV.
  Group Catheterized Cohort: The catheterized cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization for possible implantation of the Melody TPV.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Catheterized Cohort: 167
  Measured value -- Catheterized Cohort: 12.6

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Serious Procedural Adverse Event (AE)
A procedure-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the implant procedure by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the implant procedure (e.g. rupture of the conduit or damage to an intra-cardiac or intravascular structure by the delivery system).
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: 10 years.
  Analysis population: The catheterized cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization for possible implantation of the Melody TPV.
  Group Catheterized Cohort: The catheterized cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization for possible implantation of the Melody TPV.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Catheterized Cohort: 167
  Measured value -- Catheterized Cohort: 13.2

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Serious Device-related Adverse Event
A device-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the TPV by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the the TPV (e.g. embolization of the TPV and any adverse events which follow).
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: Percentage of subjects, time frame: 5 years.
  Analysis population: The implanted cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV was implanted.
  Group Implanted Cohort: The implanted cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV was implanted.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted Cohort: 150
  Measured value -- Implanted Cohort: 28

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Serious Device-related Adverse Event
A device-related event is defined as an event that is associated with the TPV by the chronology or physiology and was caused by the the TPV (e.g. embolization of the TPV and any adverse events which follow).
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: 10 years.
  Analysis population: The implanted cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV was implanted.
  Group Implanted Cohort: The implanted cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization and a Melody TPV was implanted.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted Cohort: 150
  Measured value -- Implanted Cohort: 41.3

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From Major Stent Fracture at 5 Years
Major stent fracture is defined as a stent fracture requiring intervention to prevent permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: 5 years.
  Analysis population: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Group Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 149
  Measured value -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 84.3 [72.8 to 91.2]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Kaplan-Meier Freedom From Major Stent Fracture at 10 Years
Major stent fracture is defined as a stent fracture requiring intervention to prevent permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body structure.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of subjects, time frame: 10 years.
  Analysis population: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Group Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: The Implanted \>24 hours cohort consists of all subjects who had a Melody TPV implanted which remained implanted for greater than 24 hours.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 149
  Measured value -- Implanted >24 Hour Cohort: 83.7 [69.8 to 91.6]

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
Any undesirable clinical occurrence or untoward deviation in health from the patient's baseline condition at the time of consent. Clinically significant worsening of a baseline condition requiring a new intervention, Deterioration of primary disease, Intercurrent illness, AEs related or possibly related to the implant that are greater in intensity and require different clinical intervention than normally required, and Abnormal findings on diagnostic tests not present at the onset of the study.
Safety group Catheterized Cohort: serious events in 106 of 167 at risk; other events in 112 of 167 at risk. The catheterized cohort consists of all subjects who underwent catheterization for possible implantation of the Melody TPV.
Serious adverse event -- Thrombocytopenia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 1/167
Serious adverse event -- Aortic Regurgitation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 3/167
Serious adverse event -- Arrhythmia (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 2/167
Serious adverse event -- Atrial Fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 2/167
Serious adverse event -- Atrial Flutter (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 9/167
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac Arrest (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 4/167
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac Disorder (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 11/167
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac Tamponade (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 1/167
Serious adverse event -- Complete Heart Block (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 3/167
Serious adverse event -- Congestive Heart Failure (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 4/167
Serious adverse event -- Intracardiac Mass (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 1/167
Serious adverse event -- Premature Ventricular Ectopic Beats (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 2/167
Serious adverse event -- Pulmonary Valve Disease (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 2/167
Serious adverse event -- Pulmonary Valve Regurgitation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 3/167
Serious adverse event -- Pulmonary Valve Stenosis (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 33/167
Serious adverse event -- Supraventricular Tachycardia (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 1/167
Serious adverse event -- Tricuspid Regurgitation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 5/167
Serious adverse event -- Ventricular Fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 2/167
Other adverse event -- Hemolysis (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 9/167
Other adverse event -- Arrhythmia (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 10/167
Other adverse event -- Cardiac Disorder (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 16/167
Other adverse event -- Palpitations (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 16/167
Other adverse event -- Tricuspid Regurgitation (Cardiac disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 12/167
Other adverse event -- Gastrointestinal Disorder (Gastrointestinal disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 9/167
Other adverse event -- Other Events (General disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 35/167
Other adverse event -- Chest Pain (General disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 17/167
Other adverse event -- Stent Strut Fracture (General disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 51/167
Other adverse event -- Infection (Infections and infestations): Catheterized Cohort: 9/167
Other adverse event -- Central Nervous System Disorder (Nervous system disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 9/167
Other adverse event -- Headache (Nervous system disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 11/167
Other adverse event -- Renal Disorder (Renal and urinary disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 14/167
Other adverse event -- Respiratory Disorder (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Catheterized Cohort: 16/167

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00740870; report t11; lead sponsor Medtronic Cardiovascular.]
