Two-week Study to Determine and Compare the Tolerance and Irritation Potential of Clindamycin and Benzoyl Peroxide to Dapsone Gel Topical Acne Medications
Trial registration: NCT00964366    Lead sponsor: Stiefel, a GSK Company    Report id: t14
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE4    Enrollment: 53 participants
Conditions studied: Acne Vulgaris
Study start: 2009-07    Primary completion / completion: 2009-08
Collaborators: GlaxoSmithKline

SUMMARY
This is a randomized, half-face study. On 1 side of the face, the subject will apply 1 of the 2 test products, clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide or dapsone gel and the contra lateral side of the face will remain non-treated to serve as a control.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This is a single-blind (blinded expert grader), parallel group, randomized, half-face study being conducted at one clinical site. On 1 side of the face, the subject will apply 1 of the 2 test products, clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide or dapsone gel and the contra lateral side of the face will remain non-treated to serve as a control. Approximately 25-30 male and female healthy subjects without facial acne, aged 18 to 45, will be randomly assigned to each product.

The eligible subjects who qualify will be entered into a 2-week treatment phase. The first of application of the study medication will be supervised at the site, Monday through Friday of each week. Any additional applications should be applied by the subjects at home each evening and the times of application recorded on a diary card. Subjects will apply the study product at home on Saturdays and Sundays and record the times of application on a diary card.

A blinded expert grader will rate comparative product tolerance during the study before study product is applied.

Instrumentation measurements of TEWL will be utilized to evaluate product mildness.

Duplicate sebum samples will be taken from the left and right forehead areas and assessed.

Subject will complete questionnaires and all adverse events will be recorded.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: SINGLE (OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Clindamycin/BPO gel (EXPERIMENTAL)
Once-daily applications of clindamycin/BPO gel to the randomized side of the face either left or right.
Interventions: Drug: clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide
Arm: Dapsone gel (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one side of the face.
Interventions: Drug: Dapsone gel

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide. Daily applications, to the randomized side of the face either left or right, of clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide
DRUG: Dapsone gel. Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 45 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: True.
Inclusion Criteria: * Capable of understanding and willing to provide signed and dated written voluntary informed consent (and any local or national authorization requirements) before any protocol specific procedures are performed. * Male and female subjects aged from 18 to 45 years at time of consent. * Has a Fitzpatrick Skin Type of I, II, or III. * Is willing to discontinue use of all facial products (other than the cleanser provided and makeup or razor and facial shave product) on the face for the 3 days before their baseline/day 0 visit and use only the provided facial products and their normal makeup or razor and facial shaving product for the duration of the study. * Is willing to not change brands of makeup or razor and facial shave product during the study. * Is willing to refrain from using any facial product on the face other than study products and their normal makeup or razor and facial shave product for the duration of the study. * Is willing to refrain from exercising prior to their instrument appointments. * Is willing to refrain from showering or drinking caffeinated beverages within 1 hour prior to their instrument visits. * Is willing to report to the site for each visit with a clean face and no makeup. * Is willing to avoid sunburn, tanning, tanning beds or other excessive sun exposure. Understands that if their skin tone changes significantly during the study it will be necessary to discontinue their participation. * Able to complete the study and to comply with study instructions. * Sexually active females of childbearing potential participating in the study must agree to use a medically acceptable method of contraception while receiving protocol-assigned product. A woman of childbearing potential is defined as one who is biologically capable of becoming pregnant; including perimenopausal women who are less than 2 years from their last menses. Exclusion Criteria: * Female subjects who are pregnant, trying to become pregnant, or breast feeding. * Male subjects that have facial beards (mustache and/or goatee is acceptable). * Is a Type I diabetic. * Has active or chronic skin allergies. * Has a history of acute or chronic disease that might interfere with, or increase the risk of study participation. * Has participated in other facial studies in the preceding 30 days or other clinical studies in preceding 14 days. * Had skin cancer treatment in preceding 12 months. * Has damaged skin on facial areas (eg, from sunburn, tattoos, scars). * Had any medical procedure ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Skin Erythema (Redness). Time frame: 2 Weeks. Assessment of erythema as part of an evaluation of tolerance of two treatments: clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide or dapsone gel. This was done by visual assessment by an independent blinded grader using the grading scale shown below.

Grade Description 0 None 2 Mild erythema 4 Moderate confluent erythema 6 Marked erythema with some edema 8 Marked erythema, edema, possible erosion
Primary endpoint 2: Skin Dryness. Time frame: Baseline, Day 1through Day 14. The amount of dryness on the left and right cheek of each panelist.

The scale used to evaluate skin dryness is:

Grade Description 0 None 2 Slight flaking 4 Moderate flaking/scaling 6 Marked scaling / slight fissuring 8 Severe scaling, fissuring

Expert Grader assessments of dryness were taken prior to product application on Days 0, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13 and 14.
Secondary endpoint 1: Transepidermal Water Loss (TEWL). Time frame: 2 Weeks. To assess skin moisture and hydration using transepidermal water loss (TEWL). These tables record the data obtained for each panelist at Baseline, and on Days 3, 7 and 14 or upon early termination of site(s), if applicable. Results are measured on a continuous scale.
Secondary endpoint 2: Sebum Measurements. Time frame: 2 weeks. To sample the skin surface, the sebum collector strips are applied to the skin sites for 10 seconds. Once removed, these samples will be immediately measured for the amount of sebum on the strip using the tape analyzer. The amount of sebum production was measured as the amount of sebum collected on a tape applied to the skin for 10 seconds and then converted to 1 of 10 incremental levels. Sebum production was measured in increments of 0 (minimum value) to 10 (maximum value). The higher the number, the greater amount of sebum produced.
Secondary endpoint 3: Skin Hydration. Time frame: 2 weeks. Evaluation of Skin Hydration using electrical conductance measurements,on weekdays during 14 days of treatment. The value recorded which is expressed in units of microsiemens represents the AC conductance 2-3 seconds after placing the spring-loaded probe tip to the sample site.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Flow group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 28; Dapsone Gel: 25
  COMPLETED -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 24
  NOT COMPLETED -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1; Dapsone Gel: 1
  Withdrawn -- Did not qualify at Day 1: Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1; Dapsone Gel: 0
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 0; Dapsone Gel: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Baseline group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 2; Dapsone Gel: 1; Total: 3
  Between 18 and 65 years -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 26; Dapsone Gel: 24; Total: 50
  >=65 years -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 0; Dapsone Gel: 0; Total: 0
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 21; Dapsone Gel: 22; Total: 43
  Male -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 7; Dapsone Gel: 3; Total: 10
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 28; Dapsone Gel: 25; Total: 53

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Skin Erythema (Redness)
Assessment of erythema as part of an evaluation of tolerance of two treatments: clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide or dapsone gel. This was done by visual assessment by an independent blinded grader using the grading scale shown below.

Grade Description 0 None 2 Mild erythema 4 Moderate confluent erythema 6 Marked erythema with some edema 8 Marked erythema, edema, possible erosion
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Units on a scale, time frame: 2 Weeks.
  Analysis population: ITT
  Group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 25
  Measured Baseline -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1.06 (spread 0.79); Dapsone Gel: 1.18 (spread 0.63)
  Measured Day 1 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1.26 (spread .76); Dapsone Gel: 1.34 (spread .81)
  Measured Day 2 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1.55 (spread .84); Dapsone Gel: 1.33 (spread .85)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Clindamycin and BPO Gel vs Dapsone Gel -- method: Dunn's Multiple Comparisons Test -- P-value: > 0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Skin Dryness
The amount of dryness on the left and right cheek of each panelist.

The scale used to evaluate skin dryness is:

Grade Description 0 None 2 Slight flaking 4 Moderate flaking/scaling 6 Marked scaling / slight fissuring 8 Severe scaling, fissuring

Expert Grader assessments of dryness were taken prior to product application on Days 0, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 13 and 14.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Units on a scale, time frame: Baseline, Day 1through Day 14.
  Analysis population: ITT
  Group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 25
  Measured Baseline -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 0.11 (spread 0.32); Dapsone Gel: 0.12 (spread 0.33)
  Measured Day 1 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 0.04 (spread 0.05); Dapsone Gel: 0.28 (spread 0.71)
  Measured Day 2 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 0.10 (spread 0.26); Dapsone Gel: 0.23 (spread 0.57)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Clindamycin and BPO Gel vs Dapsone Gel -- method: Dunn's Multiple Comparisons Test -- P-value: < 0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    Dapsone versus Clindamycin/BPO gel.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Transepidermal Water Loss (TEWL)
To assess skin moisture and hydration using transepidermal water loss (TEWL). These tables record the data obtained for each panelist at Baseline, and on Days 3, 7 and 14 or upon early termination of site(s), if applicable. Results are measured on a continuous scale.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: TEWL rates (gm/m2/hr), time frame: 2 Weeks.
  Group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 25
  Measured Baseline -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 10.29 (spread 3.06); Dapsone Gel: 10.4 (spread 2.93)
  Measured Day 3 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 12.34 (spread 4.80); Dapsone Gel: 11.21 (spread 3.26)
  Measured Day 7 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 14.39 (spread 3.73); Dapsone Gel: 11.53 (spread 3.09)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Sebum Measurements
To sample the skin surface, the sebum collector strips are applied to the skin sites for 10 seconds. Once removed, these samples will be immediately measured for the amount of sebum on the strip using the tape analyzer. The amount of sebum production was measured as the amount of sebum collected on a tape applied to the skin for 10 seconds and then converted to 1 of 10 incremental levels. Sebum production was measured in increments of 0 (minimum value) to 10 (maximum value). The higher the number, the greater amount of sebum produced.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: 2 weeks.
  Analysis population: ITT
  Group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 25
  Measured Baseline -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1.72 (spread 1.31); Dapsone Gel: 2.18 (spread 1.73)
  Measured Day 3 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1.52 (spread 1.01); Dapsone Gel: 1.72 (spread 1.11)
  Measured Day 7 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 2.65 (spread 2.05); Dapsone Gel: 3.33 (spread 2.43)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Clindamycin and BPO Gel vs Dapsone Gel -- method: ANOVA -- P-value: >0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Skin Hydration
Evaluation of Skin Hydration using electrical conductance measurements,on weekdays during 14 days of treatment. The value recorded which is expressed in units of microsiemens represents the AC conductance 2-3 seconds after placing the spring-loaded probe tip to the sample site.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Microsiemens, time frame: 2 weeks.
  Analysis population: ITT
  Group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Group Dapsone Gel: Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 27; Dapsone Gel: 25
  Measured Baseline -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 499.51 (spread 124.27); Dapsone Gel: 448.31 (spread 149.26)
  Measured 4 hours post 1st treatment -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 430.38 (spread 156.71); Dapsone Gel: 404.68 (spread 170.45)
  Measured Day 3 -- Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 614.73 (spread 144.64); Dapsone Gel: 511.63 (spread 163.97)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Clindamycin and BPO Gel vs Dapsone Gel -- method: ANOVA -- P-value: >0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 4%.
Any study product-related AEs ongoing at the end of the treatment period were followed until they resolve, the condition stabilizes, the events are otherwise explained, or the subject is lost to follow-up. In addition, all SAEs were followed until resolution as previously stated for study product-related AEs.
Safety group Clindamycin and BPO Gel: serious events in 0 of 27 at risk; other events in 2 of 27 at risk. Daily applications of Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide gel to one-half of the face. Clindamycin and benzoyl peroxide facial gel was applied daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Safety group Dapsone Gel: serious events in 0 of 25 at risk; other events in 2 of 25 at risk. Twice-daily applications of dapsone gel to one-half of the face. Dapsone facial gel was applied twice daily to one side of the face of all subjects in this group in a split-face model. On weekdays during the two-week trial, the investigator scored Erythema on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe) and Dryness on a scale of 0 (none) to 8 (severe).
Other adverse event -- Headache (Nervous system disorders): Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1/27; Dapsone Gel: 1/25
Other adverse event -- Infection (Infections and infestations): Clindamycin and BPO Gel: 1/27; Dapsone Gel: 1/25

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00964366; report t14; lead sponsor Stiefel, a GSK Company.]
