A Prospective, Post-market, Multi-center Study of the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell
Trial registration: NCT01063751    Lead sponsor: Stryker Orthopaedics    Report id: t15
Overall status: TERMINATED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 275 participants
Conditions studied: Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip
Keywords: Osteoarthritis, Traumatic arthritis, Avascular Necrosis
Study start: 2011-07    Primary completion / completion: 2023-12-30

SUMMARY
This study will be a prospective, non-randomized evaluation of the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell for primary total hip replacement (THR) with a cementless application in a consecutive series of patients who meet the eligibility criteria. Half of the cases will use the Trident® X3® polyethylene insert alone as the bearing surface; the other half will use the modular dual mobility (MDM™) liner coupled with a compatible anatomic dual mobility (ADM™)/MDM™ X3® insert as the bearing surface.

The success rate, defined as freedom from acetabular revision for any reason, for hips implanted with the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell, is no worse than for hips implanted with similar technology as reported in the literature and Trident® X3® Study historical control at 5 years postoperative.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
The Tritanium® Acetabular Shell, cleared for use under FDA 510(k) K081171, is a hemispherical acetabular shell with a 3D surface for biological fixation, fabricated from Commercially Pure Titanium (CPTi). The shell is built upon the design features and clinical history of the existing Trident® Tritanium®, Trident® AD, and Trident® hemispherical acetabular (HA) shells. The device is designed with a roughened surface and high coefficient of friction to resist micromotion and promote initial fixation. The Tritanium® Acetabular Shell, intended for use in a cementless application, is available in sizes from 44 millimeter (mm) through 66 mm and is compatible with Trident® polyethylene insert and acetabular screws. This advanced technology is designed to address the need for improved initial and biological fixation. Data in support of these marketing claims will be collected in the Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell Study.

A prospective, post-market, multi-center design will be employed. Radiographs will be assessed by an independent reviewer.

Cases will be enrolled at 7 to 12 centers. The enrollment goal ranges from 20 to 34 cases implanted with the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell per center. The enrollment goal range is dependent upon the number of participating centers as well as the relative rates of enrollment of the two treatment groups. Although a range is presented, there is no maximum limit to the number of cases that a center may enroll. In the event that a center far exceeds the overall enrollment goal or enrollment into one of the treatment groups is completed, Stryker may ask the center to cease enrollment so as not to skew the data. All participating centers will comply with the federal regulations regarding patient informed consent and Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval. Non-compliance of a study center may result in termination of the center's participation in the study.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell (OTHER)
Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell
Interventions: Device: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DEVICE: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell. Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* A. Patient has signed an IRB approved, study specific Informed Patient Consent Form.
* B. Patient is a male or non-pregnant female age 18 years or older at time of study device implantation.
* C. Patient has primary diagnosis of Non-Inflammatory Degenerative Joint Disease (NIDJD).
* D. Patient is a candidate for a primary cementless total hip replacement.
* E. Patient is willing and able to comply with postoperative scheduled clinical and radiographic evaluations and rehabilitation.

Exclusion Criteria:

* F. Patient has a Body Mass Index (BMI) ≥ 40.
* G. Patient has an active or suspected latent infection in or about the affected hip joint at time of study device implantation.
* H. Patient has a neuromuscular or neurosensory deficiency, which limits the ability to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the device.
* I. Patient is diagnosed with a systemic disease (e.g. Lupus Erythematosus) or a metabolic disorder (e.g. Paget's Disease) leading to progressive bone deterioration.
* J. Patient is immunologically suppressed or receiving steroids in excess of normal physiological requirements (e.g. \> 30 days).
* K. Patient requires revision surgery of a previously implanted total hip replacement or hip fusion to the affected joint.
* L. Patient has a known sensitivity to device materials.
* M. Patient is a prisoner.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Absence of Acetabular Revision. Time frame: 5 years. To evaluate the success rate of cementless primary total hip replacement (THR) in hips implanted with the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell, as compared to the published results of similar acetabular components. Success will be defined as absence of acetabular shell revision for any reason at 5 years postoperative. It is expected that the survivorship of the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell group will be non-inferior to the survivorship reported in the literature for similar competitive devices.
Secondary endpoint 1: Rates of Screw Fixation Usage in the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell. Time frame: Intraoperative. Usage of bone screw fixation will be recorded and compared between the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell group and the Trident® Hemispherical Acetabular (HA) Shell group (Trident® X3® Polyethylene Insert Study).
Secondary endpoint 2: Harris Hip Score. Time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years. The Harris Hip Score (HHS) assesses pain, function, joint deformity and range of motion. Scores can range from 0 to 100 with 0 being the worst and 100 being the best score. A score of 80-100 is considered good-excellent and a score of less than or equal to 79 is considered fair-poor. 90-100 = excellent 80-89 = good 70-79 = fair 0-69 = poor
Secondary endpoint 3: Short Form- 12 (SF-12) Heath Survey Scores. Time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years. The SF-12 Health Survey is a 12-item patient completed questionnaire to measure general health and well-being. It includes a physical and mental status component score; each ranging from 0-100. Low values represent a poor health state and high values represent a good health state.
Secondary endpoint 4: Lower Extremity Activity Scale (LEAS) Score. Time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years. The LEAS is completed by the participant to assess activity level. Activity levels were ordered in terms of intensity from 1 to 18, with 18 indicating the highest activity level.
Secondary endpoint 5: EuroQol Five-Dimensional (EQ-5D). Time frame: 1,2,3,4, and 5 years. The EuroQol five-dimensional (EQ-5D) is a subject-completed questionnaire designed to assess subject health state values. The EQ-5D consists of 2 areas: the EQ visual analogue scale (EQ VAS) and EQ-5D descriptive system. The EQ VAS collects health state values using a 20 cm visual analogue scale with the endpoints labeled best imaginable health state at the top and worst imaginable health state at the bottom, having numeric values of 100 to 0 respectively. The EQ-5D Time Trade-off (TTO) descriptive system comprises the following five dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/comfort and anxiety/depression. Each dimension has three levels: no problems, some problems and extreme problems, where an overall score of 1 represents full health.

The index values on a scale between -1 (low) and 1 (high) are showing the average health status. A low score shows worse health, and a high score shows better health.
Secondary endpoint 6: Follow-Up Questionnaire. Time frame: 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 years. The Follow-up Questionnaire is a short patient questionnaire intended to provide information on patient satisfaction, pain, and whether or not there have been any revisions or removals since the last follow-up visit. It consists of three questions:

* Patient satisfaction with the hip replacement
* Presence of any pain in the study hip
* Any surgeries performed on the study hip
Secondary endpoint 7: Acetabular Shell Radiographic Stability. Time frame: 6 weeks, 1, 3, 5 years. Numerous parameters will be reviewed by zone, including radiolucency and migration. All data will be evaluated in order to classify each case as stable or unstable.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 275
  COMPLETED -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 41
  NOT COMPLETED -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Withdrawn -- Censored from analyses: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 42
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 34
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 30
  Withdrawn -- Death: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 13
  Withdrawn -- Sponsored Terminated Study: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 60
  Withdrawn -- Cases terminated due to investigator leaving the site and site closure.: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 35
  Withdrawn -- Investigator site closed: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 10
  Withdrawn -- Revision: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 6
  Withdrawn -- Physician Decision: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 4

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
275 participants were enrolled making up 284 hip cases. Of the 284 hips, 43 cases were censored and not included in the data analyses. Therefore, 241 cases were included in the analyses.

Of the 284 cases/234 participants, 42 cases completed the study per protocol. 40 participants made up these 42 cases.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  For bilateral total knee replacement participants, the age at the time of initial knee replacement surgery is used.
  value -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 62.60 [31 to 84]
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 100
  Male -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 134
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 2
  Asian -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 2
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 0
  Black or African American -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 21
  White -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 207
  More than one race -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 2
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, Cases)
  United States -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Absence of Acetabular Revision
To evaluate the success rate of cementless primary total hip replacement (THR) in hips implanted with the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell, as compared to the published results of similar acetabular components. Success will be defined as absence of acetabular shell revision for any reason at 5 years postoperative. It is expected that the survivorship of the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell group will be non-inferior to the survivorship reported in the literature for similar competitive devices.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_UNITS, unit: hips, time frame: 5 years.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured value -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 6

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Rates of Screw Fixation Usage in the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell
Usage of bone screw fixation will be recorded and compared between the Tritanium® Acetabular Shell group and the Trident® Hemispherical Acetabular (HA) Shell group (Trident® X3® Polyethylene Insert Study).
  Reported as COUNT_OF_UNITS, unit: Hips, time frame: Intraoperative.
  Analysis population: Bone screws used.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured Yes -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 178
  Measured No -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 63

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Harris Hip Score
The Harris Hip Score (HHS) assesses pain, function, joint deformity and range of motion. Scores can range from 0 to 100 with 0 being the worst and 100 being the best score. A score of 80-100 is considered good-excellent and a score of less than or equal to 79 is considered fair-poor. 90-100 = excellent 80-89 = good 70-79 = fair 0-69 = poor
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Score on a scale, time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years.
  Analysis population: A calculable HHS score is a case where all data points are present to calculate the stated score.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 1-Year Harris Hip Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 90.01 (spread 13.6)
  Measured 3-Year Harris Hip Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 90.99 (spread 13.64)
  Measured 5-Year Harris Hip Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 90.7 (spread 14.37)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Short Form- 12 (SF-12) Heath Survey Scores
The SF-12 Health Survey is a 12-item patient completed questionnaire to measure general health and well-being. It includes a physical and mental status component score; each ranging from 0-100. Low values represent a poor health state and high values represent a good health state.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Score on a scale, time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years.
  Analysis population: An evaluable case is one where all data points are present to calculate the stated score.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 1-Year Physical Component Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 46.77 (spread 10.45)
  Measured 1-Year Mental Component Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 55.26 (spread 8.95)
  Measured 3-Year Physical Component Score -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 46.62 (spread 10.48)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Lower Extremity Activity Scale (LEAS) Score
The LEAS is completed by the participant to assess activity level. Activity levels were ordered in terms of intensity from 1 to 18, with 18 indicating the highest activity level.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Score on a scale, time frame: 1, 3, and 5 years.
  Analysis population: An evaluable case is one where all data points are present to calculate the stated score.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 1-Year LEAS -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 10.74 (spread 3.06)
  Measured 3-Year LEAS -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 11.61 (spread 3.11)
  Measured 5-Year LEAS -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 11.11 (spread 3.41)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: EuroQol Five-Dimensional (EQ-5D)
The EuroQol five-dimensional (EQ-5D) is a subject-completed questionnaire designed to assess subject health state values. The EQ-5D consists of 2 areas: the EQ visual analogue scale (EQ VAS) and EQ-5D descriptive system. The EQ VAS collects health state values using a 20 cm visual analogue scale with the endpoints labeled best imaginable health state at the top and worst imaginable health state at the bottom, having numeric values of 100 to 0 respectively. The EQ-5D Time Trade-off (TTO) descriptive system comprises the following five dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/comfort and anxiety/depression. Each dimension has three levels: no problems, some problems and extreme problems, where an overall score of 1 represents full health.

The index values on a scale between -1 (low) and 1 (high) are showing the average health status. A low score shows worse health, and a high score shows better health.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Score on a scale, time frame: 1,2,3,4, and 5 years.
  Analysis population: A calculable case is one where all data points are present to calculate the stated score.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 1-Year EQ5D Health State Over Time -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 79.87 (spread 17.32)
  Measured 1-Year EQ5D TTO Valuation Over Time -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: .87 (spread .16)
  Measured 2-Year EQ5D Health State Over Time -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 79.87 (spread 17.01)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Follow-Up Questionnaire
The Follow-up Questionnaire is a short patient questionnaire intended to provide information on patient satisfaction, pain, and whether or not there have been any revisions or removals since the last follow-up visit. It consists of three questions:

* Patient satisfaction with the hip replacement
* Presence of any pain in the study hip
* Any surgeries performed on the study hip
  Reported as COUNT_OF_UNITS, unit: Hips, time frame: 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 years.
  Analysis population: Not all participants completed the Follow-Up Questionnaire at the respective timepoints.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 6-Year_ Follow-up Questionnaire _Q1: Pain in Study Hip? - YES -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 25
  Measured 6-Year_ Follow-up Questionnaire _Q1: Pain in Study Hip? - NO -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 74
  Measured 6-Year_Follow-up Questionnaire_Q2: Satisfied with Results of Hip Replacement? - YES -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 96

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Acetabular Shell Radiographic Stability
Numerous parameters will be reviewed by zone, including radiolucency and migration. All data will be evaluated in order to classify each case as stable or unstable.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_UNITS, unit: Hips, time frame: 6 weeks, 1, 3, 5 years.
  Analysis population: Frequency of the acetabular shell stability.
  Group Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell

Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell in total hip replacement.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 234
  Participants analysed (Hips) -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 241
  Measured 6- Weeks Postoperative: Stable -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 227
  Measured 6- Weeks Postoperative: Fibrous Stable -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 0
  Measured 6- Weeks Postoperative: Unstable -- Tritanium® Primary Acetabular Shell: 0

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
Censored cases were not included as at risk. Date of occurrence, date diagnosed, type of complication and treatment were collected. Industry standard adverse events (AE) and serious adverse events (SAE) terms were used in this study.
Safety group Operative Site Adverse Event(s): serious events in 16 of 241 at risk; other events in 61 of 241 at risk. Operative site adverse events are reported by study hip because in the case of bilateral participants (participants who have the study device implanted in both hips), an event can occur in one hip, both hips or the same hip, but at different times and are counted as separate events for this reason.
Safety group Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): serious events in 56 of 234 at risk; other events in 0 of 234 at risk. Non-operative site adverse events that were reported by participant.
Serious adverse event -- Operative Site (Infections and infestations): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 6/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/234
Serious adverse event -- Operative Site (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 2/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/234
Serious adverse event -- Operative Site (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 7/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 2/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Cardiac disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 17/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Eye disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 1/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-operative (Gastrointestinal disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 5/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (General disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 4/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Hepatobiliary disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 1/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Infections and infestations): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 2/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 12/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and polyps)): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 14/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Nervous system disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 7/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-operative (Psychiatric disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 1/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 4/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Surgical and medical procedures): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 1/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Vascular disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 8/234
Serious adverse event -- Non-Operative (Renal and urinary disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 1/234
Other adverse event -- Operative Site (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Operative Site Adverse Event(s): 61/241; Non-operative Site Adverse Event(s): 0/234

REASON THE TRIAL STOPPED EARLY
As longitudinal patient follow-up continues to lag, Stryker has determined that the study is no longer able to meet the regulatory requirements this study intends to support.

Termination is not related to any safety concerns with the products.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01063751; report t15; lead sponsor Stryker Orthopaedics.]
