A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial of D-Cycloserine for the Enhancement of Social Skills Training in Pervasive Developmental Disorders
Trial registration: NCT01086475    Lead sponsor: Indiana University    Report id: t16
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE3    Enrollment: 68 participants
Conditions studied: Autistic Disorder, Asperger's Disorder, Pervasive Developmental Disorder NOS
Keywords: Autism Spectrum Disorder, D-cycloserine, Social Skills Training
Study start: 2010-03    Primary completion / completion: 2014-01
Collaborators: United States Department of Defense

SUMMARY
The purpose of this study is to determine the effectiveness of D-cycloserine for improving social impairment in child with pervasive developmental disorders (PDD).

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This study will evaluate the efficacy of D-Cycloserine given 30 minutes prior to each of 10 weekly Social Skills Training Sessions for the treatment of social impairment in children (ages 5-11 years) with PDD during a randomized placebo-controlled trial. This will examine our central hypothesis that D-cycloserine will enhance learning of social skills in children with PDD's.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: TRIPLE (PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: D-cycloserine (EXPERIMENTAL)
Subjects randomized to D-cycloserine will be administered 50 mg 30 minutes prior to each of ten Social Skills Training Sessions
Interventions: Drug: D-cycloserine
Arm: Placebo (PLACEBO_COMPARATOR)
Subjects randomized to placebo arm will receive placebo pill 30 minutes prior to each of ten Social Skills Training Sessions
Interventions: Drug: Placebo

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: D-cycloserine. 50 mg dose administered 30 minutes prior to each of the ten Social Skill Training Sessions
DRUG: Placebo. Placebo pill administered 30 minutes prior to each of the ten Social Skill Training Sessions

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 5 Years. Maximum age: 11 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: True.
Inclusion Criteria: * DSM-IV-TR diagnosis of autism, Asperger's disorder, or PDD not otherwise specified (NOS) base on a semi-structured review of DSM-IV-R criteria and mental status examination as wll as a complete parental history obtained from the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and a complete systematic patient interview utilizing the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). * Males and females ages 5-11 years. * Significant social impairment as evidenced by a parent-rated Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) T-score of 60 or greater. * TSSA score of 70% or less on both parent questionnaire and child assessment. Children not showing significant impairment in the four specific social skill areas (greetings/goodbyes, conversations, game play, and understanding emotions) targeted by the SST are less likely to benefit from treatment. * Communication Standard Score of 70 or greater on the Vineland-II. * Full Scale IQ greater than 70. * Subjects must not be taking any psychotropic drugs affecting glutamate neurotransmission (riluzole, memantine, acamprosate, topiramate, amantadine, among others). Subjects may not be taking more than two psychotropic drugs. Dosing of all concomitant psychotropic drugs targeting core social and/or communication impairment must be stable for eight weeks prior to randomization. Dosing of all concomitant psychotropic drugs treating other features associated with pervasive developmental disorders (insomnia, inattention, hyperactivity, anxiety, irritability among others0 must be stable for two weeks (with the exception of four weeks for fluoxetine) prior to randomization. * Able to participate in group SST based on semi-structured parent and child interview. * Legal guardian has provided written informed consent and the subject has provided written informed assent. Expectation that a majority of subjects will be able to assent but the potential for the younger children and/or those that are cognitively impaired will not be able to assent. Exclusion Criteria: * Subjects with diagnoses of Rett's disorder or childhood integrative disorder will not be enrolled since these disorders have a different etiology, course, and treatment response. Furthermore, children with these disorders may not function at a high enough level in terms of cognition or language in order to benefit from the SST. * Initiation of a new psychosocial intervention within 90 days prior to randomization. Participants who have recently had a significant change in their psychosocial interventions will not be eligible until this intervention has been stable for 90 days in order to avoid confounding results of the study. Stable interventions (e.g., speech and occupational therapy), with the exception of concurrent social skills training, will be allowed to continue during the course of the study. Minor changes in ongoing ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) Change. Time frame: Completed at Baseline and Week 11. The 65-item SRS is a standardized measure of the core symptoms of autism. Each item is scored on a 4-point Likert scale. The score of each individual item is summed to create a total raw score. A total scores results are as follows:

0-62: Within normal limits 63-79: Mild range of impairment 80-108: Moderate range of impairment 109-149: Severe range of impairment
Primary endpoint 2: Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) at Follow-Up. Time frame: Completed at Week 22. The 65-item SRS is a standardized measure of the core symptoms of autism. Each item is scored on a 4-point Likert scale. The score of each individual item is summed to create a total raw score. A total scores results are as follows:

0-62: Within normal limits 63-79: Mild range of impairment 80-108: Moderate range of impairment 109-149: Severe range of impairment
Secondary endpoint 1: Clinical Global Impressions Improvement Scale Responder Analysis. Time frame: Week 11. The CGI Global Improvement (CGI-I) is a clinician-rate scale designed to take into account all factors to arrive at an assessment of severity and response to treatment, including parent report, parent-rated measures, teacher-rated measures, and clinician-rated measures. The CGI-I is rated from 1 to 7 (1 = very much improved; 2 = much improved; 3 = minimally improved; 4 = no change; 5 = minimally worse; 6 = much worse; 7 = very much worse) at a single time-point. The CGI-I was completed at each visit, but only at week 11 were those subjects classified as "much" or "very much improved" defined as responders and all other classifications will be regarded as non-responders.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group D-cycloserine: Subjects who received d-cycloserine
Flow group Placebo: Subjects who received placebo
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33
  COMPLETED -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33
  NOT COMPLETED -- D-cycloserine: 0; Placebo: 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group D-cycloserine: Subjects randomized to D-cycloserine will be administered 50 mg 30 minutes prior to each of ten Social Skills Training Sessions

D-cycloserine: 50 mg dose administered 30 minutes prior to each of the ten Social Skill Training Sessions
Baseline group Placebo: Subjects randomized to placebo arm will receive placebo pill 30 minutes prior to each of ten Social Skills Training Sessions

Placebo: Placebo pill administered 30 minutes prior to each of the ten Social Skill Training Sessions
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33; Total: 67
  Between 18 and 65 years -- D-cycloserine: 0; Placebo: 0; Total: 0
  >=65 years -- D-cycloserine: 0; Placebo: 0; Total: 0
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, Years)
  value -- D-cycloserine: 8.49 (spread 1.88); Placebo: 8.34 (spread 1.70); Total: 8.41 (spread 1.78)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- D-cycloserine: 6; Placebo: 6; Total: 12
  Male -- D-cycloserine: 28; Placebo: 27; Total: 55
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33; Total: 67

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) Change
The 65-item SRS is a standardized measure of the core symptoms of autism. Each item is scored on a 4-point Likert scale. The score of each individual item is summed to create a total raw score. A total scores results are as follows:

0-62: Within normal limits 63-79: Mild range of impairment 80-108: Moderate range of impairment 109-149: Severe range of impairment
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: Completed at Baseline and Week 11.
  Analysis population: Each group included up to four children with ASD and two typically-developing peer models (TPs) in the same age group.
  Group D-cycloserine: Subjects who received d-cycloserine
  Group Placebo: Subjects who received placebo
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33
  Measured value -- D-cycloserine: -13.39 (spread 16.81); Placebo: -17.00 (spread 21.33)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared D-cycloserine vs Placebo -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.45 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS) at Follow-Up
The 65-item SRS is a standardized measure of the core symptoms of autism. Each item is scored on a 4-point Likert scale. The score of each individual item is summed to create a total raw score. A total scores results are as follows:

0-62: Within normal limits 63-79: Mild range of impairment 80-108: Moderate range of impairment 109-149: Severe range of impairment
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: Completed at Week 22.
  Analysis population: Each group included up to four children with ASD and two typically-developing peer models (TPs) in the same age group.
  Group D-cycloserine: Subjects who received d-cycloserine
  Group Placebo: Subjects who received placebo
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33
  Measured value -- D-cycloserine: 83.5 (spread 2.3); Placebo: 89.2 (spread 2.5)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared D-cycloserine vs Placebo -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- P-value: 0.048 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Clinical Global Impressions Improvement Scale Responder Analysis
The CGI Global Improvement (CGI-I) is a clinician-rate scale designed to take into account all factors to arrive at an assessment of severity and response to treatment, including parent report, parent-rated measures, teacher-rated measures, and clinician-rated measures. The CGI-I is rated from 1 to 7 (1 = very much improved; 2 = much improved; 3 = minimally improved; 4 = no change; 5 = minimally worse; 6 = much worse; 7 = very much worse) at a single time-point. The CGI-I was completed at each visit, but only at week 11 were those subjects classified as "much" or "very much improved" defined as responders and all other classifications will be regarded as non-responders.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: percentage of participants, time frame: Week 11.
  Analysis population: Each social skills group included up to four children with ASD and two typically-developing peer models (TPs) in the same age group.
  Group D-cycloserine: Subjects who received d-cycloserine
  Group Placebo: Subjects who received placebo
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- D-cycloserine: 34; Placebo: 33
  Measured value -- D-cycloserine: 32.3; Placebo: 33.3
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared D-cycloserine vs Placebo -- method: Chi-squared -- P-value: 0.927 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group D-cycloserine: serious events in 0 of 34 at risk; other events in 32 of 34 at risk. Subjects who received d-cycloserine
Safety group Placebo: serious events in 1 of 33 at risk; other events in 28 of 33 at risk. Subjects who received placebo
Serious adverse event -- Suicidal comment (Psychiatric disorders): D-cycloserine: 0/34; Placebo: 1/33
Other adverse event -- Headache (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 9/34; Placebo: 7/33
Other adverse event -- Nasal congestion or Cold (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 6/34; Placebo: 8/33
Other adverse event -- Cough (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 7/34; Placebo: 7/33
Other adverse event -- Vomiting (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 6/34; Placebo: 2/33
Other adverse event -- Aggression (Psychiatric disorders): D-cycloserine: 2/34; Placebo: 5/33
Other adverse event -- Increased Motor Activity (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 1/34; Placebo: 5/33
Other adverse event -- Interrupted Sleep/Other sleep problems (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 3/34; Placebo: 5/33
Other adverse event -- Irritability (Psychiatric disorders): D-cycloserine: 16/34; Placebo: 15/33
Other adverse event -- Restlessness/Agitation (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 4/34; Placebo: 3/33
Other adverse event -- Sadness (Psychiatric disorders): D-cycloserine: 5/34; Placebo: 3/33
Other adverse event -- Sedation/Drowsiness (General disorders): D-cycloserine: 2/34; Placebo: 6/33

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01086475; report t16; lead sponsor Indiana University.]
