Methylphenidate for Cancer-Related Fatigue: A Pilot N-of-1 Study
Trial registration: NCT01164956    Lead sponsor: Dana-Farber Cancer Institute    Report id: t18
Overall status: TERMINATED    Phase: PHASE1    Enrollment: 3 participants
Conditions studied: Cancer
Keywords: methylphenidate, fatigue
Study start: 2011-07    Primary completion / completion: 2013-03
Collaborators: Boston Children's Hospital

SUMMARY
The overall aim of this pilot study is to conduct a combined N-of-1 trial (N-1-T) of MPH (methylphenidate) for amelioration of fatigue in children with cancer, and to evaluate the N-1-T design both for individual clinical decision making and for clinical trials in symptom management in pediatric oncology patients. Because no one knows which of the study options are best, participants will receive liquid MPH on some days and a placebo on other days. We will compare how the participant feels on MPH days with how they feel on placebo days to determine whether MPH makes a difference.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
I. To assess the N-1-T as a study design to evaluate a symptom-directed intervention in children with cancer

Primary objective

-To evaluate the feasibility of conducting an N-1-T to evaluate MPH for cancer-related fatigue in children as a group

Secondary objectives

* To evaluate the ability of the N-1-T to assess efficacy of MPH for an individual subject statistically and clinically definite answer (regarding the ability of MPH to reduce fatigue)
* To explore subject/family and oncologist perspectives on N1T participation
* To examine in a preliminary fashion whether there are patient, family, disease or study-related factors that are associated with attrition to help guide future large-scale N1Ts

II. To evaluate MPH for treatment of cancer-related fatigue and related symptoms in children

Primary objective

-To evaluate the effect of MPH on cancer-related fatigue in children based on various assessments including pedsFACIT-F and a unidimensional single-item Likert scale for measuring fatigue

Secondary objective

-To assess the side effect profile of MPH for fatigue in children with cancer

III. To evaluate fatigue assessment tools Primary objective

-To evaluate correlation between fatigue scores

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: SUPPORTIVE_CARE. Masking: QUADRUPLE (PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR, OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR).
The N-of-1 design randomized participants to 3 potential treatment pairs; Each pair incorporated the 2 drugs under investigation but with different sequence: Methylphenidate then Placebo or Placebo then Methylphenidate. With this design, there are 8 potential permutations/arms.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: M-P, P-M, M-P (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: P-M, P-M, M-P (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: P-M, M-P, M-P (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: M-P, M-P, M-P (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: M-P, P-M, P-M (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: M-P, M-P, P-M (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: P-M, P-M, P-M (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo
Arm: P-M, M-P, P-M (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Interventions: Drug: methylphenidate; Other: Placebo

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: methylphenidate. 
OTHER: Placebo. 

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 7 Years. Maximum age: 21 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria: * Participants must be receiving cancer-directed treatment at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute/Children's Hospital Boston or have advanced cancer * 7-21 years old * Laboratory values as outlined in the protocol * Negative pregnancy test (for females of childbearing potential only) * Child and at least one parent/legal guardian has spoken and written knowledge of English * Participant has approximately age-appropriate knowledge of English and is able to understand and complete the single-item Likert scale for rating fatigue * Baseline pedsFACIT-F score of 20 or greater * Able to reliably take a liquid enterally * Physical examination including measurement of pulse and blood pressure conducted within the past 14 days * If the child is on an opioid analgesic, the primary oncologist does not anticipate a need to increase opioid during the study * Opioid dose stable for at least 5 days immediately prior to enrollment * No initiation of or change in the dose of benzodiazepine or other sedative/hypnotic drug in the week prior to enrollment and no forseeable initiation or change during the study * If currently on an SSRI, SNRI, or tricyclic antidepressant, on a stable dose of the past week * Participant has telephone access for communication with the study team regarding potential dose adjustments and can provide telephone number and alterative phone number Exclusion Criteria: * Participant is regarded by primary oncologist to be at a high likelihood of death within 30 days * Diagnosis of brain tumor, metastatic disease to the brain, or current active CNS leukemia * Known history of glaucoma * Receiving palliative sedation * Receipt of MPH or any other psychostimulant, alpha-adrenergic medications, neuroleptics, lithium, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, procarbazine or coumadin in the 14 days prior to enrollment * Significant GI disturbance that would impair absorption of the drug * History of alcohol or substance abuse in the subject. Subjects living with a household member with a history of alcohol or substance abuse may be excluded if the investigator feels there is a risk of the study medication being abused or diverted * Documented history of psychotic or bipolar disorder, delirium, major depression, suicidal ideation, aggressive behavior necessitating psychiatric care, or any other psychiatric condition requiring urgent psychiatric evaluation or immediate initiation of pharmacotherapy * History of tics or Tourette's syndrome * Prior history of adverse reaction to MPH * Uncontrolled hypertension * Cardiomyopathy, serious structural cardiac abnormalities, or history of any of the following: ventricular arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, rheumatic fever, spontaneous or unexplained syncope, exercise-induced syncope, or exercise-induced chest pain. ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Completion Rate of Two Treatment Pairs Using the N-1-T Design. Time frame: 18 days. The feasibility of conducting an N-1-T to evaluate MPH for cancer-related fatigue will be determined by the completion rate of two MPH-placebo pairs.
Secondary endpoint 1: Rate of Receiving Clinically Definite Answer Regarding the Ability of Experimental Treatment to Reduce Fatigue Using the N-1-T Design. Time frame: 18 days. Efficacy of the N-1-T design is defined as patient providing a clinically definite answer regarding the ability of MPH to reduce fatigue.Based on the definition of the outcome being evaluated, aggregation of data for all participants is appropriate.
Secondary endpoint 2: Change Over Treatment Pairs in pedsFACIT-F Score. Time frame: The pedsFACIT-Fwas administered at baseline and at the end of each treatment pair (TP) and related change in score was calculated for each period: baseline to end of TP 1 (day 6); end of TP 1 to end of TP 2 (day 12); end of TP 2 to end of TP 3 (day 18).. The pediatric Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (pedsFACIT-F) is an 11-item instrument derived from a comprehensive pediatric item bank that assesses fatigue. (Lai et al. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2007) Measuring fatigue over the past 7 days in a population of pediatric cancer patients, the pedsFACIT-F instrument has a score ranging from 0-44, with a higher score meaning more fatigue. A minimally important difference (MID) was established as 4.7 points.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group M-P, P-M, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Flow group P-M, P-M, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Flow group P-M, M-P, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, M-P, M-P: 1
  Evaluable for pedsFACIT-F Score Change -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 0; P-M, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, M-P, M-P: 0
  COMPLETED -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 0; P-M, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, M-P, M-P: 0
  NOT COMPLETED -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, P-M, M-P: 0; P-M, M-P, M-P: 1
  Withdrawn -- Side Effects: M-P, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, P-M, M-P: 0; P-M, M-P, M-P: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group All Participants: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
The analysis dataset is comprised of all enrolled patients.
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- All Participants: 2
  Between 18 and 65 years -- All Participants: 1
  >=65 years -- All Participants: 0
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- All Participants: 16 [11 to 20]
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- All Participants: 1
  Male -- All Participants: 2
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- All Participants: 3

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Completion Rate of Two Treatment Pairs Using the N-1-T Design
The feasibility of conducting an N-1-T to evaluate MPH for cancer-related fatigue will be determined by the completion rate of two MPH-placebo pairs.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: 18 days.
  Analysis population: The analysis dataset is comprised of all enrolled patients. Based on the definition of the outcome being evaluated, aggregation of data for all participants is appropriate.
  Group All Participants: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- All Participants: 3
  Measured value -- All Participants: 1

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Rate of Receiving Clinically Definite Answer Regarding the Ability of Experimental Treatment to Reduce Fatigue Using the N-1-T Design
Efficacy of the N-1-T design is defined as patient providing a clinically definite answer regarding the ability of MPH to reduce fatigue.Based on the definition of the outcome being evaluated, aggregation of data for all participants is appropriate.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: participants, time frame: 18 days.
  Analysis population: The analysis dataset is comprised of all enrolled patients.
  Group M-P, P-M, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
  Group P-M, P-M, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
  Group P-M, M-P, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, M-P, M-P: 1
  Measured value -- M-P, P-M, M-P: 0; P-M, P-M, M-P: 1; P-M, M-P, M-P: 0

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Change Over Treatment Pairs in pedsFACIT-F Score
The pediatric Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (pedsFACIT-F) is an 11-item instrument derived from a comprehensive pediatric item bank that assesses fatigue. (Lai et al. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2007) Measuring fatigue over the past 7 days in a population of pediatric cancer patients, the pedsFACIT-F instrument has a score ranging from 0-44, with a higher score meaning more fatigue. A minimally important difference (MID) was established as 4.7 points.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: units on a scale, time frame: The pedsFACIT-Fwas administered at baseline and at the end of each treatment pair (TP) and related change in score was calculated for each period: baseline to end of TP 1 (day 6); end of TP 1 to end of TP 2 (day 12); end of TP 2 to end of TP 3 (day 18)..
  Analysis population: The analysis dataset is comprised of all enrolled patients with data at baseline and end of all treatment pairs.
  Group P-M, P-M, M-P: Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- P-M, P-M, M-P: 1
  Measured Change from Baseline to end of Treatment Pair 1 -- P-M, P-M, M-P: 4
  Measured Change from end of Treatment Pair 1 to Pair 2 -- P-M, P-M, M-P: 2
  Measured Change from end of Treatment Pair 2 to Pair 3 -- P-M, P-M, M-P: 0

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
The metabolic/laboratory-other cases were elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), ketonuria and bilirubin in urinalysis. The cardiac-other case was hypertensionsinus tachycardia. The constitutional symptoms-other case was decreased appetite.
Safety group All Participants: serious events in 0 of 3 at risk; other events in 3 of 3 at risk. Participants were randomized to receive 3 treatment pairs of placebo (P) then methylphenidate (M) or M then P. Each M or P was given daily for 3 days and therefore treatment duration was 18 days over 3 treatment pairs. M or P was administered orally at a starting dose of 0.3 mg/kg/dose. For participants \> 40 kg, the maximum of dose in the first treatment pair was 12.5 mg per dose. Dose escalation to maximum 0.5 mg/kg/dose was permitted.
Other adverse event -- hemoglobin (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Mood alteration - anxiety (Psychiatric disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Metabolic/Laboratory-Other (Investigations): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Rigors/chills (General disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Constitutional Symptoms-Other (General disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Dehydration (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- diarrhea (Gastrointestinal disorders): All Participants: 2/3
Other adverse event -- Creatinine (Investigations): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Alkaline phosphatase (Investigations): All Participants: 2/3
Other adverse event -- ALT, SGPT (serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase) (Investigations): All Participants: 2/3
Other adverse event -- AST, SGOT (serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase) (Investigations): All Participants: 2/3
Other adverse event -- Neuropathy: cranial - CN VII Motor-face; Sensory-taste (Nervous system disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- fatigue (General disorders): All Participants: 2/3
Other adverse event -- Fever (in the absence of neutropenia, where neutropenia is defined as ANC <1.0 x 10e9/L) (General disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- fracture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Cardiac General-Other (Cardiac disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Albumin, serum-low (hypoalbuminemia) (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): All Participants: 1/3
Other adverse event -- Calcium, serum-low (hypocalcemia) (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): All Participants: 1/3

REASON THE TRIAL STOPPED EARLY
Insufficient Resources

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
The study was terminated early due to insufficient resources.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01164956; report t18; lead sponsor Dana-Farber Cancer Institute.]
