Efficacy and Safety of B-Domain Deleted Recombinant Porcine Factor VIII (OBI-1) in the Treatment of Acquired Hemophilia A Due to Factor VIII Inhibitory Auto-antibodies
Trial registration: NCT01178294    Lead sponsor: Baxalta now part of Shire    Report id: t19
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE2, PHASE3    Enrollment: 29 participants
Conditions studied: Acquired Hemophilia A
Keywords: haemophilia A, blood coagulation disorders, coagulation protein disorder, hemophilia A, Acquired Hemophilia A, hematologic diseases, hemorrhagic disorders
Study start: 2010-11-10    Primary completion / completion: 2013-10-09

SUMMARY
This study is to test whether the study drug (OBI-1) is safe and effective for the treatment of serious bleeding episodes in people with acquired hemophilia A.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: OBI-1 (EXPERIMENTAL)
Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
Interventions: Biological: OBI-1

INTERVENTION DETAIL
BIOLOGICAL: OBI-1. Intravenous infusion

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria: * Written informed consent from subject, trusted person or person who is legally authorized to sign on behalf of the participant (Legal Representative in U.S.), depending on local regulations * Participants with acquired hemophilia with autoimmune inhibitory antibodies to human factor VIII with a clinical diagnosis established by the following criteria: a) Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), b) Prothrombin time (PT) ≤ upper limit of normal (ULN) + 2 seconds and platelet count within normal range, c) Abnormal aPTT mixing study (patient-normal control 1:1) consistent with a factor VIII inhibitors reduced factor VIII activity level (below 10%) * Has a serious bleeding episode, as documented by the investigator * Be willing and able to follow all instructions and attend all study visits * Participants taking anti-thrombotics (such as clopidogrel, heparin or heparin analogue) may be included provided three half-lives of the agent have elapsed since the last dose of the agent * Life expectancy, prior to onset of the hemorrhagic episode, of at least 90 days * Participants of reproductive age must use acceptable methods of contraception and if female, undergo pregnancy testing as part of the screening process Exclusion Criteria: * Hemodynamically unstable after blood transfusion, fluid resuscitation and pharmacologic or volume replacement pressor therapy. This hemodynamic instability is characterized by symptomatic hypotension resulting in vital organ dysfunction, such as cardiac ischemia, oliguria (urine volume \<0.5 mL/kg in the previous six hours), central nervous system hypoperfusion manifested by mental status change such as confusion (unless head injury or intracranial hemorrhage is present), pulmonary compromise, and/or acidosis (manifested by pH and lactate levels) * Has an established reason for bleeding that is not correctable * Bleeding episode assessed likely to resolve on its own if left untreated * Anti-OBI-1 inhibitor that exceeds 20 Bethesda Units (BU) (prospectively or retrospectively) * Subsequent bleeding episode at the site of the initial qualifying bleeding episode within two weeks following the final OBI-1 dose for the initial qualifying bleeding episode, or subsequent bleeding episode at a different site than the initial qualifying bleeding episode within 1 week following the final OBI-1 dose for the initial qualifying bleeding episode will not be considered "new" qualifying bleeding episodes * Prior history of bleeding disorder other than acquired hemophilia. * Known major sensitivity to therapeutic products of pig or hamster origin; examples include therapeutics of porcine origin (e.g. previously marketed porcine factor VIII, Hyate-C®) and recombinant therapeutics prepared from hamster cells (e.g. Humira®, Advate® and Enbrel®) * Use of hemophilia medication: rFVIIa within 3 ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1. Time frame: 24 hours after initiation of treatment. The initial serious ("qualifying") bleeding episode for each subject was analyzed for the primary efficacy outcome measure. A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
Secondary endpoint 1: Overall Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Successfully Controlled With OBI-1 Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator. Time frame: At the time of final treatment dosing (varied from participant to participant depending on bleeding episodes). Treatment success was defined as control of qualifying bleeding episode at the time of final treatment dosing. A serious bleeding episode was considered 'successfully controlled' if the investigator had checked 'completed OBI-1 therapy as treatment success' on the eCRF.
Secondary endpoint 2: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1 Therapy at Designated Assessment Time Points After the Initiation of Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator. Time frame: 8 hours. A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
Secondary endpoint 3: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1 Therapy at Designated Assessment Time Points After the Initiation of Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator. Time frame: 16 hours. A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
Secondary endpoint 4: Frequency of Infusions of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control Qualifying Bleeding Episodes. Time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant). 'Frequency of infusions' was calculated as the 'average number of infusions per day'. 'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'.
Secondary endpoint 5: Total Dose of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control 'Qualifying' Bleeding Episodes. Time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant). 'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'.
Secondary endpoint 6: Total Number of Infusions of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control 'Qualifying' Bleeding Episodes. Time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant). 'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'. A serious bleeding episode was considered 'successfully controlled' if the investigator had checked 'completed OBI-1 therapy as treatment success' on the eCRF.
Secondary endpoint 7: Correlation Between Positive Response to OBI-1 Therapy at 8 Hours and Eventual Control of Serious Bleeding Episodes at 24 Hours. Time frame: 24 hours.
Secondary endpoint 8: Correlation Between Response to OBI-1 Therapy at 16 Hours and Eventual Control of Serious Bleeding Episodes at 24 Hours. Time frame: 24 hours.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- OBI-1: 29
  COMPLETED -- OBI-1: 18
  NOT COMPLETED -- OBI-1: 11
  Withdrawn -- Adverse Event: OBI-1: 4
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: OBI-1: 2
  Withdrawn -- Lack of Efficacy: OBI-1: 1
  Withdrawn -- Death: OBI-1: 1
  Withdrawn -- Development of inhibitors to OBI-1: OBI-1: 1
  Withdrawn -- Subject status is terminal: OBI-1: 1
  Withdrawn -- Completion status could not be verified: OBI-1: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
The baseline analysis population comprises all 29 treated subjects (=safety analysis set).
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- OBI-1: 69.8 (spread 13.28)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- OBI-1: 10
  Male -- OBI-1: 19
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Of 16 subjects enrolled in the US, 12 were enrolled under Protocol 301 and 4 were enrolled under the expanded access Protocol 301a.
  United States -- OBI-1: 16
  Canada -- OBI-1: 5
  United Kingdom -- OBI-1: 4

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1
The initial serious ("qualifying") bleeding episode for each subject was analyzed for the primary efficacy outcome measure. A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of serious bleeding episodes, time frame: 24 hours after initiation of treatment.
  Analysis population: Intent to Treat (ITT) population = 29 subjects with initial serious bleeding episodes
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 29
  Participants analysed (Initial Serious Bleeding Episodes) -- OBI-1: 29
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 100 [88.1 to 100]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared OBI-1 -- method: one-sided binomial exact test -- P-value: <0.001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER_LEGACY.
    Summary statistics for the percentage of participants with serious bleeding episodes responsive at 24 hours after the initiation of treatment are presented, along with the 95% confidence interval (two-sided 95% Clopper-Pearson confidence interval).

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Overall Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Successfully Controlled With OBI-1 Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator
Treatment success was defined as control of qualifying bleeding episode at the time of final treatment dosing. A serious bleeding episode was considered 'successfully controlled' if the investigator had checked 'completed OBI-1 therapy as treatment success' on the eCRF.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of serious bleeding episodes, time frame: At the time of final treatment dosing (varied from participant to participant depending on bleeding episodes).
  Analysis population: ITT population = 29 subjects with initial serious bleeding episodes (BEs)
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 29
  Participants analysed (Initial Serious Bleeding Episodes) -- OBI-1: 29
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 86.2 [68.3 to 96.1]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1 Therapy at Designated Assessment Time Points After the Initiation of Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator
A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of serious bleeding episodes, time frame: 8 hours.
  Analysis population: 21 subjects of the ITT population (n=29) had responses available at 8 hours after initial infusion of OBI-1.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 21
  Participants analysed (Responses Available at 8 hrs) -- OBI-1: 21
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 95.2 [76.2 to 99.9]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Percentage of Serious Bleeding Episodes Responsive to OBI-1 Therapy at Designated Assessment Time Points After the Initiation of Therapy, as Assessed by the Investigator
A 'positive response' is defined as 'effective' (bleeding stopped with clinical control and FVIII levels of 50% or higher ) or 'partially effective' (bleeding reduced with clinical stabilization and FVIII levels of 20% or higher) control of bleeding, as determined by the investigator using a 4-point rating scale (effective - partially effective - poorly effective - not effective). 'Poorly effective' is defined as 'bleeding slightly reduced or unchanged and FVIII levels of less than 50%'. 'Not effective' is defined as 'bleeding worsening and FVIII levels of less than 50%'.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of serious bleeding episodes, time frame: 16 hours.
  Analysis population: 19 subjects of the ITT population (n=29) had responses available at 16 hours after initial infusion of OBI-1.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 19
  Participants analysed (Responses Available at 16 hrs) -- OBI-1: 19
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 100 [82.4 to 100]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Frequency of Infusions of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control Qualifying Bleeding Episodes
'Frequency of infusions' was calculated as the 'average number of infusions per day'. 'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: average number of infusions per day, time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant).
  Analysis population: The analysis was performed in 25 of 29 participants in the ITT population whose 'qualifying' bleeding episode was controlled successfully.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 25
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 2.10 (spread 1.109)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Total Dose of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control 'Qualifying' Bleeding Episodes
'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: dose in U/kg, time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant).
  Analysis population: The analysis was performed in 25 of 29 participants in the ITT population whose 'qualifying' bleeding episode was controlled successfully.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 25
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 2683.2 (spread 2928.61)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Total Number of Infusions of OBI-1 Required to Successfully Control 'Qualifying' Bleeding Episodes
'Qualifying bleeding episode' was defined as the 'initial, serious bleeding episode'. A serious bleeding episode was considered 'successfully controlled' if the investigator had checked 'completed OBI-1 therapy as treatment success' on the eCRF.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: infusions per participant, time frame: Time of successful control of qualifying bleeding episode (varied from participant to participant).
  Analysis population: The analysis was performed in 25 of 29 participants in the ITT population whose 'qualifying' bleeding episode was controlled successfully.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 25
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 15.4 (spread 12.64)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Correlation Between Positive Response to OBI-1 Therapy at 8 Hours and Eventual Control of Serious Bleeding Episodes at 24 Hours
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: subjects with eventual bleed control, time frame: 24 hours.
  Analysis population: Of 21 subjects in the ITT population (n=29) with responses available at 8 hours after initial infusion of OBI-1, 20 had a positive response.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 21
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 17

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Correlation Between Response to OBI-1 Therapy at 16 Hours and Eventual Control of Serious Bleeding Episodes at 24 Hours
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: subjects with eventual bleed control, time frame: 24 hours.
  Analysis population: All 19 subjects in the ITT population (n=29) who had responses available at 16 hours after initial infusion of OBI-1 had a positive response.
  Group OBI-1: Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- OBI-1: 19
  Measured value -- OBI-1: 17

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
Subjects were monitored for adverse events from the time the subject presented with the initial bleeding episode until the end of the follow-up period.
Safety group OBI-1: serious events in 13 of 29 at risk; other events in 27 of 29 at risk. Initial dose: 200 U/kg - additional doses at the discretion of the investigator based on FVIII activity level and clinical assessment of response to treatment (upper limit: 400 U/kg every 2 hours)
Serious adverse event -- Asthenia (General disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Dizziness (Nervous system disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Hematoma (Vascular disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Atrial fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Pneumonia (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 3/29
Serious adverse event -- Sepsis (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 2/29
Serious adverse event -- Brain edema (Nervous system disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Intracranial hemorrhage (Nervous system disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Serious adverse event -- Transient ischemic attack (Nervous system disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Esophagitis (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Renal failure (Renal and urinary disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Systemic mycosis (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Urinary tract infection (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Gastrointestinal hemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Arthralgia (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Joint swelling (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Cholangitis (Hepatobiliary disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Serious adverse event -- Respiratory failure (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): OBI-1: 1/29
Other adverse event -- Anemia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): OBI-1: 6/29
Other adverse event -- Cardiac failure congestive (Cardiac disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Abdominal pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Abdominal pain upper (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Constipation (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 12/29
Other adverse event -- Diarrhea (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 7/29
Other adverse event -- Mouth ulceration (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 4/29
Other adverse event -- Vomiting (Gastrointestinal disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Chest pain (General disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Fatigue (General disorders): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Peripheral edema (General disorders): OBI-1: 6/29
Other adverse event -- Pyrexia (General disorders): OBI-1: 3/29
Other adverse event -- Bacteremia (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Bacteriuria (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 2/29
Other adverse event -- Candidiasis (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 3/29
Other adverse event -- Sepsis (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 3/29
Other adverse event -- Oral candidiasis (Infections and infestations): OBI-1: 3/29

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
Due to the low number of subjects available for evaluation, statistical tests could only be performed for the primary outcome measure. The results of all other outcome measures are descriptive.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01178294; report t19; lead sponsor Baxalta now part of Shire.]
