A Pychoeducational Intervention for Women With Diabetes
Trial acronym: SWEEP
Trial registration: NCT01185561    Lead sponsor: Loyola University    Report id: t20
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 74 participants
Conditions studied: Depression, Anxiety, Anger
Keywords: Diabetes, SWEEP, Dysphoria
Study start: 2007-03    Primary completion / completion: 2009-11

SUMMARY
This proposal describes a small randomized study to determine whether usual medical care (UMC) for diabetes combined with a psychoeducational program is more effective than UMC for diabetes alone. This program differs from other diabetes programs by focusing on the management of dysphoric symptoms (depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger). Diabetes self-care behaviors will be discussed and measured, but they are not the primary focus of the intervention. The psychoeducational program will address: 1) education about how dysphoric symptoms affect glycemic control; 2) recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and 3) management of dysphoric symptoms using Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). Subjects will be randomized to receive the group psychoeducational intervention or no additional treatment. All subjects will receive UMC for diabetes.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Diabetes is the fifth deadliest disease in the United States with no known cure, and cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of death in persons with diabetes. Diabetes is the only disease that causes women to have as much heart disease as men. The relative risk of cardiac mortality has been reported to be 2.6 for women with diabetes as compared to 1.9 for men with diabetes after controlling for other cardiac risk factors. While cardiac mortality for men with diabetes has declined (13.1%), there has been a 23% increase in age-adjusted cardiac mortality for women with diabetes. This poor outcome, occurring in a time of significant advances in the management of heart disease, suggests the need to consider directing treatment at other risk factors. Depression may be one such risk factor.

Depression is an independent risk factor for CVD, and is associated with poorer self-management and decreased health-related quality of life. Approximately 25% of persons with diabetes have depression, and the rate of depression in women with diabetes is double that of men with diabetes. Women with diabetes exhibit worse diabetes self-care, glycemic control, and poorer quality of life than men with diabetes, which are exacerbated by depression. Other affective symptoms including anxiety and anger commonly accompany depressive symptoms appear to impose similar risks for poor medical outcomes, and occur more often in women with diabetes than men with diabetes.

Research has shown that treatment of depression with medication and/or cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) effectively relieves depression and improves glycemic control in persons with diabetes. More recent evidence suggests that these benefits are more durable in patients treated with CBT vs. antidepressants alone. There has been no research on "symptom clusters" (i.e., depression, anxiety, and anger) in persons with diabetes, and their effect on glycemic control and self-management. In addition, a CBT program to treat a cluster of dysphoric symptoms has not been tested in persons with diabetes. Since women with diabetes have greater depression and anxiety, worse glycemic control, and increased cardiac mortality than men with diabetes, we are proposing to test the feasibility and effectiveness of a psychoeducational intervention to promote emotional health in women with type 2 diabetes.

This proposal describes a small randomized controlled trial to determine whether usual medical care (UMC) for diabetes combined with a psychoeducational program is more effective than UMC for diabetes alone. This program differs from other diabetes programs by focusing on the management of dysphoric symptoms (depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger). Diabetes self-care behaviors will be discussed and measured, but they are not the primary focus of the intervention. The psychoeducational program will address: 1) education about how dysphoric symptoms affect glycemic control; 2) recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and 3) management of dysphoric symptoms using CBT. A repeated measures, experimental design will be used. Subjects will be randomized to receive the group psychoeducational intervention or no additional treatment. All subjects will receive UMC for diabetes. The aims and hypotheses for the study are:

Primary Aim: To determine the effect of a psychoeducational intervention on dysphoric symptoms. The primary hypothesis is that women receiving a psychoeducational intervention plus UMC will report fewer dysphoric symptoms (depression, anxiety, and anger) at three and six months follow-up.

Secondary Aim: To determine the effect of a psychoeducational intervention on glycemic control, diabetes self-management, and health-related quality of life. The secondary hypothesis is that women receiving a psychoeducational intervention plus UMC will have decreased hemoglobin A1c, report better diabetes self-management (increased self-care behaviors and self-efficacy), and report increased health-related quality of life (increased functional status, life satisfaction, and decreased diabetes-related distress) at three and six months follow-up.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Usual medical care (NO_INTERVENTION)
Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
Arm: Psychoeducational intervention (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes
Interventions: Behavioral: Psychoeducational intervention

INTERVENTION DETAIL
BEHAVIORAL: Psychoeducational intervention. The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: FEMALE. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 75 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

1. aged 18 to 75 years;
2. have type 2 diabetes greater than six months and being medically managed
3. score greater than or equal to 16 on the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression (CES-D) scale which is indicative of depressive symptoms.
4. score greater than or equal to 12 on the CES-D plus a history of depression or currently being treated for depression.

Exclusion Criteria:

Women with current alcohol or substance abuse disorders, or a history of bipolar depression or any other psychotic disorder will be excluded.

Women will also be excluded if they have a diabetes knowledge test score of less than 70% and severe complications of diabetes (blindness, renal failure, or major amputation which includes most toes, foot, knee, or leg)

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) Score. Time frame: 6 Months. The CES-D score was compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The CES-D is a self-report questionnaire assessing frequency and severity of depression symptoms. Scores may range from 0 to 60, where higher scores indicate worse mood.
Secondary endpoint 1: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) State Anxiety Sub-test Score. Time frame: 6 Months. Scores on the The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) State Anxiety Sub-test are compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAI state anxiety subtest is a 20-item scale measuring state anxiety. Scores may range from 20 to 80 with higher scores indicating greater state anxiety.
Secondary endpoint 2: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) Trait Anxiety Sub-test Score. Time frame: 6 Months. Scores on the The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) Trait Anxiety Sub-test are compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAI trait anxiety subtest is a 20-item scale measuring state anxiety. Scores may range from 20 to 80 with higher scores indicating greater state anxiety.
Secondary endpoint 3: State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) Anger Expression Sub-test Score. Time frame: 6 Months. Scores on the The State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) Anger Expression Sub-test will be compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAXI anger expression subtest is a 24-item scale measuring how anger is generally being experienced and expressed. Scores may range from 0 to 72 with higher scores indicating greater anger.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
Flow group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Usual Medical Care: 36; Psychoeducational Intervention: 38
  COMPLETED -- Usual Medical Care: 34; Psychoeducational Intervention: 26
  NOT COMPLETED -- Usual Medical Care: 2; Psychoeducational Intervention: 12
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: Usual Medical Care: 0; Psychoeducational Intervention: 4
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Usual Medical Care: 2; Psychoeducational Intervention: 8

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
Baseline group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
All randomized participants are included in the baseline analysis population.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 54.8 (spread 8.8); Usual Medical Care: 54.0 (spread 8.4); Total: 54.4 (spread 8.6)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 38; Usual Medical Care: 36; Total: 74
  Male -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 3; Usual Medical Care: 2; Total: 5
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 35; Usual Medical Care: 34; Total: 69
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
  Asian -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
  Black or African American -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 11; Usual Medical Care: 9; Total: 20
  White -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 27; Usual Medical Care: 27; Total: 54
  More than one race -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 0; Usual Medical Care: 0; Total: 0
Baseline measure: Weight (MEAN, pounds (lbs))
  value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 229.1 (spread 64.4); Usual Medical Care: 226.9 (spread 48.7); Total: 228.0 (spread 56.9)
Baseline measure: Years Living with Diabetes (MEAN, years)
  value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 10.5 (spread 8.2); Usual Medical Care: 10.0 (spread 6.5); Total: 10.3 (spread 7.4)
Baseline measure: CES-D (MEAN, units on a scale)
  The CES-D is a self-report questionnaire assessing frequency and severity of depression symptoms. Scores may range from 0 to 60, where higher scores indicate worse mood.
  value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 27.7 (spread 9.3); Usual Medical Care: 28.9 (spread 9.5); Total: 28.3 (spread 9.4)
Baseline measure: STAI Trait Anxiety Subtest (MEAN, units on a scale)
  The STAI trait anxiety subtest is a 20-item scale measuring state anxiety. Scores may range from 20 to 80 with higher scores indicating greater state anxiety.
  value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 51.6 (spread 9.8); Usual Medical Care: 50.4 (spread 9.2); Total: 51.0 (spread 9.4)

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression (CES-D) Score
The CES-D score was compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The CES-D is a self-report questionnaire assessing frequency and severity of depression symptoms. Scores may range from 0 to 60, where higher scores indicate worse mood.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: 6 Months.
  Analysis population: This analysis is restricted to participants who completed the final study visit six months after randomization.
  Group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
  Group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 26; Usual Medical Care: 34
  Measured value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 12.6 (spread 8.0); Usual Medical Care: 21.5 (spread 10.2)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Psychoeducational Intervention vs Usual Medical Care -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 8.89 -- 95% confidence interval 4.03 to 13.76 -- P-value: .001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    The null hypothesis is that there is no difference in CES-D score between those assigned to the psychoeducational intervention and those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) State Anxiety Sub-test Score
Scores on the The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) State Anxiety Sub-test are compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAI state anxiety subtest is a 20-item scale measuring state anxiety. Scores may range from 20 to 80 with higher scores indicating greater state anxiety.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: 6 Months.
  Analysis population: This analysis is restricted to participants who completed the final study visit six months after randomization.
  Group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
  Group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 26; Usual Medical Care: 34
  Measured value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 35.7 (spread 12.4); Usual Medical Care: 43.6 (spread 12.6)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Psychoeducational Intervention vs Usual Medical Care -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 7.82 -- 95% confidence interval 1.29 to 14.37 -- P-value: .02 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    The null hypothesis is that there is no difference in the State Anxiety Sub-test score between those assigned to the psychoeducational intervention and those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) Trait Anxiety Sub-test Score
Scores on the The State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI Form Y-1) Trait Anxiety Sub-test are compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAI trait anxiety subtest is a 20-item scale measuring state anxiety. Scores may range from 20 to 80 with higher scores indicating greater state anxiety.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: 6 Months.
  Analysis population: This analysis is restricted to participants who completed the final study visit six months after randomization.
  Group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
  Group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 26; Usual Medical Care: 34
  Measured value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 36.9 (spread 10.1); Usual Medical Care: 45.3 (spread 12.0)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Psychoeducational Intervention vs Usual Medical Care -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 8.48 -- 95% confidence interval 2.64 to 14.31 -- P-value: .005 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    The null hypothesis is that there is no difference in the State Trait Anxiety Sub-test score between those assigned to the psychoeducational intervention and those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) Anger Expression Sub-test Score
Scores on the The State-Trait Anger Expression Inventory (STAXI) Anger Expression Sub-test will be compared between those assigned to intervention versus those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization. The STAXI anger expression subtest is a 24-item scale measuring how anger is generally being experienced and expressed. Scores may range from 0 to 72 with higher scores indicating greater anger.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: units on a scale, time frame: 6 Months.
  Analysis population: This analysis is restricted to participants who completed the final study visit six months after randomization.
  Group Psychoeducational Intervention: Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
  Group Usual Medical Care: Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 26; Usual Medical Care: 34
  Measured value -- Psychoeducational Intervention: 28.9 (spread 13.7); Usual Medical Care: 29.6 (spread 14.9)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Psychoeducational Intervention vs Usual Medical Care -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 0.73 -- 95% confidence interval -6.77 to 8.24 -- P-value: .85 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER.
    The null hypothesis is that there is no difference in the State Trait Anger Expression Sub-test score between those assigned to the psychoeducational intervention and those assigned to usual medical care six months after randomization.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Psychoeducational Intervention: serious events in 1 of 38 at risk; other events in 2 of 38 at risk. Participants assigned to this arm represent the experimental group and will receive group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes

Psychoeducational intervention: The intervention is group therapy for depression treatment based on cognitive behavioral therapy principles developed for women with type 2 diabetes. Specifically, the intervention comprises activities including (1) Education about how dysphoric symptoms (i.e., depressive symptoms, anxiety, and anger) affect glycemic control; (2) Recognition of dysphoric symptoms; and (3) Management of dysphoric symptoms using cognitive-behavioral skills.
Safety group Usual Medical Care: serious events in 0 of 36 at risk; other events in 0 of 36 at risk. Participants assigned to this arm represent the control group and will receive usual medical care only.
Serious adverse event -- Inpatient Hospitalization (Psychiatric disorders): Psychoeducational Intervention: 1/38; Usual Medical Care: 0/36
Other adverse event -- Worsening mood (Psychiatric disorders): Psychoeducational Intervention: 2/38; Usual Medical Care: 0/36

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
There are no limitations or caveats to report.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01185561; report t20; lead sponsor Loyola University.]
