ImageReady(TM) MR Conditional Pacing System Clinical Study
Trial acronym: SAMURAI
Trial registration: NCT01781078    Lead sponsor: Boston Scientific Corporation    Report id: t31
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 363 participants
Conditions studied: Bradycardia, Sinus Node Dysfunction
Keywords: Single chamber pacing, Dual chamber pacing, MRI, MR scans
Study start: 2013-02    Primary completion / completion: 2019-09-11

SUMMARY
The objective of the SAMURAI Clinical Study is to collect data to confirm the safety, performance and effectiveness of the ImageReady System for use in the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) environment when used in accordance with the Conditions of Use included in the Boston Scientific MRI Technical Guide

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: MRI Group (EXPERIMENTAL)
Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.
Interventions: Radiation: MRI; Device: ImageReady System implant
Arm: Control Group (EXPERIMENTAL)
Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo s study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.
Interventions: Device: ImageReady System implant

INTERVENTION DETAIL
RADIATION: MRI. The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment
DEVICE: ImageReady System implant. Pacemaker and lead(s) implant

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Subject must have the ImageReady System as their initial (de novo) pacing system implant
* Subject has a Class I or II indication for implantation of a single or dual chamber pacemaker according to the ACC/AHA/HRS, or ESC guidelines, as appropriate per geography
* Subject is able and willing to undergo an MRI scan without intravenous sedation
* Subject is willing and capable of providing informed consent (which can include the use of a legally authorized representative (LAR) for documentation of informed consent) and participating in all testing/ visits associated with this clinical study at an approved clinical study center and at the intervals defined by this protocol
* Subject is age 18 or above, or of legal age to give informed consent specific to state and national law

Exclusion Criteria:

* Subject has or has had any pacing or ICD system implants
* Subject has any MR Unsafe implants or devices with an unknown MR status, including MR Unsafe sternal wires, neurostimulators, biostimulator, metals or alloys, per labeling of each implant
* Subject has any MR Conditional implants or devices that impact the ability to conduct this protocol
* Subject needs or will need another MR scan within 14 weeks of system implant, other than that required by the SAMURAI Study
* Subject has a known or suspected sensitivity to dexamethasone acetate (DXA)
* Subject has a mechanical tricuspid heart valve
* Subject is enrolled in any other concurrent study, with the exception of local mandatory governmental registries and observational studies/registries\* that are not in conflict and do not affect the following:

 * Schedule of procedures for the SAMURAI Study (i.e. should not cause additional or missed visits);
 * SAMURAI Study outcome (i.e. involve medications that could affect pacing thresholds);
 * Conduct of the SAMURAI Study per GCP/ ISO 14155:2011/ local regulations
* Subjects with documented permanent or persistent AF where the physician intends to implant a dual chamber pulse generator (single chamber VVIR pulse generators are acceptable)
* Subject is currently on the active heart transplant list
* Subject has documented life expectancy of less than 12 months
* Women of childbearing potential who are or might be pregnant at the time of study enrollment or ImageReady MR Conditional Pacing System implant (method of assessment upon physician's discretion)
* Subjects currently requiring dialysis

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Proportion of Participants Without MR Scan-related Complications. Time frame: MRI Visit + 1 Month. The primary safety endpoint for SAMURAI will be assessed for all subjects randomized to the MRI Group who undergo any portion of the MRI scan sequences. Safety will be confirmed by evaluating the MRI scan-related Complication-free rate (CFR) between the MR Scan and the MRI Visit + 1 Month Visit.
Primary endpoint 2: Success Rate for Threshold Measurement at 1 Month Post-MRI Scan or Control Group Visit. Time frame: MRI + 1 Month Visit. The MRI scan can result in damage to cardiac tissue surrounding lead electrodes due to RF field-induced heating, which in turn may cause elevated pacing thresholds. Primary Effectiveness Endpoint 1 will evaluate any chronic effects from lead heating that will be seen through increased pacing threshold at the MRI Visit + 1 Month follow-up.

Subjects with an increase in pacing thresholds s 0.5V (at 0.5 ms) from pre-MR Scan/Control Group visit to MRI/Control visit + 1 Month follow-up were considered a success. A success rate was calculated for both the MRI and the Control Groups.
Primary endpoint 3: Success Rate for Sensed Amplitude Measurement at 1 Month Post-MRI Scan or Control Group Visit. Time frame: MRI + 1 Month Visit. The MRI scan can result in damage to cardiac tissue surrounding lead electrodes due to Radiofrequency (RF) field-induced heating. Primary Effectiveness Endpoint 2 will evaluate any chronic effects from lead heating that will be seen through decreased sensed amplitude at the MRI Visit + 1 Month follow-up. Data were analyzed separately by chamber, Right Atrium (RA) and Right Ventricle (RV), for this endpoint.
Secondary endpoint 1: Proportion of Participants Without ImageReady System-related Complications. Time frame: 3 months post implant. Overall safety of the ImageReady System will be confirmed by evaluating system-related complications that occur from system implant through 3 months post implant for all subjects who underwent an implant procedure and and reached 91 days of follow-up.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group MRI Group: Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Flow group Control Group: Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo s study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Flow group Patients Withdrawn Prior to Randomization: Patients who consented to the study but were withdrawn prior to the randomization.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- MRI Group: 229; Control Group: 118; Patients Withdrawn Prior to Randomization: 16
  COMPLETED -- MRI Group: 217; Control Group: 113; Patients Withdrawn Prior to Randomization: 0
  NOT COMPLETED -- MRI Group: 12; Control Group: 5; Patients Withdrawn Prior to Randomization: 16

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group MRI Group: Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Baseline group Control Group: Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo s study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- MRI Group: 69.0 (spread 13.0); Control Group: 70.4 (spread 11.9); Total: 69.4 (spread 12.8)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- MRI Group: 102; Control Group: 63; Total: 165
  Male -- MRI Group: 127; Control Group: 55; Total: 182
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Canada -- MRI Group: 6; Control Group: 2; Total: 8
  Singapore -- MRI Group: 12; Control Group: 8; Total: 20
  United States -- MRI Group: 162; Control Group: 83; Total: 245

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Proportion of Participants Without MR Scan-related Complications
The primary safety endpoint for SAMURAI will be assessed for all subjects randomized to the MRI Group who undergo any portion of the MRI scan sequences. Safety will be confirmed by evaluating the MRI scan-related Complication-free rate (CFR) between the MR Scan and the MRI Visit + 1 Month Visit.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: MRI Visit + 1 Month.
  Analysis population: The primary safety endpoint for SAMURAI will be assessed for all subjects randomized to the MRI Group who underwent any portion of the MRI scan sequences and did not have a medically necessary scan performed prior to the MRI visit + 1 month follow-up.
  Group MRI Group: Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MRI Group: 180
  Measured value -- MRI Group: 100 [100 to 100]

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Success Rate for Threshold Measurement at 1 Month Post-MRI Scan or Control Group Visit
The MRI scan can result in damage to cardiac tissue surrounding lead electrodes due to RF field-induced heating, which in turn may cause elevated pacing thresholds. Primary Effectiveness Endpoint 1 will evaluate any chronic effects from lead heating that will be seen through increased pacing threshold at the MRI Visit + 1 Month follow-up.

Subjects with an increase in pacing thresholds s 0.5V (at 0.5 ms) from pre-MR Scan/Control Group visit to MRI/Control visit + 1 Month follow-up were considered a success. A success rate was calculated for both the MRI and the Control Groups.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: % of participants with success, time frame: MRI + 1 Month Visit.
  Analysis population: For the per-protocol analysis, a total of 96 Control Group subjects and 167 MRI Group subjects had paired threshold measurements and met the inclusion criteria.
  Group MRI Group: Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
  Group Control Group: Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MRI Group: 167; Control Group: 96
  Measured value -- MRI Group: 98.2; Control Group: 97.9
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared MRI Group vs Control Group -- method: Farrington-Manning score test -- difference: -0.3 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    The difference in the success rate between the 2 randomized groups was compared to 10% using a one-sided Farrington-Manning score test for non-inferiority at a significance level of 0.05.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 3: Success Rate for Sensed Amplitude Measurement at 1 Month Post-MRI Scan or Control Group Visit
The MRI scan can result in damage to cardiac tissue surrounding lead electrodes due to Radiofrequency (RF) field-induced heating. Primary Effectiveness Endpoint 2 will evaluate any chronic effects from lead heating that will be seen through decreased sensed amplitude at the MRI Visit + 1 Month follow-up. Data were analyzed separately by chamber, Right Atrium (RA) and Right Ventricle (RV), for this endpoint.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: % of participants with success, time frame: MRI + 1 Month Visit.
  Analysis population: Right Atrium: a total of 78 Control Group subjects and 135 MRI Group subjects had paired sensed amplitude measurements and met the inclusion criteria. Right Ventricle: a total of 91 Control Group subjects and 152 MRI Group subjects had paired sensed amplitude measurements and met the inclusion criteria.
  Group Control Group: Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
  Group MRI Group: Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Control Group: 169; MRI Group: 287
  Measured Right Atrium (RA) -- Control Group: 96.2; MRI Group: 96.3
  Measured Right Ventricle (RV) -- Control Group: 96.7; MRI Group: 96.7
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Control Group vs MRI Group -- method: Farrington-Manning score test -- difference: -0.1 -- P-value: 0.0006 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    The difference in the success rate between the 2 randomized groups was compared to 10% using a one-sided Farrington-Manning score test for non-inferiority at a significance level of 0.05.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Control Group vs MRI Group -- method: Farrington-Manning score test -- difference: -0.0 -- P-value: 0.0002 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    The difference in the success rate between the 2 randomized groups was compared to 10% using a one-sided Farrington-Manning score test for non-inferiority at a significance level of 0.05.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Proportion of Participants Without ImageReady System-related Complications
Overall safety of the ImageReady System will be confirmed by evaluating system-related complications that occur from system implant through 3 months post implant for all subjects who underwent an implant procedure and and reached 91 days of follow-up.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: 3 months post implant.
  Group All Subjects Who Underwent an Implant Procedure: All subjects who underwent an implant procedure and reached 91 days of follow-up.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- All Subjects Who Underwent an Implant Procedure: 326
  Measured value -- All Subjects Who Underwent an Implant Procedure: 94.5 [91.9 to 94.5]

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
All Adverse Events are collected, as per ISO 14155: 2011 and/or 21 CFR Part 812.
Safety group MRI Group: serious events in 123 of 229 at risk; other events in 163 of 229 at risk. Those subjects randomized to the MRI Group will undergo a study-specific MRI scan 6-9 weeks post-implant.

MRI: The study-specified MRI scan includes RF- and gradient-intensive sequences designed to test the ImageReady System in the MR environment

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Safety group Control Group: serious events in 67 of 118 at risk; other events in 82 of 118 at risk. Those subjects randomized to the Control Group will not undergo s study-specific MRI scan. All follow-up time requirements are the same for the two groups.

ImageReady System implant: Pacemaker and lead(s) implant
Serious adverse event -- Early ERI - Random component failure (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Erosion (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Infection (> 30 days post-implant) (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Impedance > 2000 ohms - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Dislodgment - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 3/229; Control Group: 2/118
Serious adverse event -- Other - RA Lead (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 1/118
Serious adverse event -- Elevated threshold - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Myocardial perforation post-implant - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 3/229; Control Group: 1/118
Serious adverse event -- Impedance > 2000 ohms - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Dislodgment - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 2/229; Control Group: 1/118
Serious adverse event -- Post-surgical infection (<= 30 days post-implant) (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 0/229; Control Group: 2/118
Serious adverse event -- Adverse reaction - General (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 2/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Physical trauma (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Myocardial perforation without tamponade (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 1/118
Serious adverse event -- Myocardial perforation with tamponade (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 1/118
Serious adverse event -- Venous occlusion (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Adverse reaction - General (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Serious adverse event -- Dyspnea - Heart failure (Cardiac disorders): MRI Group: 5/229; Control Group: 1/118
Other adverse event -- Oversensing - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Undersensing - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 2/229; Control Group: 1/118
Other adverse event -- Other - PG system (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 1/118
Other adverse event -- Oversensing - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 0/229; Control Group: 1/118
Other adverse event -- Rate response inappropriate (Product Issues): MRI Group: 3/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Inappropriate AV delay (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 2/118
Other adverse event -- Pacemaker-mediated tachycardia (PMT) (Product Issues): MRI Group: 6/229; Control Group: 2/118
Other adverse event -- Hematoma - Pocket (> 30 days post-implant) (Product Issues): MRI Group: 0/229; Control Group: 1/118
Other adverse event -- Oversensing - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 2/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Undersensing - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 2/118
Other adverse event -- Extracardiac stimulation - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 2/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Dislodgment - RA (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Other - RA Lead (Product Issues): MRI Group: 0/229; Control Group: 2/118
Other adverse event -- Oversensing - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Undersensing - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Elevated threshold - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 3/229; Control Group: 0/118
Other adverse event -- Extracardiac stimulation - RV (Product Issues): MRI Group: 1/229; Control Group: 2/118
Other adverse event -- Post-surgical wound discomfort (Surgical and medical procedures): MRI Group: 5/229; Control Group: 5/118

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01781078; report t31; lead sponsor Boston Scientific Corporation.]
