Clinical Trial on the Efficacy of a Natural Components Mixture in the Treatment of Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD)
Trial acronym: NUTRAFAST
Trial registration: NCT02369536    Lead sponsor: Neuromed IRCCS    Report id: t38
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 126 participants
Conditions studied: Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Keywords: NAFLD, nutraceutical mixture
Study start: 2015-08-18    Primary completion / completion: 2016-09-15

SUMMARY
The objective of this study is to provide clinical data to support the effectiveness of a mixture of ingredients of natural origin, suitably selected and packaged, in the protection from liver damage, in subjects with NAFLD.

Study design: double-blind, randomized, multicentre trial, placebo-controlled on two parallel groups.

The study participants are healthy volunteers, since they do not have nor had any liver-related clinical symptom, but simply laboratory (plasma levels greater than normal for at least one of the liver parameters -aspartate aminotransferase AST, alanine aminotransferase ALT or γ -glutamyltranspeptidase γ-GT) or instrumental (ultrasonographic abnormalities of steatosic liver) tests altered as compared to normal ranges.

Three months treatment with the nutraceutical mixture or placebo. Outcomes tested before and at the end of treatment - 3 months).

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
A correct hepatic function is highly relevant from the epidemiological point of view. In Italy, Non Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease - NAFLD - has a prevalence of 20-25% in the adult population, with peaks of 50-70% within obese and type-2 diabetes populations: it is the most frequent cause of hematic changes in cytonecrosis enzymes, and can explain about 90% of asymptomatic high levels of transaminases. NAFLD natural history is associated with an increase of cerebro and cardiovascular risk, in both healthy subjects and diabetic patients.

Its prevention and treatment are of great interest, in particular dietary and nutraceutical interventions are the object of innovative research. It is also known that about 65% of subjects with hepatic dysfunction consume plant extracts, like silymarin from Cardo marianum. A recent trial showed an improvement of the hepatic function in subjects with NAFLD treated with silybin, combined with phosphatidylcholine and vitamin E. These findings provide valuable information on new therapeutic strategies, but warrant further investigation. For no natural substance a health claim related to liver function was in fact approved by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). The only exception is constituted by the food sources of choline, for which the maintenance of normal hepatic function has been claimed.

The objective of this study is to provide clinical data to support the effectiveness of a mixture of ingredients of natural origin, suitably selected and packaged, in the protection from liver damage, in subjects with NAFLD.

Treatment: subjects will be randomized to receive the nutraceutical formulation or placebo for three months, in the amount of two capsules (about 800 mg each) a day, at one time.

All subjects, after signing a written informed consent to participation in the study, will receive appropriate recomendations about diet and physical exercise.

A clinic visit, with collection of the patient clinical and pharmacological history and recording of any adverse event, liver ultrasound, measurement of weight and height and calculation of BMI, measure of arterial blood pressure, collection of a sample of venous blood, under fasting conditions, for hematochemical tests, will be made at the baseline (T0); all examinations and tests (except liver ultrasound) will be repeated after three months of treatment (T1).

Primary end-points of the study: hematic levels of hepatic enzymes: ALT, AST and γ-GT.

Secondary end-points of the study:

1. Hepatic function: direct and indirect bilirubin;
2. Inflammation markers: C Reactive Protein (CRP), interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, IL-8, IL-10, Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products (RAGE), Advanced Glycation End Products (AGE), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1)
3. Haemostatic function: Factor VII, fibrinogen, thrombin generation with and without thrombomodulin, antithrombin (AT), tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA), Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1(PAI-1), thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) and activated TAFI (TAFIa), plasmin-antiplasmin complex, plasma fibrinolytic capacity;
4. Metabolic syndrome parameters: glycemia, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol, insulin e insulin-resistance (HOMA-IR homeostasis model assessment-estimated insulin resistance), adiponectin;
5. Apoptosis parameters: total cytokeratin-18 (M65 antigene), M30 and M65/M65ED, soluble fas and soluble fas ligand.

A weekly food diary will be administered to each subject before and at the end of the treatment, to highlight any possible change of dietary habits during the study.

In addition, for all subjects the NAFLD Fibrosis Score (NFS), a composite score of prognostic value for the conversion of NAFDL into fibrotic hepatitis and for the disease severity, will be calculated. This score includes age, body mass index, platelet count, albumin, relationship between AST and ALT, and presence of diabetes. A sub-analysis will be done to evaluate the efficacy of the treatment with the synergistic blend of ingredients in subjects with high, as compared to those with low NFS.

Sample size calculation: Establishing Alpha = 0.05 and Β = 80%, the number of 150 people (75 per treatment arm) will evaluate differences between the two groups (T1 to T0) equal to 46% of the standard deviation of the mean of the two liver function parameters selected (primary end-points), in particular, differences over 11.5 for ALT (17% of the average), 7.1 for AST (17% of the average) or 13.8 for γ-GT (19% of the average). This calculation also includes a drop-out of 10% of the sample enrolled in the study.

Compliance to treatment will be monitored by counting the capsules returned in the box at the end of treatment.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: QUADRUPLE (PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR, OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: nutraceutical mixture (ACTIVE_COMPARATOR)
Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)
Interventions: Dietary Supplement: nutraceutical mixture
Arm: placebo (PLACEBO_COMPARATOR)
Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)
Interventions: Dietary Supplement: placebo

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DIETARY_SUPPLEMENT: nutraceutical mixture. Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
DIETARY_SUPPLEMENT: placebo. Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 80 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: True.
Inclusion Criteria:

* subjects with non alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
* presenting ultrasonographic abnormalities of steatosic liver (hyperechogenic parenchyma)
* with plasma levels greater than normal (ranges of each recruiting center) for at least one of the following parameters (aspartate aminotransferase AST, alanine aminotransferase ALT, γ -glutamyltranspeptidase γ-GT).

Exclusion Criteria:

* history of alcohol abuse
* use of drugs associated with the development of hepatic steatosis
* malnutrition
* alcoholic chronic liver disease
* chronic liver disease of different etiology (autoimmune disease, primary biliary cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, hereditary hemochromatosis, Wilson's disease, deficits of alpha-1 antitrypsin, celiac disease)
* severe renal, cardiac or respiratory insufficiency
* malignant tumors
* intolerance to any component of the active ingredients of the formulation
* women who are pregnant or have planned the pregnancy within three months and women who are breast-feeding.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes AST. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
Primary endpoint 2: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes ALT. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Primary endpoint 3: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes GGT. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
Secondary endpoint 1: Plasma Levels of Hepatic Enzymes. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). hematic levels of direct bilirubin
Secondary endpoint 2: Levels of Circulating Inflammation Marker. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). Levels of circulating Inflammation marker: C Reactive Protein (CRP)
Secondary endpoint 3: Measures of the Haemostatic Function. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA) levels in plasma
Secondary endpoint 4: Measures of the Haemostatic Function. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). Plasminogen Activator Inihibitor (PAI-1) levels in plasma
Secondary endpoint 5: Measures of the Haemostatic Function. Time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months). Thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) levels in plasma

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Nutraceutical Mixture: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
Flow group Placebo: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 62; Placebo: 64
  COMPLETED -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  NOT COMPLETED -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 7; Placebo: 6

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Nutraceutical Mixture: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
Baseline group Placebo: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 0; Placebo: 0; Total: 0
  Between 18 and 65 years -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 47; Placebo: 47; Total: 94
  >=65 years -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 8; Placebo: 11; Total: 19
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55.7 (spread 12.2); Placebo: 53.4 (spread 11.3); Total: 54.6 (spread 11.8)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 20; Placebo: 19; Total: 39
  Male -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 35; Placebo: 39; Total: 74
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  Italy -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58; Total: 113

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes AST
hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: IU/L, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 35.4 (spread 22.5); Placebo: 37.5 (spread 25.2)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 31.6 (spread 15); Placebo: 31.2 (spread 14.7)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Nutraceutical Mixture vs Placebo -- method: ANOVA -- P-value: <0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY_OR_OTHER_LEGACY.
    Intention-to-treat-analysis. Differences between basal values in active and control groups and between T1 vsT0 changes in the two groups assessed by ANOVA and Fisher's exact test.

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes ALT
hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: IU/L, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 45.5 (spread 28.4); Placebo: 48.3 (spread 43.4)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 43.8 (spread 22.9); Placebo: 40.0 (spread 21.9)

PRIMARY OUTCOME 3: Hematic Levels of Hepatic Enzymes GGT
hematic levels of hepatic enzyme: gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: IU/L, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 101.4 (spread 101.0); Placebo: 98.5 (spread 136.0)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 87.2 (spread 71.1); Placebo: 75.6 (spread 64.4)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Plasma Levels of Hepatic Enzymes
hematic levels of direct bilirubin
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: microM/L, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Analysis population: direct bilirubin
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 2.05 (spread 1.2); Placebo: 2.74 (spread 2.91)
  Measured 3 months after -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 2.22 (spread 1.2); Placebo: 2.39 (spread 1.71)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Nutraceutical Mixture vs Placebo -- method: ANOVA -- P-value: <0.05 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    Intention-to-treat-analysis. Differences between basal values in active and control groups and between T1 vsT0 changes in the two groups assessed by ANOVA and Fisher's exact test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Levels of Circulating Inflammation Marker
Levels of circulating Inflammation marker: C Reactive Protein (CRP)
  Reported as MEDIAN with Inter-Quartile Range, unit: nmol/L, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 21.0 [13.3 to 38.1]; Placebo: 28.3 [3.4 to 44.5]
  Measured 3 months after -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 17.1 [12.9 to 30.5]; Placebo: 24.0 [13.3 to 41.0]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Measures of the Haemostatic Function
Tissue-type Plasminogen Activator (t-PA) levels in plasma
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: ng/ml, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Group Nutraceutical Mixture: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
  Group Placebo: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 8.6 (spread 4.8); Placebo: 10.1 (spread 9.0)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 8.7 (spread 4.9); Placebo: 9.9 (spread 8.9)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Measures of the Haemostatic Function
Plasminogen Activator Inihibitor (PAI-1) levels in plasma
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: ng/ml, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Group Nutraceutical Mixture: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
  Group Placebo: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 42.7 (spread 19.8); Placebo: 48.0 (spread 18.5)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 44.3 (spread 18.4); Placebo: 47.7 (spread 21.9)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Measures of the Haemostatic Function
Thrombin activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) levels in plasma
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: % of reference plasma, time frame: before and at the end of treatment (three months).
  Group Nutraceutical Mixture: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
  Group Placebo: Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 55; Placebo: 58
  Measured before treatment -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 105 (spread 23); Placebo: 100 (spread 23)
  Measured after 3 months -- Nutraceutical Mixture: 104 (spread 23); Placebo: 99 (spread 21)

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Nutraceutical Mixture: serious events in 0 of 55 at risk; other events in 0 of 55 at risk. Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of nutraceutical mixture (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

nutraceutical mixture: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a nutraceutical mixture: fish oil 70% DHA (docosahexaenoic acid), phosphatidylcholine concentrated in sunflower oil, silymarin, choline bitartrate, curcumin, D-α-tocopherol; choline (82,5 mg, corresponding to 15% of the average intake of 550 mg per day in an adult man)
Safety group Placebo: serious events in 0 of 58 at risk; other events in 0 of 58 at risk. Lifestyle counseling plus three month administration of placebo formulation (2 soft gelatin capsules of 800 mg per day)

placebo: Lifestyle counseling, administration of a placebo, containing only choline, at the same low concentration of the active mixture

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02369536; report t38; lead sponsor Neuromed IRCCS.]
