An Open-Label, Single-Arm, Phase 3 Study to Evaluate the Effects of KRN23 on Osteomalacia in Adults With X-linked Hypophosphatemia (XLH)
Trial registration: NCT02537431    Lead sponsor: Kyowa Kirin, Inc.    Report id: t40
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE3    Enrollment: 14 participants
Conditions studied: X-linked Hypophosphatemia
Keywords: KRN23, Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), XLH, X-linked Hypophosphatemia
Study start: 2015-12-23    Primary completion / completion: 2018-12-13
Collaborators: Kyowa Kirin Co., Ltd.

SUMMARY
The primary objective of this study is to establish the effect of KRN23 treatment on improvement in XLH-associated osteomalacia as determined by osteoid volume (osteoid volume/bone volume, OV/BV).

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Open-Label Burosumab Q4W (EXPERIMENTAL)
1.0 mg/kg burosumab monthly (Q4W), calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
Interventions: Biological: burosumab

INTERVENTION DETAIL
BIOLOGICAL: burosumab. solution for subcutaneous injection

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 65 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria: 1. Male or female, aged 18 - 65 years, inclusive 2. Diagnosis of XLH supported by classic clinical features of adult XLH (such as short stature or bowed legs), and at least one of the following at Screening: * Documented phosphate regulating gene with homology to endopeptidases located on the X chromosome (PHEX) PHEX mutation in either the patient or in a directly related family member with appropriate X-linked inheritance * Serum intact FGF23 (iFGF23) level \> 30 pg/mL by Kainos assay 3. Biochemical findings consistent with XLH based on overnight fasting (min. 8 hours): * Serum phosphorus \< 2.5 mg/dL at Screening * Ratio of renal tubular maximum phosphate reabsorption rate to glomerular filtration rate (TmP/GFR) \< 2.5 mg/dL at Screening 4. Presence of skeletal pain attributed to XLH/osteomalacia, as defined by a score of ≥ 4 on the Brief Pain Inventory question 3 (BPI-Q3, Worst Pain) at Screening. (Skeletal pain that, in the opinion of the investigator, is attributed solely to causes other than XLH/osteomalacia-for example, back pain or joint pain in the presence of severe osteoarthritis by radiograph in that anatomical location-in the absence of any skeletal pain likely attributed to XLH/osteomalacia should not be considered for eligibility) 5. Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ≥ 60 mL/min (using the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration \[CKD-EPI\] equation) or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) eGFR of 45 to \<60 mL/min at Screening with confirmation that the renal insufficiency is not due to nephrocalcinosis 6. Provide written informed consent after the nature of the study has been explained, and prior to any research-related procedures. If the subject in a minor, provide written assent and have a legally authorized representative willing and able to provide written informed consent, after the nature of the study has been explained, and prior to any research-related procedures 7. Willing to provide access to prior medical records for the collection of biochemical and radiographic data and disease history 8. Females of child-bearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test at Screening and be willing to have additional pregnancy tests during the study. Females considered not to be of childbearing potential include those who have been in menopause for at least two years prior to Screening, or have had tubal ligation at least one year prior to Screening, or have had a total hysterectomy or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. 9. Participants of child-bearing potential or with partners of child-bearing potential who have not undergone a total hysterectomy or a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and are sexually active must ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Percent Change From Baseline in OV/BV at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. OV/BV: percent of a given volume of bone tissue that consists of unmineralized bone (osteoid).
Secondary endpoint 1: Percentage of Participants Achieving Mean Serum Phosphorus Levels Above the Lower Limit of Normal (LLN) at the Mid-Point of the Dose Interval, as Averaged Across Dose Cycles Between Baseline and Week 24. Time frame: Baseline, up to 24 weeks. The LLN was defined as 2.5 mg/dL (0.81 mmol/L). The 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated using Wilson score method.
Secondary endpoint 2: Percent Change From Baseline in O.Th at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. O.Th: mean thickness, given in micrometers, for osteoid seams.
Secondary endpoint 3: Percent Change From Baseline in OS/BS at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. OS/Bs: percent of bone surface covered in osteoid.
Secondary endpoint 4: Percent Change From Baseline in MLt at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. MLt: average time interval between osteoid formation and its subsequent mineralization; calculated by dividing the osteoid thickness by the adjusted apposition rate (O.Th/Aj.AR). Aj.AR; amount of new bone created (bone formation rate over the entire osteoid surface). Based on imputed MLt values.
Secondary endpoint 5: Change From Baseline in MAR at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. MAR: linear rate of new bone deposition; mean distance between the double labels, divided by the time interval between them.
Secondary endpoint 6: Change From Baseline in MS/BS at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. MS/BS: percent of bone surface that displays a tetracycline label reflecting active mineralization; calculated as the double-labeled surface plus one half of the single-labeled surface and is expressed as a function of total bone surface (\[dLS + sLS/2\]/BS). It is a measure of the proportion of bone surface upon which new mineralized bone was being deposited during the period of tetracycline labeling.
Secondary endpoint 7: Change From Baseline in BFR/BS at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. BFR/BS: amount of new bone formed in unit time per unit of bone surface; calculated by multiplying MS/BS by the MAR.

MS/BS: percent of bone surface that displays a tetracycline label reflecting active mineralization; calculated as the double-labeled surface plus one half of the single-labeled surface and is expressed as a function of total bone surface (\[dLS + sLS/2\]/BS). It is a measure of the proportion of bone surface upon which new mineralized bone was being deposited during the period of tetracycline labeling. MAR: linear rate of new bone deposition; mean distance between the double labels, divided by the time interval between them.
Secondary endpoint 8: Change From Baseline in BFR/OS at Week 48. Time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks. BFR/OS: bone formation rate to osteoid surface ratio, related to the Aj.AR (amount of new bone created \[bone formation rate over the entire osteoid surface\]).

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab monthly (Q4W), calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
Period: Open-Label Period (Week 0 to Week 48)
  STARTED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 14
  COMPLETED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 13
  NOT COMPLETED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1
Period: Treatment Extension Period I
  STARTED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 13
  COMPLETED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 13
  NOT COMPLETED -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 40.13 (spread 8.725)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 8
  Male -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 6
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 13
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0
  Asian -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 4
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0
  Black or African American -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1
  White -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 9
  More than one race -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0
Baseline measure: Osteoid Volume/Bone Volume (OV/BV) (MEAN, percentage of osteoid volume)
  Percent of a given volume of bone tissue that consists of unmineralized bone (osteoid).
  value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 26.12 (spread 12.357)
Baseline measure: Serum Phosphorus (MEAN, mg/dL)
  value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2.24 (spread 0.396)
Baseline measure: Osteoid Thickness (O.Th) (MEAN, µm)
  Mean thickness, given in micrometers, for osteoid seams.
  value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 17.21 (spread 4.105)
Baseline measure: Osteoid Surface/Bone Surface (OS/BS) (MEAN, percentage of osteoid surface)
  Percent of bone surface covered in osteoid.
  value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 91.73 (spread 3.438)

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Percent Change From Baseline in OV/BV at Week 48
OV/BV: percent of a given volume of bone tissue that consists of unmineralized bone (osteoid).
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: percentage change of unmineralized bone, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data; participants with non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 10
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -54.18 (spread 20.211)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Open-Label Burosumab Q4W -- method: t-test -- Mean: -54.18 -- 95% confidence interval -68.64 to -39.72 -- P-value: < 0.0001 -- test type: OTHER.
    The null hypothesis of no mean percent change from baseline is tested using t-test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Percentage of Participants Achieving Mean Serum Phosphorus Levels Above the Lower Limit of Normal (LLN) at the Mid-Point of the Dose Interval, as Averaged Across Dose Cycles Between Baseline and Week 24
The LLN was defined as 2.5 mg/dL (0.81 mmol/L). The 95% confidence interval (CI) was calculated using Wilson score method.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of participants, time frame: Baseline, up to 24 weeks.
  Analysis population: Full Analysis Set: all enrolled participants who receive at least one dose of study drug.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 14
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 92.9 [68.5 to 98.7]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Open-Label Burosumab Q4W -- method: binomial test -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: OTHER.
    The p-value is for testing the proportion of participants achieving the mean serum phosphorus levels above the LLN (2.5 mg/dL \[0.81 mmol/L\]) against 0% from the binomial test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Percent Change From Baseline in O.Th at Week 48
O.Th: mean thickness, given in micrometers, for osteoid seams.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: percentage change in thickness, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data; participants with non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 11
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -32.21 (spread 11.966)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Open-Label Burosumab Q4W -- method: t-test -- Mean: -32.21 -- 95% confidence interval -40.25 to -24.17 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: OTHER.
    The null hypothesis of no mean percent change from baseline is tested using t-test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Percent Change From Baseline in OS/BS at Week 48
OS/Bs: percent of bone surface covered in osteoid.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: percent change of bone surface covered, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data; participants with non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 11
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -26.00 (spread 15.012)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Open-Label Burosumab Q4W -- method: t-test -- Mean: -26.00 -- 95% confidence interval -36.08 to -15.91 -- P-value: 0.0002 -- test type: OTHER.
    The null hypothesis of no mean percent change from baseline is tested using t-test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Percent Change From Baseline in MLt at Week 48
MLt: average time interval between osteoid formation and its subsequent mineralization; calculated by dividing the osteoid thickness by the adjusted apposition rate (O.Th/Aj.AR). Aj.AR; amount of new bone created (bone formation rate over the entire osteoid surface). Based on imputed MLt values.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: percent change in average time interval, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data who had non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 10
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -52.24 (spread 58.487)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Open-Label Burosumab Q4W -- method: t-test -- Mean: -52.24 -- 95% confidence interval -94.08 to -10.41 -- P-value: 0.0199 -- test type: OTHER.
    The null hypothesis of no mean percent change from baseline is tested using t-test.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Change From Baseline in MAR at Week 48
MAR: linear rate of new bone deposition; mean distance between the double labels, divided by the time interval between them.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: µm/day, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data who had non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 11
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 0.04 (spread 0.506)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Change From Baseline in MS/BS at Week 48
MS/BS: percent of bone surface that displays a tetracycline label reflecting active mineralization; calculated as the double-labeled surface plus one half of the single-labeled surface and is expressed as a function of total bone surface (\[dLS + sLS/2\]/BS). It is a measure of the proportion of bone surface upon which new mineralized bone was being deposited during the period of tetracycline labeling.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: percent of mineralizing surface, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data who had non-missing data.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 10
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.32 (spread 4.365)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Change From Baseline in BFR/BS at Week 48
BFR/BS: amount of new bone formed in unit time per unit of bone surface; calculated by multiplying MS/BS by the MAR.

MS/BS: percent of bone surface that displays a tetracycline label reflecting active mineralization; calculated as the double-labeled surface plus one half of the single-labeled surface and is expressed as a function of total bone surface (\[dLS + sLS/2\]/BS). It is a measure of the proportion of bone surface upon which new mineralized bone was being deposited during the period of tetracycline labeling. MAR: linear rate of new bone deposition; mean distance between the double labels, divided by the time interval between them.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: µm^3/µm^2/year, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data; participants with non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 6
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -4.90 (spread 27.356)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Change From Baseline in BFR/OS at Week 48
BFR/OS: bone formation rate to osteoid surface ratio, related to the Aj.AR (amount of new bone created \[bone formation rate over the entire osteoid surface\]).
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: µm^3/µm^2/year, time frame: Baseline, 48 weeks.
  Analysis population: Primary Analysis Set: enrolled participants with baseline and follow-up (Week 48/end of treatment) bone biopsy data; participants with non-missing results.
  Group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 4
  Measured value -- Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: -1557.25 (spread 3139.075)

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
Treatment-emergent adverse events are presented.
Safety group Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: serious events in 4 of 14 at risk; other events in 14 of 14 at risk. 1.0 mg/kg burosumab Q4W, calculated based on baseline weight and up to a maximum dose of 90 mg.
Serious adverse event -- Atrial Fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Serious adverse event -- Obstruction Gastric (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Serious adverse event -- Splenic Rupture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Serious adverse event -- Migraine (Nervous system disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Serious adverse event -- Paraesthesia (Nervous system disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Bradycardia (Cardiac disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Pericarditis (Cardiac disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Hypoacusis (Ear and labyrinth disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Abdominal Discomfort (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2/14
Other adverse event -- Abdominal Distension (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Abdominal Pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 3/14
Other adverse event -- Abdominal Pain Upper (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 3/14
Other adverse event -- Constipation (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 3/14
Other adverse event -- Diarrhoea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2/14
Other adverse event -- Dyspepsia (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Gastrooesophageal Reflux Disease (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2/14
Other adverse event -- Gingival Pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Gingival Swelling (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2/14
Other adverse event -- Irritable Bowel Syndrome (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Mouth Ulceration (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 2/14
Other adverse event -- Oral Pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14
Other adverse event -- Periodontal Disease (Gastrointestinal disorders): Open-Label Burosumab Q4W: 1/14

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02537431; report t40; lead sponsor Kyowa Kirin, Inc..]
