RENal Hemodialysis Patients ALlocated Apixaban Versus Warfarin in Atrial Fibrillation (RENAL-AF) Randomized Clinical Trial
Trial acronym: RENAL-AF
Trial registration: NCT02942407    Lead sponsor: Christopher Granger, MD    Report id: t45
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE4    Enrollment: 154 participants
Conditions studied: Atrial Fibrillation, End Stage Renal Disease
Keywords: Renal dialysis
Study start: 2016-12    Primary completion / completion: 2019-08-12
Collaborators: Bristol-Myers Squibb

SUMMARY
This is a prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded end-point evaluation trial. The patient population consists of patients on hemodialysis who have atrial fibrillation (AF) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) .

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This is a multicenter study in adult patients with AF and ESRD who are on hemodialysis and who have stroke risk factors making them candidates for oral anticoagulation. Patients will be randomized to apixaban versus warfarin, and will be treated for up to 15 months.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: apixaban (EXPERIMENTAL)
apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients)
Interventions: Drug: apixaban
Arm: warfarin (EXPERIMENTAL)
warfarin daily dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ration(INR) of 2-3
Interventions: Drug: warfarin

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: apixaban. oral anticoagulant
DRUG: warfarin. oral anticoagulant

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Males and females, age at least 18 years, or the local age of consent, whichever is greater.
* Patients with AF defined as AF on ECG at enrollment or two or more reports of AF from separate monitoring events at least 2 weeks apart (report of ECG, Holter monitor, event monitor or implantable loop recorder).
* CHA2DS2-VASc score of ≥ 2.
* End-stage renal disease treated with hemodialysis for ≥ 3 months.
* Considered by the treating physician(s) to be candidate for oral anticoagulation.
* If of childbearing potential, be willing to avoid pregnancy during the study.

Exclusion Criteria:

* Not considered by the treating physician(s) to be candidates for oral anticoagulation (for example, hemoglobin \< 8.5g/dL, history of intracranial hemorrhage, active bleeding, recent gastrointestinal bleed or retroperitoneal bleed, severe hepatic impairment, or anaphylactic reaction to apixaban)
* Moderate or severe mitral stenosis
* Conditions other than AF that require anticoagulation such as mechanical prosthetic valve, deep venous thrombosis, or pulmonary embolism
* Need for aspirin at a dose \> 81 mg a day or need for P2Y12 antagonist therapy (for example clopidogrel, prasugrel, or ticagrelor)
* Life expectancy \< 3 months
* Anticipated kidney transplant within the next 3 months
* Prisoners or others who are involuntarily incarcerated or detained
* Pregnant, breastfeeding, or considering pregnancy.
* Participation in a clinical trial of an experimental treatment within the past 30 days

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Number of Participants Experiencing ISTH (International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis) Major or Clinically Relevant Non-major Bleeding. Time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit. Assess the safety of apixaban versus warfarin regarding ISTH major bleeding or clinically relevant non-major bleeding events in patients with NVAF (nonvalvular atrial fibrillation) and ESRD (end-stage renal disease) on hemodialysis.

Major bleeding event is defined as:Acute clinically overt bleeding (including access site related bleeding) accompanied by 1 or more of the following: Decrease in Hgb of 2g/dL or more with overt bleeding; Transfusion of 2 or more units of packed RBCs in the setting of an overt bleeding event; Bleeding within a critical site. Hemorrhagic stroke (primary or infarction with hemorrhagic conversion) were classified as major bleeds.

Non-major bleeding event is defined as: Acute or sub-acute clinically overt bleeding (including access site related bleeding) that does not meet criteria for major bleeding \& results in Hospital admission for bleeding, physician guided medical or surgical treatment for bleeding, or change in antithrombotic therapy
Secondary endpoint 1: Number of Participants Experiencing Stroke or Systemic Embolism. Time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit. Number of participants experiencing adjudicated stroke or systemic embolism.
Secondary endpoint 2: Number of Participants Experiencing Mortality. Time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit. Evaluate mortality rates for those participants randomized to warfarin and apixaban in patients with NVAF and ESRD on hemodialysis
Secondary endpoint 3: Persistence of Therapy. Time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit. Evaluate days between time from initiation to discontinuation of randomized therapy.
Secondary endpoint 4: Apixaban Plasma Concentration, Cmax. Time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose. Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0-12 hours after the dose was given on Day 1.
Secondary endpoint 5: Apixaban Plasma Concentration, Cmin. Time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose. Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0-12 hours after the dose was given on Day 1.
Secondary endpoint 6: Area Under the Plasma Apixaban Concentration Curve From 0 to 12 Hours After Dose (AUCO-12). Time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose. Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0 to 12 hours after dose was given on Day 1.
Secondary endpoint 7: Apixaban Pharmacodynamics, Chromogenic Factor Xa Assay. Time frame: Baseline: Day 3, 4, or 5; Day 28. Evaluate the pharmacodynamics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis
Secondary endpoint 8: Adherence to Treatment With Apixaban or With Warfarin. Time frame: Month 15/Final Visit. Measured by self-reported days of medication compliance over the last 30 days.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
Flow group Warfarin: warfarin as prescribed by participant's provider dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Apixaban: 82; Warfarin: 72
  COMPLETED -- Apixaban: 56; Warfarin: 48
  NOT COMPLETED -- Apixaban: 26; Warfarin: 24
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: Apixaban: 3; Warfarin: 2
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Apixaban: 7; Warfarin: 9
  Withdrawn -- Death: Apixaban: 16; Warfarin: 13

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
Baseline group Warfarin: warfarin daily dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Categorical (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  <=18 years -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 0; Total: 0
  Between 18 and 65 years -- Apixaban: 32; Warfarin: 25; Total: 57
  >=65 years -- Apixaban: 50; Warfarin: 47; Total: 97
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Apixaban: 34; Warfarin: 22; Total: 56
  Male -- Apixaban: 48; Warfarin: 50; Total: 98
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- Apixaban: 5; Warfarin: 3; Total: 8
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- Apixaban: 77; Warfarin: 67; Total: 144
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 2; Total: 2
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Apixaban: 1; Warfarin: 0; Total: 1
  Asian -- Apixaban: 3; Warfarin: 1; Total: 4
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 0; Total: 0
  Black or African American -- Apixaban: 35; Warfarin: 33; Total: 68
  White -- Apixaban: 43; Warfarin: 36; Total: 79
  More than one race -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 1; Total: 1
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 1; Total: 1
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  United States -- Apixaban: 82; Warfarin: 72; Total: 154
Baseline measure: Weight (MEAN, kilograms)
  Dry weight of each participant is measured in kilograms.
  value -- Apixaban: 87.6 (spread 24.1); Warfarin: 93.7 (spread 24.9); Total: 90.5 (spread 24.6)

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Number of Participants Experiencing ISTH (International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis) Major or Clinically Relevant Non-major Bleeding
Assess the safety of apixaban versus warfarin regarding ISTH major bleeding or clinically relevant non-major bleeding events in patients with NVAF (nonvalvular atrial fibrillation) and ESRD (end-stage renal disease) on hemodialysis.

Major bleeding event is defined as:Acute clinically overt bleeding (including access site related bleeding) accompanied by 1 or more of the following: Decrease in Hgb of 2g/dL or more with overt bleeding; Transfusion of 2 or more units of packed RBCs in the setting of an overt bleeding event; Bleeding within a critical site. Hemorrhagic stroke (primary or infarction with hemorrhagic conversion) were classified as major bleeds.

Non-major bleeding event is defined as: Acute or sub-acute clinically overt bleeding (including access site related bleeding) that does not meet criteria for major bleeding \& results in Hospital admission for bleeding, physician guided medical or surgical treatment for bleeding, or change in antithrombotic therapy
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit.
  Analysis population: Intent to Treat Population(ITT): Consists of all unique randomized participants regardless of their compliance with the study protocol. Participants are analyzed in the treatment group to which they were randomized.
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin as prescribed by participant's provider dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 82; Warfarin: 72
  Measured value -- Apixaban: 21; Warfarin: 16
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Apixaban vs Warfarin -- method: Regression, Cox -- Hazard Ratio (HR): 1.20 -- 95% confidence interval 0.63 to 2.3 -- P-value: 0.321 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    Exploratory analysis due to failure to reach initial sample size: Non-inferiority (NI) null hypothesis: HR \>= 1.4 (Non-inferiority).
    Due to a lower recruitment rate than anticipated in the early stage of the trial, the sample size was curtailed from 760 to 230 patients. Thus, under the initial protocol assumptions, the study is considered under-powered for the two-sided upper 95% CI on the HR to rule-out the non-inferiority margin of 1.40.
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Apixaban vs Warfarin -- method: Regression, Cox -- Hazard Ratio (HR): 1.20 -- 95% confidence interval 0.63 to 2.3 -- P-value: 0.583 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    Exploratory analysis due to lack of achieving initial sample size.
    If upper limit of 95% confidence interval \< 1 this would be considered evidence of superiority.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Number of Participants Experiencing Stroke or Systemic Embolism
Number of participants experiencing adjudicated stroke or systemic embolism.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit.
  Analysis population: Intent to Treat Population (ITT): Consists of all unique randomized participants regardless of their compliance with the study protocol. Participants are analyzed in the treatment group to which they were randomized.
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin as prescribed by participant's provider dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 82; Warfarin: 72
  Measured value -- Apixaban: 2; Warfarin: 2

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Number of Participants Experiencing Mortality
Evaluate mortality rates for those participants randomized to warfarin and apixaban in patients with NVAF and ESRD on hemodialysis
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit.
  Analysis population: Intent to Treat Population(ITT): Consists of all unique randomized participants regardless of their compliance with the study protocol. Participants are analyzed in the treatment group to which they were randomized..
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin as prescribed by participant's provider dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 82; Warfarin: 72
  Measured value -- Apixaban: 21; Warfarin: 13
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Apixaban vs Warfarin -- Hazard Ratio (HR): 1.47 -- 95% confidence interval 0.74 to 2.93 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    Hazard ratios (apixaban vs warfarin) and 95% confidence intervals obtained using Cox model adjusted for prior warfarin status (naive vs experienced) and treatment. Time from randomization to first occurrence of the composite outcome/censoring date modeled. Those that did not experience the outcome are censored at the earliest of the following: 1) most recent date of evaluation of all of the components, 2) month 15 target (460 days + randomization date), and end of study date (July 27, 2019).
    No p-value provided as analysis is considered exploratory due to study being under powered.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Persistence of Therapy
Evaluate days between time from initiation to discontinuation of randomized therapy.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: Days, time frame: Randomization up to Month 15/Final Visit.
  Analysis population: Consists of all unique participants who took at least one dose of the randomized study drug. Participants were analyzed as randomized.
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin as prescribed by participant's provider dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 77; Warfarin: 68
  Measured value -- Apixaban: 304.4 (spread 140.0); Warfarin: 279.6 (spread 138.2)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Apixaban Plasma Concentration, Cmax
Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0-12 hours after the dose was given on Day 1.
  Reported as GEOMETRIC_MEAN with Geometric Coefficient of Variation, unit: ng/mL, time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose.
  Analysis population: Participants in the Apixaban group who had a plasma sample collected. This outcome measure is not relevant to the Warfarin group.
  Group Apixaban 2.5 mg: Plasma apixaban concentration, Cmax for apixaban 2.5 mg
  Group Apixaban 5 mg: Plasma apixaban concentration, Cmax for apixaban 5mg
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 20; Apixaban 5 mg: 41
  Measured value -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 59.7 (spread 34.3); Apixaban 5 mg: 97.9 (spread 37.9)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Apixaban Plasma Concentration, Cmin
Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0-12 hours after the dose was given on Day 1.
  Reported as GEOMETRIC_MEAN with Geometric Coefficient of Variation, unit: ng/mL, time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose.
  Analysis population: Participants in the Apixaban group who had a plasma sample collected. This outcome measure is not relevant to the Warfarin group.
  Group Apixaban 2.5 mg: Plasma apixaban concentration, Cmin from apixaban 2.5 mg
  Group Apixaban 5mg: Plasma apixaban concentration, Cmin from apixaban 5 mg
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 20; Apixaban 5mg: 41
  Measured value -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 28.2 (spread 62.1); Apixaban 5mg: 49.7 (spread 57.1)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Area Under the Plasma Apixaban Concentration Curve From 0 to 12 Hours After Dose (AUCO-12)
Evaluate the pharmacokinetics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis. The measurement was done from 0 to 12 hours after dose was given on Day 1.
  Reported as GEOMETRIC_MEAN with Geometric Coefficient of Variation, unit: ng*h/mL, time frame: 0-12 hours post-dose.
  Analysis population: Participants in the Apixaban group who had a plasma sample collected. This outcome measure is not relevant to the Warfarin group.
  Group Apixaban 2.5 mg: Plasma apixaban concentration curve from 0 to 12 hours after dose for apixaban 2.5 mg
  Group Apixaban 5mg: Plasma apixaban concentration curve from 0 to 12 hours after dose for apixaban 5 mg
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 20; Apixaban 5mg: 41
  Measured value -- Apixaban 2.5 mg: 507 (spread 40.4); Apixaban 5mg: 868 (spread 44)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Apixaban Pharmacodynamics, Chromogenic Factor Xa Assay
Evaluate the pharmacodynamics of apixaban in ESRD NVAF patients on hemodialysis
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline: Day 3, 4, or 5; Day 28.
  Analysis population: Data not collected.
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin daily dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 0; Warfarin: 0

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Adherence to Treatment With Apixaban or With Warfarin
Measured by self-reported days of medication compliance over the last 30 days.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Month 15/Final Visit.
  Analysis population: Participants who reported medication compliance at month 15.
  Group Apixaban: apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
  Group Warfarin: warfarin daily dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Apixaban: 28; Warfarin: 18
  Measured 5 days or fewer -- Apixaban: 1; Warfarin: 1
  Measured 6 to 23 days -- Apixaban: 4; Warfarin: 2
  Measured 24 days or more -- Apixaban: 23; Warfarin: 15

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
For the apixaban group, 79 of the 82 participants randomized were assessed for adverse events. For the warfarin group, 68 of the 72 participants randomized were assessed for adverse events. The participants that were not assessed for adverse events either died on the same day as randomization (n=1) or withdrew consent for additional follow-up on Day 1 and, therefore, were not assessed for AEs. (n=6).
Safety group Apixaban: serious events in 13 of 79 at risk; other events in 4 of 79 at risk. apixaban 5 mg twice daily (apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily for selected patients; \>= 80 years old or dry body weight/hemodialysis target body weight \<= 60 kg)

apixaban: oral anticoagulant
Safety group Warfarin: serious events in 8 of 68 at risk; other events in 2 of 68 at risk. warfarin daily dose adjusted to target International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 2-3

warfarin: oral anticoagulant
Serious adverse event -- Anaemia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 2/68
Serious adverse event -- Angina Pectoris (Cardiac disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Atrioventricular dissociation (Cardiac disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Bradyarrhythmia (Cardiac disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Bradycardia (Cardiac disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac tamponade (Cardiac disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Diarrhoea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Gastritis (Gastrointestinal disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Asthenia (General disorders): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Serious adverse event -- Non-cardiac chest pain (General disorders): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Serious adverse event -- Cellulitis (Infections and infestations): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Gangrene (Infections and infestations): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Osteomyelitis (Infections and infestations): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Foot fracture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Serious adverse event -- Hip fracture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Tibia fracture (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Serious adverse event -- Vena cava injury (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Serious adverse event -- Failure to thrive (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Other adverse event -- Prostate cancer (Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (incl cysts and polyps)): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Other adverse event -- Anaemia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68
Other adverse event -- Musculoskeletal stiffness (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Other adverse event -- Myalgia (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Other adverse event -- Catheter site haemorrhage (General disorders): Apixaban: 1/79; Warfarin: 0/68
Other adverse event -- International normalised ratio abnormal (Investigations): Apixaban: 0/79; Warfarin: 1/68

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
PK data are not final and are undergoing further modeling and analyses that will be reported in a separate manuscript.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT02942407; report t45; lead sponsor Christopher Granger, MD.]
