A Phase 2, Open-label, Multicenter Study to Investigate the Efficacy, Safety, and Pharmacokinetics of the Anti-PD-1 Monoclonal Antibody BGB-A317 in Patients With Previously Treated Hepatocellular Unresectable Carcinoma
Trial registration: NCT03419897    Lead sponsor: BeiGene    Report id: t52
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE2    Enrollment: 249 participants
Conditions studied: Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC)
Keywords: Advanced liver cancer, RATIONALE-208
Study start: 2018-04-09    Primary completion / completion: 2022-07-06

SUMMARY
This study investigated the efficacy, safety, and pharmacokinetics of the anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody BGB-A317 in participants with previously treated hepatocellular unresectable carcinoma.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Tislelizumab (EXPERIMENTAL)
200 milligrams once every 3 weeks
Interventions: Drug: Tislelizumab

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: Tislelizumab. Administered intravenously

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Key Inclusion Criteria:

1. Histologically confirmed HCC
2. Participants with Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) Stage C, or BCLC stage B not amenable to locoregional therapy or relapsed after locoregional therapy, and not amenable to a curative treatment approach
3. Has received at least 1 line of systemic therapy for unresectable HCC
4. Has at least 1 measurable lesion as defined per RECIST v1.1
5. Child-Pugh score A
6. Easter Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status ≤ 1
7. Adequate organ function

Key Exclusion Criteria:

1. Known fibrolamellar HCC, sarcomatoid HCC, or mixed cholangiocarcinoma and HCC histology
2. Prior therapies targeting PD-1 or PD-L1
3. Has known brain or leptomeningeal metastasis
4. Tumor thrombus involving main trunk of portal vein or inferior vena cava
5. Loco-regional therapy to the liver within 4 weeks before enrollment
6. Medical history of interstitial lung disease, non-infectious pneumonitis or uncontrolled systemic diseases, including diabetes, hypertension, pulmonary fibrosis, or acute lung diseases
7. Has received:

 1. Within 28 days or 5 half-lives (whichever is shorter) of the first study drug administration: any chemotherapy, immunotherapy (eg, interleukin, interferon, thymoxin) or any investigational therapies
 2. Within 14 days of the first study drug administration: sorafenib, regorafenib, or any Chinese herbal medicine or Chinese patent medicines used to control cancer
8. Active autoimmune diseases or history of autoimmune diseases that may relapse
9. Participant with any condition requiring systemic treatment with either corticosteroids (\> 10 mg daily of prednisone or equivalent) or other immunosuppressive medication within 14 days before study drug administration

NOTE: Other protocol defined Inclusion/Exclusion criteria may apply.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Objective Response Rate (ORR) Assessed by Independent Review Committee (IRC). Time frame: From date of first dose to primary analysis data cut-off date of 30-June-2021 (up to approximately 3 years and 3 months). ORR is defined as the percentage of participants with complete response (CR) and partial response (PR) as the best overall response, as determined by an IRC using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1. CR is defined as disappearance of all target lesions and PR is defined as at least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions.
Secondary endpoint 1: ORR Assessed by Investigator. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). ORR is defined as the percentage of participants with CR and PR as the best overall response, as determined by investigator assessment using RECIST v1.1. CR is defined as disappearance of all target lesions and PR is defined as at least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions.
Secondary endpoint 2: Duration of Response (DOR) Assessed by IRC. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1
Secondary endpoint 3: DOR Event-Free Rate Assessed by IRC. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months); Months 12 and 24 reported. DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the percentage of participants who were event-free for progression or death at 12 and 24 months with 95% confidence intervals estimated using Greenwood's formula.
Secondary endpoint 4: DOR Assessed by Investigator. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1
Secondary endpoint 5: DOR Event-Free Rate Assessed by Investigator. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months); Months 12 and 24 reported. DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the percentage of participants who were event-free for progression or death at 12 and 24 months with 95% confidence intervals estimated using Greenwood's formula.
Secondary endpoint 6: Progression-free Survival (PFS) Assessed by IRC. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). PFS is defined as the time from first dose until first documentation of progression or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1
Secondary endpoint 7: PFS Assessed by Investigator. Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). PFS is defined as the time from first dose until first documentation of progression or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1
Secondary endpoint 8: Overall Survival (OS). Time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months). OS is defined as the time from first study drug administration to the date of death due to any cause

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 milligrams (mg) administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Tislelizumab: 249
  COMPLETED -- Tislelizumab: 0
  NOT COMPLETED -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Withdrawn -- Death: Tislelizumab: 180
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: Tislelizumab: 1
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Tislelizumab: 6
  Withdrawn -- Sponsor Decision: Tislelizumab: 61
  Withdrawn -- Physician Decision: Tislelizumab: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, Years)
  value -- Tislelizumab: 60.3 (spread 12.54)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Tislelizumab: 32
  Male -- Tislelizumab: 217
Baseline measure: Race/Ethnicity, Customized (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Asian -- Tislelizumab: 123
  White -- Tislelizumab: 47
  Other -- Tislelizumab: 1
Baseline measure: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) Performance Status Score (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  ECOG performance status is used by doctors and researchers to assess how a participant's disease is progressing, assess how the disease affects the daily living activities of the participant and determine appropriate treatment and prognosis. 0 = Fully Active (Most Favorable Activity); 1 = Restricted activity but ambulatory; 2 = Ambulatory but unable to carry out work activities; 3 = ...
  0 = Fully Active -- Tislelizumab: 129
  1 = Restricted Activity -- Tislelizumab: 120

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Objective Response Rate (ORR) Assessed by Independent Review Committee (IRC)
ORR is defined as the percentage of participants with complete response (CR) and partial response (PR) as the best overall response, as determined by an IRC using Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1. CR is defined as disappearance of all target lesions and PR is defined as at least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: From date of first dose to primary analysis data cut-off date of 30-June-2021 (up to approximately 3 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 12.9 [8.96 to 17.66]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Tislelizumab -- method: Binomial exact test -- P-value: 0.0001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    Tislelizumab compared with historical ORR rate of 7%

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: ORR Assessed by Investigator
ORR is defined as the percentage of participants with CR and PR as the best overall response, as determined by investigator assessment using RECIST v1.1. CR is defined as disappearance of all target lesions and PR is defined as at least a 30% decrease in the sum of diameters of target lesions.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 14.5 [10.34 to 19.45]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Duration of Response (DOR) Assessed by IRC
DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1
  Reported as MEDIAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Months, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: NA [14.6 to NA]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: DOR Event-Free Rate Assessed by IRC
DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the percentage of participants who were event-free for progression or death at 12 and 24 months with 95% confidence intervals estimated using Greenwood's formula.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months); Months 12 and 24 reported.
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured 12 Months -- Tislelizumab: 76.9 [57.5 to 88.3]
  Measured 24 Months -- Tislelizumab: 65.9 [45.7 to 80.1]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: DOR Assessed by Investigator
DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1
  Reported as MEDIAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Months, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 21.4 [11.1 to NA]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: DOR Event-Free Rate Assessed by Investigator
DOR is defined as the time from the date that response criteria are first met to the date that progressive disease is objectively documented or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the percentage of participants who were event-free for progression or death at 12 and 24 months with 95% confidence intervals estimated using Greenwood's formula.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Percentage of participants, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months); Months 12 and 24 reported.
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured 12 Months -- Tislelizumab: 68.1 [49.8 to 80.9]
  Measured 24 Months -- Tislelizumab: 47.4 [30.1 to 62.8]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Progression-free Survival (PFS) Assessed by IRC
PFS is defined as the time from first dose until first documentation of progression or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the IRC using RECIST v1.1
  Reported as MEDIAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Months, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 2.7 [1.4 to 2.8]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: PFS Assessed by Investigator
PFS is defined as the time from first dose until first documentation of progression or death, whichever comes first, as assessed by the investigator using RECIST v1.1
  Reported as MEDIAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Months, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 2.8 [2.6 to 4.0]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Overall Survival (OS)
OS is defined as the time from first study drug administration to the date of death due to any cause
  Reported as MEDIAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: Months, time frame: From date of first dose to end of study (up to approximately 4 years and 3 months).
  Analysis population: Safety analysis set included all participants who received ≥ 1 dose of study drug
  Group Tislelizumab: Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Tislelizumab: 249
  Measured value -- Tislelizumab: 13.2 [10.8 to 15.2]

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 3%.
Defined as an adverse event that had an onset date or worsening in severity from baseline (pretreatment) on or after the date of first dose of study drug up to 30 days after study drug discontinuation or initiation of new anticancer therapy.
Safety group Tislelizumab: serious events in 94 of 249 at risk; other events in 226 of 249 at risk. Tislelizumab 200 mg administered intravenously once every 3 weeks until unacceptable toxicity, withdrawal of consent, or the time point at which the participant was no longer benefiting from therapy, as assessed by the investigator, whichever occurred first
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac failure congestive (Cardiac disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Myocarditis (Cardiac disorders): Tislelizumab: 2/249
Serious adverse event -- Palpitations (Cardiac disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Primary adrenal insufficiency (Endocrine disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Eyelid ptosis (Eye disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Abdominal pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 3/249
Serious adverse event -- Abdominal pain upper (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 2/249
Serious adverse event -- Ascites (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 9/249
Serious adverse event -- Colitis (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Diarrhoea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Duodenal ulcer haemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 2/249
Serious adverse event -- Gastric haemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Haematemesis (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Haemoperitoneum (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Immune-mediated enterocolitis (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Lower gastrointestinal haemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Serious adverse event -- Obstruction gastric (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 1/249
Other adverse event -- Anaemia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Tislelizumab: 32/249
Other adverse event -- Thrombocytopenia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): Tislelizumab: 15/249
Other adverse event -- Hypothyroidism (Endocrine disorders): Tislelizumab: 23/249
Other adverse event -- Abdominal distension (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 21/249
Other adverse event -- Abdominal pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 26/249
Other adverse event -- Abdominal pain upper (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 17/249
Other adverse event -- Ascites (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 19/249
Other adverse event -- Constipation (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 24/249
Other adverse event -- Diarrhoea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 30/249
Other adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 15/249
Other adverse event -- Stomatitis (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 8/249
Other adverse event -- Vomiting (Gastrointestinal disorders): Tislelizumab: 21/249
Other adverse event -- Asthenia (General disorders): Tislelizumab: 40/249
Other adverse event -- Fatigue (General disorders): Tislelizumab: 28/249
Other adverse event -- Influenza like illness (General disorders): Tislelizumab: 11/249
Other adverse event -- Oedema peripheral (General disorders): Tislelizumab: 21/249
Other adverse event -- Pyrexia (General disorders): Tislelizumab: 32/249
Other adverse event -- Nasopharyngitis (Infections and infestations): Tislelizumab: 8/249

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03419897; report t52; lead sponsor BeiGene.]
