A Phase 2 Double-blind, Placebo-controlled Study of the Effects of Muscadine Grape Extract in Men With Prostate Cancer on Androgen Deprivation Therapy
Trial registration: NCT03496805    Lead sponsor: Wake Forest University Health Sciences    Report id: t54
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE2    Enrollment: 106 participants
Conditions studied: Recurrent Prostate Cancer
Keywords: Muscadine Grape Extract, Androgen Deprivation Therapy
Study start: 2019-01-29    Primary completion / completion: 2025-08-14

SUMMARY
It is estimated that one-third of the more than 7 million deaths from cancer worldwide are attributable to potentially modifiable risk factors, with 374,000 deaths preventable through diet modification alone. Diet supplementation for the prevention or treatment of cancer is attractive, as implementation is relatively easy, even in populations with reduced incomes and resources. Grape extracts or active components isolated from grapes have received attention as chemopreventive or therapeutic agents based upon their anti-proliferative, anti-inflammatory, and anti-oxidant properties. Evidence from preclinical trials also suggests that muscadine grape products may decrease systemic inflammation. This study builds upon promising preclinical and clinical evidence to determine if the addition muscadine grape extract (MGE) to androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) improves symptoms in men with prostate cancer.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Primary Objective: To compare levels of fatigue in the MGE group compared to the placebo group at 6 months.

Secondary Objectives

* To compare levels of fatigue in the MGE group compared to the placebo group at 3, 9, and 12 months.
* To compare quality of life in men in the MGE group compared to the placebo group.
* To compare physical function, physical fitness, and body composition in men in the MGE group compared to the placebo group.
* To compare time to PSA progression (from study entry) in men in the MGE group compared to the placebo group.
* To compare progression-free survival (from study entry) in men in the MGE group compared to the placebo group.

OUTLINE: Participants are randomized into 1 of 2 groups.

GROUP I (Muscadine grape extract): Participants begin Androgen deprivation therapy prior to receiving muscadine grape extract and then receive muscadine grape extract orally (PO) twice daily (BID) for 12 months in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.

GROUP II (PLACEBO): Participants begin Androgen deprivation therapy prior to receiving placebo and then receive placebo PO BID for 12 months in the absence of disease progression or unacceptable toxicity.

After completion of study treatment, participants are followed up at 72 hours and then for up to 12 months.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: TRIPLE (PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR).
This is a double-blind study. Only the lead-site investigational pharmacy team and the statistician will unblinded. The blind will be maintained until the study is complete.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: MGE group (EXPERIMENTAL)
Patients will be randomized to muscadine grape extract (MGE). The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Interventions: Drug: MGE; Other: ADT
Arm: Placebo group (PLACEBO_COMPARATOR)
Patients will be randomized to placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of placebo.
Interventions: Other: Placebo; Other: ADT

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: MGE. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).
OTHER: Placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).
OTHER: ADT. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: MALE. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Men age ≥18 years who are fluent in English.
* Histologically confirmed prostate adenocarcinoma.
* Prior surgical castration or active ongoing use of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) with expectation by the treating physician that patient would remain on ADT for the upcoming 12 months. ADT in the setting of definitive radiation therapy permitted. Concurrent treatment with androgen pathway inhibitors (examples include enzalutamide, abiraterone, darolutamide, apalutamide) permitted..
* Normal organ and marrow function function (labs within 30 days prior to study entry) as defined below:

White blood cell count greater than or equal to 3,500/mcL (or 3.5 (x103)) Platelet count greater than or equal to 75,000/mcL (or 75 (x103)) Hemoglobin greater than or equal to \>9 g/dL Total bilirubin less than or equal to 2.5 X institutional upper limit of normal AST(SGOT)/ALT(SGPT) less than or equal to 2.5 X institutional upper limit of normal Creatinine less than or equal to 2.5 X institutional upper limit of normal

* Able to ambulate (use of assist device is acceptable).
* Able to cooperate with study-related activities.
* The effects of MGE on the developing human fetus are unknown. Men must agree to use adequate contraception (barrier method of birth control; abstinence) prior to study entry and for the duration of study participation.
* Ability to understand and the willingness to sign an IRB-approved informed consent document (either directly or via a legally authorized representative).

Exclusion Criteria:

* Symptomatic metastatic disease requiring medical treatment (i.e., painful metastases to bone).
* Prostate cancer related surgery or radiation within 60 days prior to study entry.
* Documented rise in PSA (defined as rise of \> 0.5 ng/mL) while on current prostate cancer therapy, determined by PSA values, at least one of which must be during the 6 months prior to study entry PSA values must be at least 7 days apart.
* Planned cessation of ADT or planned use of cytotoxic chemotherapy (i.e., docetaxel) within 12 months after study entry.
* Ongoing use of any other investigational cancer-directed agents.
* History of allergic reactions attributed to compounds of similar chemical or biologic composition to MGE.
* Inability to swallow oral medications.
* Malabsorption due to bowel resection or gastrointestinal disease leading to uncontrolled diarrhea, or persistent nausea or vomiting requiring daily antiemetic therapy for symptom management within the past week.
* Uncontrolled intercurrent illness, including but not limited to: ongoing or active infection, symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia, or psychiatric illness/social situations that would limit compliance with study requirements.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Changes in Fatigue. Time frame: 6 months. The PROMIS Fatigue 7a Short-Form assesses the experience (3 items) and impact (4 items) of fatigue. Item responses are rated on a five-point scale ranging from "never" to "always" and are summed for a total score and transformed to a T-score metric. Higher scores indicate more fatigue. Recommendations for classifying fatigue based on the T scores are as follows: \<50 normal; 50-59 mild; 60-69 moderate; ≥70 severe. 50 indicates the population mean with a standard deviation of 10
Secondary endpoint 1: Changes in Quality of Life: PROMIS. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. General Quality of Life will be measured using the Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System© (PROMIS©) Global Health Short Form (SF), a 10-item instrument representing multiple domains. Items assess self-reported measures of general aspects of physical, mental and social health in adults. Raw scores are summed within each sub-domain, and converted to T-scores. Higher scores indicate better general health than the general population.
Secondary endpoint 2: Changes in Quality of Life: HFRDIS. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Quality of life will be assessed by the Hot Flash Related Daily Interference Scale (HFRDIS). HFRDIS is a 10-item scale that assesses the degree to which hot flashes interfere with a variety of daily activities and quality of life. Interference is rated on an 11-point scale (0=not interfere; 10=completely interfere). Higher scores indicate more interference.
Secondary endpoint 3: Changes in Sleep Disturbance. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Sleep disturbance will be measured using the PROMIS Sleep Disturbance (SD) SF 8a. The PROMIS-SD items assess self-reported perceptions of sleep quality, sleep depth, and restoration associated with sleep. Each question has five response options ranging in value from one to five. The lowest possible raw score is 8; the highest possible raw score is 40. Raw scores are converted to a standardized T-score. Higher scores indicate more sleep disturbance.
Secondary endpoint 4: Changes in Cognitive Abilities. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Cognitive abilities will be measured using the PROMIS Cognitive Abilities SF 4a, which assesses patient-perceived functional abilities related to mental acuity, concentration, and memory. Raw scores are converted to a standardized T-score; final scores are represented by the T-score. Higher scored indicate more cognitive ability.
Secondary endpoint 5: Changes in Self-reported Physical Function. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Self-reported physical function will be measured using the PROMIS Physical Function 10a SF, which is designed to assess self-reported capability rather than actual performance of physical activities. The form consists of 10 items. Raw scores are summed within each sub-domain, and converted to T-scores. Higher scores indicate better physical function general health than the general population.
Secondary endpoint 6: Changes in Physical Performance. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Physical performance will be objectively assessed using the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB). Each performance measure is scored ranging from 0-4 (0 = unable to complete; 4 = highest performance level), with total sum score range from 0-12. Lower score on the SPPB have been associated with increased risk of disability, hospitalization and worse survival among older adults with and without cancer.
Secondary endpoint 7: Changes in Sub-maximal Exercise. Time frame: baseline and 6 month. Submaximal (6-minute walk) exercise capacity will be measured to assess physical fitness.
Secondary endpoint 8: Changes in Body Composition. Time frame: Baseline and 6 months. Whole body lean mass, fat mass, and bone mass will be measured by duel energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). BMI will be calculated from height and weight.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group MGE Group: Patients will be randomized to muscadine grape extract (MGE). The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.

MGE: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Flow group Placebo Group: Patients will be randomized to placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of placebo.

Placebo: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- MGE Group: 53; Placebo Group: 53
  COMPLETED -- MGE Group: 35; Placebo Group: 43
  NOT COMPLETED -- MGE Group: 18; Placebo Group: 10
  Withdrawn -- Adverse Event: MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 0
  Withdrawn -- Death: MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 0
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 1
  Withdrawn -- Physician Decision: MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 0
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: MGE Group: 14; Placebo Group: 9

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group MGE Group: Patients will be randomized to muscadine grape extract (MGE). The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.

MGE: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Baseline group Placebo Group: Patients will be randomized to placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of placebo.

Placebo: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- MGE Group: 71.3 (spread 5.6); Placebo Group: 72.1 (spread 5.9); Total: 71.7 (spread 5.6)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 0
  Male -- MGE Group: 53; Placebo Group: 53; Total: 106
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 1
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- MGE Group: 51; Placebo Group: 53; Total: 104
  Unknown or Not Reported -- MGE Group: 1; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 1
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 0
  Asian -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 0
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 0; Total: 0
  Black or African American -- MGE Group: 17; Placebo Group: 6; Total: 23
  White -- MGE Group: 36; Placebo Group: 45; Total: 81
  More than one race -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 1; Total: 1
  Unknown or Not Reported -- MGE Group: 0; Placebo Group: 1; Total: 1
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- MGE Group: 53; Placebo Group: 53; Total: 106

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Changes in Fatigue
The PROMIS Fatigue 7a Short-Form assesses the experience (3 items) and impact (4 items) of fatigue. Item responses are rated on a five-point scale ranging from "never" to "always" and are summed for a total score and transformed to a T-score metric. Higher scores indicate more fatigue. Recommendations for classifying fatigue based on the T scores are as follows: \<50 normal; 50-59 mild; 60-69 moderate; ≥70 severe. 50 indicates the population mean with a standard deviation of 10
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: T-score, time frame: 6 months.
  Group MGE Group: Patients will be randomized to muscadine grape extract (MGE). The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.

MGE: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
  Group Placebo Group: Patients will be randomized to placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of placebo.

Placebo: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- MGE Group: 53; Placebo Group: 53
  Measured value -- MGE Group: 52.4 (spread 0.9); Placebo Group: 53.4 (spread 0.9)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared MGE Group vs Placebo Group -- method: ANCOVA -- P-value: 0.454 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Changes in Quality of Life: PROMIS
General Quality of Life will be measured using the Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System© (PROMIS©) Global Health Short Form (SF), a 10-item instrument representing multiple domains. Items assess self-reported measures of general aspects of physical, mental and social health in adults. Raw scores are summed within each sub-domain, and converted to T-scores. Higher scores indicate better general health than the general population.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Changes in Quality of Life: HFRDIS
Quality of life will be assessed by the Hot Flash Related Daily Interference Scale (HFRDIS). HFRDIS is a 10-item scale that assesses the degree to which hot flashes interfere with a variety of daily activities and quality of life. Interference is rated on an 11-point scale (0=not interfere; 10=completely interfere). Higher scores indicate more interference.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Changes in Sleep Disturbance
Sleep disturbance will be measured using the PROMIS Sleep Disturbance (SD) SF 8a. The PROMIS-SD items assess self-reported perceptions of sleep quality, sleep depth, and restoration associated with sleep. Each question has five response options ranging in value from one to five. The lowest possible raw score is 8; the highest possible raw score is 40. Raw scores are converted to a standardized T-score. Higher scores indicate more sleep disturbance.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Changes in Cognitive Abilities
Cognitive abilities will be measured using the PROMIS Cognitive Abilities SF 4a, which assesses patient-perceived functional abilities related to mental acuity, concentration, and memory. Raw scores are converted to a standardized T-score; final scores are represented by the T-score. Higher scored indicate more cognitive ability.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Changes in Self-reported Physical Function
Self-reported physical function will be measured using the PROMIS Physical Function 10a SF, which is designed to assess self-reported capability rather than actual performance of physical activities. The form consists of 10 items. Raw scores are summed within each sub-domain, and converted to T-scores. Higher scores indicate better physical function general health than the general population.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Changes in Physical Performance
Physical performance will be objectively assessed using the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB). Each performance measure is scored ranging from 0-4 (0 = unable to complete; 4 = highest performance level), with total sum score range from 0-12. Lower score on the SPPB have been associated with increased risk of disability, hospitalization and worse survival among older adults with and without cancer.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Changes in Sub-maximal Exercise
Submaximal (6-minute walk) exercise capacity will be measured to assess physical fitness.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: baseline and 6 month.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Changes in Body Composition
Whole body lean mass, fat mass, and bone mass will be measured by duel energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). BMI will be calculated from height and weight.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: Baseline and 6 months.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group MGE Group: serious events in 6 of 53 at risk; other events in 43 of 53 at risk. Patients will be randomized to muscadine grape extract (MGE). The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.

MGE: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Safety group Placebo Group: serious events in 8 of 53 at risk; other events in 43 of 53 at risk. Patients will be randomized to placebo. The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily). Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of placebo.

Placebo: The patients will take 4 capsules by mouth BID (twice daily).

ADT: Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is to be started within 60 days prior to initiation of MGE.
Serious adverse event -- Alanine aminotransferase increased (Investigations): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac arrest (Cardiac disorders): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Serious adverse event -- Device related infection (Infections and infestations): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Dizziness (Nervous system disorders): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Diverticulitis (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Serious adverse event -- Hyperglycemia (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Hypotension (Vascular disorders): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Lower gastrointestinal hemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Serious adverse event -- Lung infection (Infections and infestations): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Myasthenia gravis (Nervous system disorders): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 1/53
Serious adverse event -- Stroke (Nervous system disorders): MGE Group: 1/53; Placebo Group: 2/53
Other adverse event -- Abdominal pain (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 3/53; Placebo Group: 4/53
Other adverse event -- Alkaline phosphatase increased (Investigations): MGE Group: 4/53; Placebo Group: 4/53
Other adverse event -- Anemia (Blood and lymphatic system disorders): MGE Group: 9/53; Placebo Group: 9/53
Other adverse event -- Aspartate aminotransferase increased (Investigations): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 3/53
Other adverse event -- Back pain (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 3/53
Other adverse event -- Constipation (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 13/53; Placebo Group: 13/53
Other adverse event -- Diarrhea (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 7/53; Placebo Group: 5/53
Other adverse event -- Dizziness (Nervous system disorders): MGE Group: 3/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Other adverse event -- Dyspepsia (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 10/53; Placebo Group: 13/53
Other adverse event -- Dyspnea (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): MGE Group: 3/53; Placebo Group: 0/53
Other adverse event -- Fatigue (General disorders): MGE Group: 9/53; Placebo Group: 9/53
Other adverse event -- Flatulence (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 18/53; Placebo Group: 12/53
Other adverse event -- Hot flashes (Vascular disorders): MGE Group: 9/53; Placebo Group: 9/53
Other adverse event -- Hyperglycemia (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): MGE Group: 3/53; Placebo Group: 11/53
Other adverse event -- Hypertension (Vascular disorders): MGE Group: 13/53; Placebo Group: 16/53
Other adverse event -- COVID-19 (Infections and infestations): MGE Group: 0/53; Placebo Group: 3/53
Other adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): MGE Group: 6/53; Placebo Group: 3/53
Other adverse event -- Pain (General disorders): MGE Group: 4/53; Placebo Group: 4/53

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03496805; report t54; lead sponsor Wake Forest University Health Sciences.]
