The Effect of Gentamicin Intravesical Installations on Decreasing Urinary Tract Infections in Patients With Neurogenic Bladder After Spinal Cord Injury: A Clinical Trial
Trial registration: NCT03503513    Lead sponsor: University of Michigan    Report id: t55
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE2, PHASE3    Enrollment: 23 participants
Conditions studied: Urinary Tract Infections, Spinal Cord Injuries, Spinal Cord Diseases, Neurogenic Bladder
Study start: 2018-08-24    Primary completion / completion: 2023-09-30
Collaborators: Department of Health and Human Services

SUMMARY
A non-randomized study evaluating the efficacy of intravesical gentamicin on the occurrence rate of urinary tract infections and bladder complications in patients after spinal cord injury (SCI), and to assess its effectiveness in promoting overall quality of life (QOL), community living, and participation.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Intervention: Participants' number of UTIs during the six-month treatment period will be compared to the number they incurred during the six months prior to treatment. Participants complete a baseline visit which consists of medical history, informed consent, urinalysis/culture indicating no active UTIs, metabolic panel, and self-reported measures about complications, symptoms, community participation and quality of life. Similar information is collected at the end of treatment. At a 3-month follow up visit, all available data is obtained through phone interviews and/or medical chart reviews except for self-report measures. Participants begin active treatment using Gentamicin plus saline solution after they have completed all requirements. Instillations of treatment solution occur nightly after the participant's last evening catheterization. Bi-weekly calls are conducted to ensure compliance, answer questions and document adverse events. Participants will stop the trial if they develop an UTI. After receiving treatment for the UTI by their physician, they will go into a washout period of a week before resuming the trial with Gentamicin instillations.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: PREVENTION. Masking: NONE.
For each participant, six month pre-treatment data is compared to data collected during treatment (count of UTIs) and immediately after treatment (self-reported measures).

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Gentamicin sulfate (EXPERIMENTAL)
Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a treatment period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment for this UTI, they resume the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline screening and being consented, they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug from syringes are to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.
Interventions: Drug: Gentamicin Sulfate

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: Gentamicin Sulfate. Gentamicin is compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Pharmacy mails participants treatment drug. Once received, participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution after catheterizing their bladder at night.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: 80 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Provision of signed and dated informed consent form and agreement to complete the daily dosing log as instructed by the study coordinator.
* History of traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI) or non-traumatic spinal cord disease, (SCD) with sustained neurological dysfunction
* At least 6 months post-initial hospital discharge following SCI/SCD onset
* Neurogenic bladder
* Ability to perform daily instillation on self or with help of others and willingness to adhere to the study regiment.
* History of at least 2 documented urinary tract infection (UTI) during the previous 6 months (prior to screening)
* Have a designated physician or health care provider for routine care
* Use of clean intermittent catheterization or catheterization through a stoma (i.e. Mitrofanoff) as their primary method of bladder management

Exclusion Criteria:

* Concurrent use of systemic oral or intravesical antibiotic prophylaxis
* Documented or self-reported history of gentamicin allergy
* Female patients who are currently pregnant or attempting to become pregnant
* Patients with a history of 8th cranial nerve disorder
* Co-morbidities like cancer and chronic disease that could impact patient safety OR significantly affect the rate of UTIs and/or quality of life (QOL) substantially
* Urological co-morbidities like bladder cancer and history of kidney disease.
* Current UTI at screening (assessed via urine analysis and culture and symptoms)
* Concurrent enrollment in a similar clinical trial
* Concurrent use of contraindicated diuretics (ethacrynic acid, furosemide)
* Current use of other contraindicated or disallowed concomitant medications or receiving treatments that may influence the results from this study.
* Known allergy to aminoglycoside antibiotics; Otological symptoms at baseline (i.e. tinnitus. severe dizziness/vertigo)
* At the discretion of study team, individuals who are unable or unlikely to comply with procedures and/or for whom study participation is not recommended (e.g. unable to arrange transportation, cognitive and/or behavioral challenges that preclude meaningful participation, poor health, etc.)

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Number of Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) Over Time. Time frame: 6 months prior to treatment and 6 months during treatment. Number of reported urinary tract infections (UTI) by participants and documented in medical chart, per person across months pre and post treatment. The number of UTIs over time was determined by establishing a per person-month rate made up of the total number of UTIs pre and during treatment (numerator) for the sample divided by the total number of persons/ 6 months (11 participants over 6 months period = 66) as the denominator. The unit of measure is defined as pre and during treatment number of UTI events per person months. These appear below under outcome measure data table.
Secondary endpoint 1: Change in Score of Neurogenic Bladder Symptom Severity (NBSS) Scale. Time frame: Baseline to 6 months. Self-reported bladder symptoms on a scale from 0 (no symptoms) to 74 (maximum symptoms). The NBSS is a patient reported 22 item scale designed to assess symptoms and bladder related consequences among persons with neurogenic bladder dysfunction. NBSS scores are calculated across three domains with higher scores being worse and reflecting more symptoms or complications. Incontinence (scored 0-29), storage and voiding (scored 0-22), and consequences (scored 0-23). An additional question of happiness (points) was not used for this outcome.
Secondary endpoint 2: Change in Score of Neurogenic Bowel Dysfunction (NBD). Time frame: Baseline to 6 months. Self-reported bowel symptoms on a scale from 0 (very minor) to 14+ (severe). The NBD is a 10 item validated measure that assesses frequency of defecation and methods of bowel management and complications. Thus negative numbers in "score change" represent decrease in symptom severity.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Gentamicin Sulfate: Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment for the UTI and a one week washout period, they can resume their Gentamicin instillations. After screening, being consented and completing baseline interview, participants are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug in the syringe is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin is compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 23
  Began Treatment -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 19
  Completed More Than 4 Months of Treatment -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 12
  COMPLETED -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 11
  NOT COMPLETED -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 12
  Withdrawn -- First cohort faced a clinical hold which caused disruption in treatment;: Gentamicin Sulfate: 4
  Withdrawn -- Second cohort faced changes due to pandemic, resulting in declining participant count: Gentamicin Sulfate: 2
  Withdrawn -- Physician Decision: Gentamicin Sulfate: 3
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Gentamicin Sulfate: 2
  Withdrawn -- Lost to Follow-up: Gentamicin Sulfate: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Gentamicin Sulfate: Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment they can continue with the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline and consented they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin will be compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
Baseline data is provided for all participants who started treatment
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 46 [26 to 76]
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 7
  Male -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 12
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 18
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 1
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  Asian -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  Black or African American -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  White -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 18
  More than one race -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 1
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  United States -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 19
Baseline measure: Type of spinal lesions (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 14
  Spinal Cord Disease (SCD) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 5

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Number of Urinary Tract Infections (UTI) Over Time
Number of reported urinary tract infections (UTI) by participants and documented in medical chart, per person across months pre and post treatment. The number of UTIs over time was determined by establishing a per person-month rate made up of the total number of UTIs pre and during treatment (numerator) for the sample divided by the total number of persons/ 6 months (11 participants over 6 months period = 66) as the denominator. The unit of measure is defined as pre and during treatment number of UTI events per person months. These appear below under outcome measure data table.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: UTI events per person months., time frame: 6 months prior to treatment and 6 months during treatment.
  Analysis population: Eleven participants with spinal cord injury or disease and neurogenic bladder with recurrent urinary track infections (2 or more) during the 6 months prior to treatment.
  Group Gentamicin Sulfate: Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment they can continue with the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline and consented they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin will be compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 11
  Measured 6 months prior to treatment -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0.53 [0.37 to 0.74]
  Measured 6 months during treatment -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 0.09 [0.03 to 0.20]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Gentamicin Sulfate -- method: differences in incidence rate ratio -- Risk Ratio (RR): 0.17 -- 95% confidence interval 0.03 to 0.20 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    comparison between pre and during treatment rates of UTI

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Change in Score of Neurogenic Bladder Symptom Severity (NBSS) Scale
Self-reported bladder symptoms on a scale from 0 (no symptoms) to 74 (maximum symptoms). The NBSS is a patient reported 22 item scale designed to assess symptoms and bladder related consequences among persons with neurogenic bladder dysfunction. NBSS scores are calculated across three domains with higher scores being worse and reflecting more symptoms or complications. Incontinence (scored 0-29), storage and voiding (scored 0-22), and consequences (scored 0-23). An additional question of happiness (points) was not used for this outcome.
  Reported as MEAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: score on a scale, time frame: Baseline to 6 months.
  Group Gentamicin Sulfate: Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment they can continue with the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline and consented they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin will be compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 11
  Measured NBSS Incontinence (0-29) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: -3.8 [-7.9 to 0.3]
  Measured NBSS Storage/Void (0-22) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: -1.1 [-3.8 to 1.7]
  Measured NBSS Consequences (0-23) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: -1.9 [-4.6 to 0.8]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Gentamicin Sulfate -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -3.8 -- 95% confidence interval -7.9 to 0.3 -- P-value: <0.06 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    NBSS Domain score for incontinence pre-post comparison; small sample size did not allow for power calculation.
    a priori threshold p value of \<0.05
  Statistical analysis 2 -- compared Gentamicin Sulfate -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -1.1 -- 95% confidence interval -3.8 to 1.7 -- P-value: <0.39 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    NBSS Domain score for storage and voiding; pre-post comparison. Due to small sample size (n=11) no power calculations were conducted.
    a priori threshold p\<0.05
  Statistical analysis 3 -- compared Gentamicin Sulfate -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -1.9 -- 95% confidence interval -4.6 to 0.8 -- P-value: <0.14 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.
    Pre and post test comparisons of mean NBSS scores for the consequences domain. Power calculations were not conducted due to small sample size.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Change in Score of Neurogenic Bowel Dysfunction (NBD)
Self-reported bowel symptoms on a scale from 0 (very minor) to 14+ (severe). The NBD is a 10 item validated measure that assesses frequency of defecation and methods of bowel management and complications. Thus negative numbers in "score change" represent decrease in symptom severity.
  Reported as MEAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: score on a scale, time frame: Baseline to 6 months.
  Analysis population: 11 participants with spinal cord injury or disease (SCI/D) with neurogenic bladder and recurrent UTIs during 6 months prior to treatment. They completed the NBD survey.
  Group Gentamicin Sulfate: Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment they can continue with the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline and consented they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin will be compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Gentamicin Sulfate: 11
  Measured value -- Gentamicin Sulfate: -2.1 [-6.8 to 2.6]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Gentamicin Sulfate -- method: t-test, 2 sided -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -2.1 -- 95% confidence interval -6.8 to 2.6 -- P-value: <0.34 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Gentamicin Sulfate: serious events in 4 of 19 at risk; other events in 17 of 19 at risk. Participants initiate Gentamicin instillations every night for a period of 6 months. Instillations are stopped if they developed a UTI. After receiving treatment they can continue with the Gentamicin instillations. After baseline and consented they are instructed on how to do the instillations through a catheter, once they receive the drug and aid equipment (i.e. syringes) to do installations. Remaining drug is to be disposed after each use. Participants use their own catheters. In-dwelling catheters are not allowed.

Gentamicin Sulfate: Gentamicin will be compounded by the Michigan Medicine Research Pharmacy in a concentration of 480 milligrams of the active product to 1000 milliliters of normal saline. Participants will do daily instillations of 30 milliliters of solution
Serious adverse event -- Renal stone removal (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- Gross hematuria (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- Post-COVID 19 pneumonia (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- pulmonary embolism (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- bowel obstruction (Gastrointestinal disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- Urinary Tract Infection (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Serious adverse event -- Serratia tissue infection (Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- Clinically significant labs (General disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 2/19
Other adverse event -- Urinary Tract Infection (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 12/19
Other adverse event -- bladder spasms (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 3/19
Other adverse event -- COVID-19 (Infections and infestations): Gentamicin Sulfate: 4/19
Other adverse event -- nasal discharge (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- urinary discharge (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- abdominal stoma issue (Infections and infestations): Gentamicin Sulfate: 2/19
Other adverse event -- bladder irritation (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- sweating (General disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- heel wound (Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 2/19
Other adverse event -- air in bladder (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- upper respiratory infection (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- bleeding from catheter site (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- muscle strain (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- pneumonia (Infections and infestations): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- flu-like symptoms (Infections and infestations): Gentamicin Sulfate: 3/19
Other adverse event -- bone infection (Infections and infestations): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19
Other adverse event -- hematuria (Renal and urinary disorders): Gentamicin Sulfate: 1/19

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03503513; report t55; lead sponsor University of Michigan.]
