A Randomized Clinical Trial of Andexanet Alfa in Acute Intracranial Hemorrhage in Patients Receiving an Oral Factor Xa Inhibitor
Trial registration: NCT03661528    Lead sponsor: Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc.    Report id: t56
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE4    Enrollment: 530 participants
Conditions studied: Acute Intracranial Hemorrhage
Keywords: thrombosis, anticoagulant, acute intracranial hemorrhage, andexanet alfa
Study start: 2019-06-06    Primary completion / completion: 2023-08-09

SUMMARY
Randomized, controlled clinical trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of andexanet alfa versus usual care in patients with intracranial hemorrhage anticoagulated with a direct oral FXa anticoagulant

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
This is a randomized, multicenter clinical trial designed to determine the efficacy and safety of andexanet alfa compared to usual care in patients presenting with acute intracranial hemorrhage within 6 hours of symptom onset to baseline scan and within 15 hours of taking an oral factor Xa inhibitor. The study will use a prospective, randomized, open label (PROBE) design. The primary efficacy outcome will be adjudicated by a blinded Endpoint Adjudication Committee. To support the adjudication of hemostatic efficacy, a blinded Imaging Core Laboratory will review all available scans. Between 900 and 1200 patients are planned to be enrolled in the study.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: SINGLE (OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR).
ANNEXA-I is a randomized, open-label study with blinded adjudication on primary efficacy and safety outcomes, including death and thrombotic events.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: andexanet alfa (EXPERIMENTAL)
Patients will receive one of two dosing regimens of andexanet alfa based on which FXa inhibitor they received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose.
Interventions: Drug: andexanet alfa
Arm: Usual Care (OTHER)
Usual care will consist of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians consider to be appropriate.
Interventions: Drug: Usual Care

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: andexanet alfa. Andexanet alfa is a recombinant version of human FXa
DRUG: Usual Care. Usual care will consist of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians consider to be appropriate.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria: 1. Written informed consent. Either the patient or his or her medical proxy (or legally authorized representative if permissible by local or regional laws and regulations) has been adequately informed of the nature and risks of the study and has given written informed consent prior to Screening. * Deferred consent procedure is allowed where approved by local ethics committees. In cases of deferred consent, the time of the study physician's documented decision to include the patient into the study will serve as "time of consent" with respect to protocol-specific procedures. * In all cases where the patient does not sign informed consent prior to study entry, informed consent from the patient will be obtained as soon as realistically possible after inclusion in the trial and in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, International Conference on Harmonization-Good Clinical Practice (GCP), the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and national and local regulations. 2. Age ≥ 18 years old at the time of consent. 3. An acute intracerebral bleeding episode, defined as an estimated blood volume ≥ 0.5 to ≤ 60 mL acutely observed radiographically within the cerebrum. Patients may have extracerebral (e.g., subdural, subarachnoid, epidural) or extracranial (e.g., gastrointestinal, intraspinal) bleeding additionally, but the intracerebral hemorrhage must be considered the most clinically significant bleed at the time of enrollment. 4. Performance of a head CT or MRI scan demonstrating the intracerebral bleeding within 2 hours prior to randomization (the baseline scan may be repeated only once to meet this criterion). 5. Treatment with an oral FXa inhibitor (apixaban \[last dose 2.5 mg or greater\], rivaroxaban \[last dose 10 mg or greater\], or edoxaban \[last dose 30 mg or greater\]): * ≤ 15 hours prior to randomization. * \> 15 hours prior to randomization or unknown time of last dose, if documented anti fXa activity is \> 100 ng/mL for direct fXa inhibitors (apixaban, rivaroxaban or edoxaban) may be enrolled, irrespective of the time of the last dose, and the local anti-fXa activity level is obtained within 2 hours prior to consent, performed as per standard of care. Note: Patients enrolled in this manner should receive a high andexanet dosing regimen. 6. Time from bleeding symptom onset \< 6 hours prior to the baseline imaging scan. Time of trauma (if applicable) or time last seen normal may be used as surrogates for time of symptom onset. (If the baseline scan is repeated to meet Inclusion Criterion #4, the time from bleeding symptom onset must be \< 6 hours prior to ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Number of Participants Who Achieved Effective Hemostasis. Time frame: Baseline up to 12 hours. Effective hemostasis was defined as a change from baseline in National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of + 6 or less at the 12 hour timepoint and ≤35% increase in haematoma volume compared to baseline on a repeat computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan at 12 hours and no rescue therapies administered between 3 hours and 12 hours after randomization (defined as excellent or good hemostasis). The NIHSS is a validated quantitative assessment tool to measure stroke-related neurological deficits and ranges from 0 (no neurological deficits) to a maximum of 42, indicative of a very severe level of impairment. Data presented is for the number of participants who achieved effective hemostasis (excellent or good hemostasis), as adjudicated by the independent Endpoint Adjudication Committee (IEAC).
Secondary endpoint 1: Percentage Change From Baseline to Nadir in Anti-FXa Activity. Time frame: Baseline up to 2 hours. Anti-FXa activity was measured from plasma samples to assess the anticoagulant status of FXa inhibitors using a modified chromogenic assay performed at a Central Laboratory. Nadir was defined as the minimum anti-FXa activity post-randomization.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Andexanet Alfa: Participants received a regimen of andexanet alfa administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus, immediately followed by a continuous infusion.

Dosing regimen was based on which FXa inhibitor the participants received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose of treatment.
Flow group Usual Care: Participants received usual care. Usual care consisted of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians considered to be appropriate.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Andexanet Alfa: 263; Usual Care: 267
  Received at Least 1 Dose of Study Drug -- Andexanet Alfa: 262; Usual Care: 265
  COMPLETED -- Andexanet Alfa: 180; Usual Care: 193
  NOT COMPLETED -- Andexanet Alfa: 83; Usual Care: 74
  Withdrawn -- Death: Andexanet Alfa: 1; Usual Care: 0
  Withdrawn -- Physician Decision: Andexanet Alfa: 3; Usual Care: 1
  Withdrawn -- Other than Specified: Andexanet Alfa: 5; Usual Care: 2
  Withdrawn -- Withdrawal by Subject: Andexanet Alfa: 5; Usual Care: 3
  Withdrawn -- Disease Progression: Andexanet Alfa: 8; Usual Care: 13
  Withdrawn -- Adverse Event: Andexanet Alfa: 61; Usual Care: 55

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Andexanet Alfa: Participants received a regimen of andexanet alfa administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus, immediately followed by a continuous infusion.

Dosing regimen was based on which FXa inhibitor the participants received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose of treatment.
Baseline group Usual Care: Participants received usual care. Usual care consisted of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians considered to be appropriate.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Measured in the Intent-to-Treat Population (ITT), Extended Population, which included all randomized participants according to the randomized treatment.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Andexanet Alfa: 79.4 (spread 8.51); Usual Care: 78.7 (spread 8.61); Total: 79.0 (spread 8.56)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Andexanet Alfa: 117; Usual Care: 128; Total: 245
  Male -- Andexanet Alfa: 146; Usual Care: 139; Total: 285
Baseline measure: Ethnicity (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Hispanic or Latino -- Andexanet Alfa: 15; Usual Care: 13; Total: 28
  Not Hispanic or Latino -- Andexanet Alfa: 227; Usual Care: 237; Total: 464
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Andexanet Alfa: 21; Usual Care: 17; Total: 38
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Andexanet Alfa: 0; Usual Care: 0; Total: 0
  Asian -- Andexanet Alfa: 3; Usual Care: 4; Total: 7
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Andexanet Alfa: 0; Usual Care: 0; Total: 0
  Black or African American -- Andexanet Alfa: 5; Usual Care: 4; Total: 9
  White -- Andexanet Alfa: 239; Usual Care: 247; Total: 486
  More than one race -- Andexanet Alfa: 0; Usual Care: 0; Total: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Andexanet Alfa: 16; Usual Care: 12; Total: 28

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Number of Participants Who Achieved Effective Hemostasis
Effective hemostasis was defined as a change from baseline in National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) of + 6 or less at the 12 hour timepoint and ≤35% increase in haematoma volume compared to baseline on a repeat computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan at 12 hours and no rescue therapies administered between 3 hours and 12 hours after randomization (defined as excellent or good hemostasis). The NIHSS is a validated quantitative assessment tool to measure stroke-related neurological deficits and ranges from 0 (no neurological deficits) to a maximum of 42, indicative of a very severe level of impairment. Data presented is for the number of participants who achieved effective hemostasis (excellent or good hemostasis), as adjudicated by the independent Endpoint Adjudication Committee (IEAC).
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Baseline up to 12 hours.
  Analysis population: Measured in the ITT set, primary efficacy population, which included all participants randomized to study intervention based on the first data cut-off. Here, 'Overall number of participants analyzed' = participants evaluable for this outcome measure.
  Group Andexanet Alfa: Participants received a regimen of andexanet alfa administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus, immediately followed by a continuous infusion.

Dosing regimen was based on which FXa inhibitor the participants received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose of treatment.
  Group Usual Care: Participants received usual care. Usual care consisted of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians considered to be appropriate.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Andexanet Alfa: 224; Usual Care: 228
  Measured value -- Andexanet Alfa: 150; Usual Care: 121
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Andexanet Alfa vs Usual Care -- method: Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel -- Percentage proportion difference: 13.4 -- 95% confidence interval 4.6 to 22.2 -- P-value: 0.0032 -- test type: OTHER.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Percentage Change From Baseline to Nadir in Anti-FXa Activity
Anti-FXa activity was measured from plasma samples to assess the anticoagulant status of FXa inhibitors using a modified chromogenic assay performed at a Central Laboratory. Nadir was defined as the minimum anti-FXa activity post-randomization.
  Reported as MEDIAN with Full Range, unit: Percent change, time frame: Baseline up to 2 hours.
  Analysis population: Measured in the ITT set, primary efficacy population, which included all participants randomized to study intervention based on the first data cut-off. Here, 'Overall number of participants analyzed' = participants evaluable for this outcome measure.
  Group Andexanet Alfa: Participants received a regimen of andexanet alfa administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus, immediately followed by a continuous infusion.

Dosing regimen was based on which FXa inhibitor the participants received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose of treatment.
  Group Usual Care: Participants received usual care. Usual care consisted of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians considered to be appropriate.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Andexanet Alfa: 203; Usual Care: 199
  Measured value -- Andexanet Alfa: -94.41 [-99.1 to 1805.0]; Usual Care: -27.46 [-97.9 to 416.0]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Andexanet Alfa vs Usual Care -- method: ANCOVA -- Difference in least squares mean: -185.99 -- 95% confidence interval -199.93 to -172.05 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: OTHER.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 5%.
All-cause mortality (ACM) is presented for all enrolled participants. Serious adverse events and other adverse event (AE) data are presented for all randomized participants who received study treatment and were analyzed according to the actual treatment received.

ACM data includes participants who died due to AEs, an initial intracranial hemorrhage (disease progression), or participants who were discontinued from the study for other reasons and died on, or after, the day of discontinuation.
Safety group Andexanet Alfa: serious events in 120 of 262 at risk; other events in 198 of 262 at risk. Participants received a regimen of andexanet alfa administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus, immediately followed by a continuous infusion.

Dosing regimen was based on which FXa inhibitor the participants received and the amount and timing of the most recent dose of treatment.
Safety group Usual Care: serious events in 96 of 265 at risk; other events in 200 of 265 at risk. Participants received usual care. Usual care consisted of any treatment(s) (including no treatment) other than andexanet alfa administered within 3 hours post-randomization that the Investigator and/or other treating physicians considered to be appropriate.
Serious adverse event -- Myocardial infarction (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 8/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Acute myocardial infarction (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 3/262; Usual Care: 2/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac failure (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 3/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Acute cardiac event (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 0/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Atrial fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Atrioventricular block complete (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Atrioventricular block second degree (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 0/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac arrest (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 0/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac dysfunction (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 0/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac failure chronic (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiac failure congestive (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardio-respiratory arrest (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Cardiopulmonary failure (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Pulseless electrical activity (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 0/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Sinus node dysfunction (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Ventricular fibrillation (Cardiac disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Serious adverse event -- Intestinal obstruction (Gastrointestinal disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 1/262; Usual Care: 1/265
Serious adverse event -- Upper gastrointestinal haemorrhage (Gastrointestinal disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 2/262; Usual Care: 0/265
Other adverse event -- Pneumonia (Infections and infestations): Andexanet Alfa: 28/262; Usual Care: 25/265
Other adverse event -- Pneumonia aspiration (Infections and infestations): Andexanet Alfa: 19/262; Usual Care: 16/265
Other adverse event -- Urinary tract infection (Infections and infestations): Andexanet Alfa: 54/262; Usual Care: 44/265
Other adverse event -- Hypokalaemia (Metabolism and nutrition disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 40/262; Usual Care: 28/265
Other adverse event -- Delirium (Psychiatric disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 20/262; Usual Care: 26/265
Other adverse event -- Insomnia (Psychiatric disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 14/262; Usual Care: 9/265
Other adverse event -- Headache (Nervous system disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 24/262; Usual Care: 19/265
Other adverse event -- Hypertension (Vascular disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 18/262; Usual Care: 19/265
Other adverse event -- Constipation (Gastrointestinal disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 39/262; Usual Care: 25/265
Other adverse event -- Nausea (Gastrointestinal disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 23/262; Usual Care: 17/265
Other adverse event -- Vomiting (Gastrointestinal disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 9/262; Usual Care: 14/265
Other adverse event -- Pyrexia (General disorders): Andexanet Alfa: 23/262; Usual Care: 22/265

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03661528; report t56; lead sponsor Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc..]
