Sodium-Glucose CoTransporter 2 (sGLT2) Inhibitor and Endogenous Ketone Production
Trial registration: NCT03852901    Lead sponsor: National Institute on Aging (NIA)    Report id: t58
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE1    Enrollment: 21 participants
Conditions studied: Empaglifozin, Physiological Effects of Drugs, Hypoglycemic Agents, Sodium-Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors
Keywords: Ketones, Metabolism, Hormones, Alzheimer's Disease
Study start: 2019-03-28    Primary completion / completion: 2021-12-13

SUMMARY
Background:

The drug empagliflozin treats diabetes. It lowers blood sugar by increasing glucose the kidneys excrete. This increases levels of ketones formed in the blood. The body makes ketones when it does not have enough glucose for fuel. The brains of many people with age-related diseases like Alzheimer's do not use glucose well. Brain use of ketones might improve mental ability. We investigated how empagliflozin affects ketone levels, which could lead to ways to improve brain health as people age.

Objectives:

To study how taking empagliflozin affects systemic and brain metabolism including ketone levels in people without diabetes.

Eligibility:

Adults at least 55 years old without diabetes

Design:

After a screening Visit, eligible participants were admitted to the NIA Clinical Unit during Visits 1 (baseline), 2 (first dose) and 3 (last/14th dose). On each Visit, blood draws were performed and circulating metabolites and hormones were repeatedly measured over 34-hour periods. Using plasma from fasting state only, we isolated total and neuronal-origin extracellular vesicles to measure proteins of the IGF-1 and insulin signaling cascades. Furthermore, on each Visit, we performed magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) to measure concentrations of a plethora of metabolites in the brain. Between Visits 2 and 3, participants were taking the drug at home. A continuous glucose monitoring device was placed to detect potential glucose fluctuations while at home. The study was concluded for participants after the end of Visit 3.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Objective and Specific Aims: The objective of this proof-of-concept study was to demonstrate in non-diabetic men and women age \> 55 years that a sGLT2 inhibitor (empagliflozin) can increase ketone bodies and metabolites used for gluconeogenesis. We also hypothesized that empagliflozin would increase circulating glucagon and fatty acids, decrease circulating amino acids, upregulate IGF-1 and insulin cascades in plasma extracellular vesicles, and change MRS brain metabolism measures.

Experimental Design and Methods: men and women (total n=21) were recruited for this pilot study. Each eligible participant had a screen visit (Visit 0) and three additional 2-day study visits (Visit 1-3). On Visits 1, 2 and 3, frequent blood sampling for beta-hydroxybutyrate butyrate (BHB), acetoacetate (AcAc), fatty and amino acids, glucagon, insulin and glucose levels will be carried out; these visits also included blood work for extracellular vesicle biomarkers and brain MRS. In addition, placement of a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) along with a 34-hour urine collection was carried out. On Visit 2 the participants wore the CGM until they returned for their next Visit. On Visit 3 the CGM was removed at the end of the study Visit. On Visit 1, no empagliflozin was administered. Participants returned in 13 +/- 2 days for Visit 2. Visit 2 was the same as Visit 1 except empagliflozin 25 mg was administered both mornings, at least 30 minutes before eating breakfast and participants continueed empagliflozin 25 mg once every morning, at least 30 minutes before eating breakfast, at home until they returned in 13 +/- 2 days for Visit 3. At the end of Visit 3, empagliflozin was stopped.

Medical Relevance and Expected Outcome: Elevating ketone bodies may bolster neuronal health and delay onset and progression of cognitive impairment. The expected outcome of this study was an increase in circulating levels of ketones, glucagon and fatty acids, an increased expression of receptors and mediators of ketone metabolism in plasma exosomes, an upregulation of IGF-1/insulin cascades in exosomes, and a change in Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) brain metabolism measures, in subjects taking a sGLT2 inhibitor. We expected circulating amino acid levels to decrease, especially during the overnight hours. This study will aid in deciding whether this class of compound may be used in a larger study to improve cognitive function in patients with diagnosis consistent with declining cognitive function. We required that empagliflozin was taken for up to 2 weeks before returning for Visit 3, because we needed to fully understand the homeostatic adaptations that may occur in the metabolite response to empagliflozin due to prolonged (up to 2 weeks) sGLT2 inhibition. It is our goal in the future to use the information gathered in this pilot study to design a long-term study in people who actually suffer from mild cognitive impairment/Alzheimer's disease and therefore a Visit 2 (34-hour acute study) only, as outlined above, would not give us the full picture of the metabolic changes that might occur with prolonged use, especially in a non-diabetic population.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: BASIC_SCIENCE. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Single Arm (EXPERIMENTAL)
Single group
Interventions: Drug: empagliflozin (Jardiance) 25 mg

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: empagliflozin (Jardiance) 25 mg. Oral empagliflozin 25 mg/day x 14 days

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 55 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
INCLUSION CRITERIA: * Age 55 years and older. * Healthy (see exclusion criteria below). * Able to understand the study risks and procedures, and consent to participate in the study. * Able to read and speak English. EXCLUSION CRITERIA: * History of diabetes (requiring any medical treatment other than diet and exercise) or fasting plasma glucose \> 126 mg/dl or HbA1c\> 6.5 %. * History of hypoglycemia. * BMI \> 35 kg/m(2). * Creatinine clearance less than 60 ml/min as measured by GFR. * Glucosuria * History of anemia within the past 6 months or Hgb \<11.0 mg/dL for women and Hgb \<12.5 mg/dL for men. * Current steroid use or steroid use within 90 days of screening, excluding eye drops. * Currently taking loop diuretics (Lasix, for example). * Participant presently following a calorie restriction diet, low carb/high fat diet. * HIV virus infection * Hepatitis B infection, as evidenced by a positive HBsAG at screen visit. * Hepatitis C infection that has not been treated. (The screen blood work must show HCV RNA quantitative is not detectable). * Active infection/fever that may cause changes in glucose metabolism. * Known allergy to sGLT2 inhibitors in the past. * Thyroid dysfunction that is not controlled or treated. This will be determined by Free T3, T4, Free T4 or TSH not within MedStar Harbor Hospital laboratory normal ranges for this pilot study. * Adrenal dysfunction as determined by a cortisol level not within the normal range for MedStar Harbor Hospital Laboratory for this pilot study. * Kidney or liver disease, (GFR \< 60 mL/min/1.73 m(2) and/or liver enzymes not within normal ranges for MedStar Harbor Hospital Laboratory for this pilot study. * Severe gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn s disease or ulcerative colitis requiring continuous treatment. * History of severe pulmonary disease such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma requiring continuous medication use. * Patients with known, or evidence of, peripheral vascular disease. * History of chronic urinary tract infections. * History of recurrent or recent dehydration in the past year. * History of recurrent or recent vaginal yeast infection. * Alcohol intake greater than 30 grams (drink more than 2 beers OR equivalent per day). * History of severe psychiatric conditions associated with behavioral problems or requiring chronic medical treatment. * Poor venous access. * Inability to walk 2,000 steps * Donation or loss of 400 mL or more of blood within 56 days prior to and subsequent to screening. * Participation in another study in the past ...

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Change in Serum β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB). Time frame: 14 days. Change in serum β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 1: Change in Plasma Glucose. Time frame: 14 days. Change in plasma glucose after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 2: Change in Serum Non-esterified Fatty Acids (NEFAs). Time frame: 14 days. Change in serum non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 3: Change in Plasma Insulin. Time frame: 14 days. Change in plasma insulin after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 4: Change in Serum Acetoacetate (AcAc). Time frame: 14 days. Change in serum Acetoacetate (AcAc) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 5: Change in 1H MRS BHB. Time frame: 14 days. Change in 1H MRS β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 6: Change in 1H MRS Glutamate (Glu). Time frame: 14 days. Change in 1H MRS glutamate (Glu) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
Secondary endpoint 7: Change in 1H MRS Glutamine (Gln). Time frame: 14 days. Change in 1H MRS glutamine (Gln) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Single Arm: The single group of the study (empagliflozin group) took empagliflozin 25mg/day for 14 days.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Single Arm: 21
  COMPLETED -- Single Arm: 20
  NOT COMPLETED -- Single Arm: 1

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Single Arm: 62.14 (spread 6.91)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Single Arm: 11
  Male -- Single Arm: 10
Baseline measure: Race (NIH/OMB) (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  American Indian or Alaska Native -- Single Arm: 0
  Asian -- Single Arm: 0
  Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander -- Single Arm: 0
  Black or African American -- Single Arm: 3
  White -- Single Arm: 18
  More than one race -- Single Arm: 0
  Unknown or Not Reported -- Single Arm: 0
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (NUMBER, participants)
  United States -- Single Arm: 21

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Change in Serum β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB)
Change in serum β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: µM, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 21
  Measured value -- Single Arm: 40.717 (spread 4.866)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 40.717 -- 95% confidence interval 31.166 to 50.268 -- P-value: <0.001 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 1; Den df = 902.758; F = 70.003; Sig. \< 0.001 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Change in Plasma Glucose
Change in plasma glucose after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mg/dl, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 21
  Measured value -- Single Arm: -.637 (spread 1.051)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -0.637 -- 95% confidence interval -2.699 to 1.426 -- P-value: 0.545 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 1; Den df = 884.229; F = .367; Sig = .545 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Change in Serum Non-esterified Fatty Acids (NEFAs)
Change in serum non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mEq/L, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 21
  Measured value -- Single Arm: .027 (spread .009)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 0.027 -- 95% confidence interval .009 to .044 -- P-value: 0.003 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 1; Den df = 880.629; F = 8.782; Sig. = 0.003 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Change in Plasma Insulin
Change in plasma insulin after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mIU/L, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 21
  Measured value -- Single Arm: -2.647 (spread 1.329)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -2.647 -- 95% confidence interval -5.255 to -0.040 -- P-value: 0.047 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 1; Den df = 880.870; F = 3.970; Sig. = 0.047 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Change in Serum Acetoacetate (AcAc)
Change in serum Acetoacetate (AcAc) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: µM, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 21
  Measured value -- Single Arm: -5.573 (spread 1.853)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- Mean Difference (Final Values): -5.573 -- 95% confidence interval -9.210 to -1.937 -- P-value: 0.003 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 1; Den df = 902.181; F = 9.049; Sig. = 0.003 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Change in 1H MRS BHB
Change in 1H MRS β-hydroxybutyrate (BHB) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mmol/L, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 20
  Measured value -- Single Arm: 0.04 (spread 0.03)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- P-value: 0.5849 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df: 2; Den df = 33; F = 0.5451; Sig. = 0.5849 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Change in 1H MRS Glutamate (Glu)
Change in 1H MRS glutamate (Glu) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mmol/L, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 20
  Measured value -- Single Arm: -0.23 (spread 0.11)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- P-value: 0.0142 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df = 2; Den df = 35; F = 4.8191; Sig. = 0.0142 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Change in 1H MRS Glutamine (Gln)
Change in 1H MRS glutamine (Gln) after 14 days on empagliflozin, compared with baseline.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Error, unit: mmol/L, time frame: 14 days.
  Group Single Arm: The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Single Arm: 20
  Measured value -- Single Arm: -0.27 (spread 0.12)
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Single Arm -- method: Mixed Models Analysis -- P-value: 0.024 -- test type: OTHER.
    No a-priori power calculation was performed due to the exploratory nature of the study.
    Type III of fixed effects. Num df: 2; Den df = 34; F = 4.1501; Sig. = 0.0244 (threshold for statistical significance p \< 0.05)

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Single Arm: serious events in 0 of 21 at risk; other events in 1 of 21 at risk. The single group underwent baseline assessment (visit 1). Fourteen days later (visit 2), participants took the first empagliflozin dose and acute effects were assessed. Participants continued taking empagliflozin once per day at home for 13 additional days, and returned for the final visit (visit 3) in which chronic effects were assessed.
Other adverse event -- Mild creatinine elevation (Renal and urinary disorders): Single Arm: 1/21

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03852901; report t58; lead sponsor National Institute on Aging (NIA).]
