Reaching mEthadone Users Attending Community pHarmacies With HCV
Trial acronym: REACH-HCV
Trial registration: NCT03935906    Lead sponsor: University of Dundee    Report id: t61
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 1410 participants
Conditions studied: Hepatitis C
Keywords: Point of Care, Direct Acting Antivirals, Community Pharmacy, Opiate Substitution Therapy
Study start: 2019-10-08    Primary completion / completion: 2021-01-14
Collaborators: Public Health Wales, Burnet Institute

SUMMARY
Hepatitis C Virus (HCV) is a blood-borne virus that damages the liver and is a major public health threat globally. Most individuals infected with HCV are unaware of it and show no symptoms until presenting with incurable, fatal end-stage disease. In Scotland and Australia approximately 0.7% of the general population has chronic HCV with 0.4% in Wales, and they are at risk of developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. The clinical challenge is to identify those infected and bring them into treatment before the disease advances.

The greatest risk factor for acquiring HCV in many countries is through injecting drug use. On the road to recovery from drug use, many will receive long-term opiate substitution therapy (OST), commonly with methadone or buprenorphine. Internationally, OST is routinely dispensed by a community pharmacist. HCV testing can be offered by GPs, drugs workers, drug agencies, social workers, community pharmacies and needle exchange sites. Once patients are diagnosed, they are referred to a hospital-based service to receive anti-HCV treatment. In this pathway, less than 10% of the OST population is tested per year, and cumulative rates of testing are less than 50% of those on OST.

Highly effective Directly Acting Antiviral (DAA) treatment combinations are now available and achieve HCV cure rates in excess of 95%, with once or twice daily tablets for 8-24 weeks.

The REACH HCV study will compare efficacy of an education-only HCV referral and treatment pathway against a nurse-led point-of-care device testing and treatment pathway among OST patients in community pharmacies in Scotland, Wales and Australia. Eligible participants will be treated using DAAs.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
The REACH HCV study is an international, cluster-randomised non-clinical trial with two arms. The unit of randomisation is the community pharmacy, so all participants in a given pharmacy are allocated to one of two pathways for HCV testing and treatment. There are three participating hubs located in: Scotland, Wales and Australia respectively.

The sample size is 140 participants, equally split between the three participating hubs, and the trial population is patients receiving opiate substitution therapy (OST) in community pharmacies.

Arm 1 (REACH arm): The community pharmacist will take the opportunity to explain the risks of contracting HCV from current or historical intravenous drug use. The OST patients will then meet with an outreach hepatology nurse specialist who will consent the patients and perform a diagnostic point-of-care (PoC) HCV test along with venepuncture for safety laboratory blood tests and confirmatory HCV RNA. The outreach nurse will return for a subsequent visit to prescribe (in the UK; in Australia prescribing is undertaken by qualified medic) and deliver HCV medication for those patients who test positive, which will be dispensed to participants alongside their OST schedule by their community pharmacist. The outreach nurse will return after approximately 14 days to confirm negative results, dispense medication for new patients with positive results (PCR positive but below limit of detection of POC test) and confirm follow up appointments where required. The RNA and PoC test will also be administered for sustained viral response at 12 weeks post treatment (SVR12).

Arm 2 (Education-only arm): The community pharmacist will discuss the risks of contracting HCV through current or historical intravenous drug use. The community pharmacist will then advise participants on the nearest centre for HCV testing and treatment, as is standard of care for the countries included in this study. If they are referred from a REACH pharmacy, they will present a reply slip and/or the Patient Information Sheet to the nurse who will then consent the participant, perform HCV and safety blood tests, and complete the study paperwork. The participant's medication will be delivered to, and dispensed from, their community pharmacy alongside their OST. Participants will return to the local BBV clinic for an SVR12 test after completing treatment.

All eligible HCV-infected participants will receive treatment with 100mg glecaprevir/40mg pibrentasvir (Maviret) a pan-genotypic Direct Acting Antiviral (DAA) for between 8-16 weeks, depending on blood test results. The study is planned to run for a total of two years, with one year clinical phase and one year follow-up phase.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: PARALLEL. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Reach Pathway (EXPERIMENTAL)
Community pharmacist will explain the risks of contracting HCV from current or historical intravenous drug use. OST patients will then meet with an outreach hepatology nurse specialist who will perform a diagnostic point-of-care (PoC) HCV test along with venepuncture for safety blood tests and confirmatory HCV RNA on the pharmacy premises. The nurse will return for a subsequent visit to prescribe (in the UK; in Australia prescribing is undertaken by qualified medic) and deliver HCV medication for participants who test positive, which will be dispensed alongside their OST schedule by their community pharmacist. The outreach nurse will return after approximately 14 days to confirm negative results, dispense medication for new patients with positive results (PCR positive but below limit of detection of POC test) and confirm follow up appointments where required. The RNA and PoC test will also be administered for sustained viral response at 12 weeks post treatment (SVR12).
Interventions: Other: Reach Pathway
Arm: Education-only Pathway (EXPERIMENTAL)
The community pharmacist will discuss the risks of contracting HCV through current or historical intravenous drug use. The community pharmacist will then advise participants on the nearest centre for HCV testing and treatment, as is standard of care for the countries included in this study. If they are referred from a REACH pharmacy, they will present a reply slip and/or the Patient Information Sheet to the nurse who will then consent the participant, perform HCV and safety blood tests, and complete the study paperwork. The participant's medication will be delivered to, and dispensed from, their community pharmacy alongside their OST. Participants will return to the local BBV clinic for an SVR12 test after completing treatment.
Interventions: Other: Education-only Pathway

INTERVENTION DETAIL
OTHER: Reach Pathway. Trial of outreach nurse offering point-of-care Hepatitis C (HCV) testing to opiate substitution therapy patients in community pharmacies, which is hypothesised to improve number of patients tested and cured of HCV.
OTHER: Education-only Pathway. Trial of community pharmacists advising opiate substitution therapy patients to attend a local blood-borne virus clinic to be tested for Hepatitis C by a specialist nurse, which represents the standard care pathway for HCV patients in the countries included in the study.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 18 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

* Over 18 years of age.
* Previous or current injecting drug user.
* Stable OST dose for greater than 12 weeks prior to study enrolment.
* Glecaprevir/pibrentasvir treatment naïve.
* Able to voluntarily sign and date an informed consent form prior to initiation of any screening or study specific procedures.
* Able to understand and adhere to study visit schedule and all other protocol requirements.

Exclusion Criteria:

* Female who is pregnant, planning to become pregnant or breastfeeding or unwilling/unable to take appropriate birth control.
* Known current HIV infection.
* Known current HBV infection. Serological: patients with a positive HBsAg or isolated positive anti-HBC will be excluded from the study and followed up in secondary care.
* Previous treatment with glecaprevir/pibrentasvir.
* Currently taking any concomitant medication that has a warning of'do not co-administer' with glecaprevir and/or pibrentasvir as defined by the Liverpool Hep drug interactions website and product SmPC.
* Clinically significant abnormalities that make candidate unsuitable for this study in the opinion of the investigator including but not limited to:
* Uncontrolled cardiac, respiratory, gastrointestinal, hematologic, neurologic, psychiatric or other medical disease or disorder, which is unrelated to existing HCV infection.
* History of either current or previous decompensated liver disease or symptoms/signs of decompensation e.g. ascites noted on physical exam, use of beta-blockers for portal hypertension, hepatic encephalopathy or oesophageal variceal bleeding.
* Candidate is deemed unsuitable to receive study drugs by the study investigator, for any reason according to clinical judgement.
* Unable or unwilling to provide informed consent.
* History of severe, life-threatening or other significant sensitivity to any excipients of the study drugs.
* Drug-drug Interaction which may have safety concerns with any concomitant medication the patient is receiving including non-prescribed and/or recreational drugs.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: SVR12. Time frame: 12 weeks after participants finish their hepatitis C treatment, up to 14 weeks from Baseline.. Percentage of patients in a population of stable opiate substitution therapy patients achieving Sustained Viral Response at 12 weeks post-treatment in the REACH pathway versus education-only pathway (Intention to Treat analysis).
Secondary endpoint 1: Determine Whether the REACH Pathway Compared With the Education Only Pathway Leads to More People on Opiate Substitution Therapy Who Are Confirmed HCV RNA Positive Being Treated and Cured.. Time frame: 12 weeks after participants finish their hepatitis C treatment regimen. Percentage of patients achieving Sustained Viral Response at 12 weeks post-treatment from the patient population that tested positive for HCV in each arm (modified Intention to Treat analysis).
Secondary endpoint 2: Determine Whether the REACH Pathway Compared With the Education-only Pathway Leads to More People on Opiate Substitution Therapy Being Tested for HCV.. Time frame: Up to 30 weeks. Percentage of patients being tested for HCV in each arm
Secondary endpoint 3: Compare Adherence and Persistence to HCV Therapy in the Reach Pathway to the Education-only Pathway.. Time frame: Up to 16 weeks. Percentage of patients adhering to therapy in each arm (taking ≥ 85% of prescribed tablets) as reported in the observed therapy adherence log.
Secondary endpoint 4: Assess the Impact of Baseline Blood Tests on Treatment Decisions.. Time frame: 2 weeks. Percentage of patients in whom changes in therapy are advised due to blood test results, as recorded at start of HCV therapy.
Secondary endpoint 5: Number of Participants Tested for HCV. Time frame: 16 months. Count of number of eligible participants tested for HCV
Secondary endpoint 6: Number of Participants Treated for HCV. Time frame: 12 months. Number of eligible participants treated for HCV
Secondary endpoint 7: Number of Participants Achieved SVR. Time frame: 12 weeks after end of treatment. Number of eligible participants who achieved SVR (cured of HCV infection)

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm of the trial, where point-of-care hepatitis c virus RNA testing was offered in community pharmacies.
Flow group Education-only Pathway: The control pathway of the trial, which represents conventional care.
Period: OAT clients at intervention sites
  STARTED -- Reach Pathway: 762; Education-only Pathway: 648
  COMPLETED -- Reach Pathway: 762; Education-only Pathway: 648
  NOT COMPLETED -- Reach Pathway: 0; Education-only Pathway: 0
Period: OAT clients counselled by pharmacist
  STARTED -- Reach Pathway: 387; Education-only Pathway: 267
  COMPLETED -- Reach Pathway: 387; Education-only Pathway: 267
  NOT COMPLETED -- Reach Pathway: 0; Education-only Pathway: 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Consented Population REACH Pathway: Basic demographic descriptors for individuals who consented to testing through the trial.
Baseline group Consented Population Education-Only Pathway: Basic demographic descriptors for individuals who consented to testing through the trial.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline trial data were only collected from participants who agreed to a HCV test, this was part of the design of the study and a purposeful choice.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEDIAN, years)
  value -- Consented Population REACH Pathway: 42.1 (spread 8.5); Consented Population Education-Only Pathway: 43.7 (spread 9.8); Total: 42.6 (spread 8.9)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Consented Population REACH Pathway: 52; Consented Population Education-Only Pathway: 21; Total: 73
  Male -- Consented Population REACH Pathway: 96; Consented Population Education-Only Pathway: 41; Total: 137
Baseline measure: Race and Ethnicity Not Collected (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  value -- Total: 0

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: SVR12
Percentage of patients in a population of stable opiate substitution therapy patients achieving Sustained Viral Response at 12 weeks post-treatment in the REACH pathway versus education-only pathway (Intention to Treat analysis).
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 12 weeks after participants finish their hepatitis C treatment, up to 14 weeks from Baseline..
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm of the trial, where point-of-care hepatitis c virus RNA testing was offered in community pharmacies.
  Group Education-only Pathway: The control pathway of the trial, which represents conventional care.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 762; Education-only Pathway: 648
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 18; Education-only Pathway: 2
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Reach Pathway vs Education-only Pathway -- method: Mixed effects logistic regression -- Odds Ratio (OR): 8.64 -- 95% confidence interval 1.82 to 40.91 -- P-value: 0.007 -- test type: OTHER.
    Calculated. Threshold for significance = ≤0.05

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Determine Whether the REACH Pathway Compared With the Education Only Pathway Leads to More People on Opiate Substitution Therapy Who Are Confirmed HCV RNA Positive Being Treated and Cured.
Percentage of patients achieving Sustained Viral Response at 12 weeks post-treatment from the patient population that tested positive for HCV in each arm (modified Intention to Treat analysis).
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 12 weeks after participants finish their hepatitis C treatment regimen.
  Analysis population: There was an insufficient quantity of HCV RNA+ patients to enable this analysis to be undertaken.
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm
  Group Education-only Pathway: Control arm
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 23; Education-only Pathway: 6
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 18; Education-only Pathway: 02

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Determine Whether the REACH Pathway Compared With the Education-only Pathway Leads to More People on Opiate Substitution Therapy Being Tested for HCV.
Percentage of patients being tested for HCV in each arm
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Up to 30 weeks.
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm of the trial, where point-of-care hepatitis c virus RNA testing was offered in community pharmacies.
  Group Education-only Pathway: The control pathway of the trial, which represents conventional care.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 762; Education-only Pathway: 648
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 144; Education-only Pathway: 17
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Reach Pathway vs Education-only Pathway -- method: Mixed effects logistic regression -- Odds Ratio (OR): 16.95 -- 95% confidence interval 7.07 to 40.64 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: OTHER.
    Calculated. Threshold for significance = ≤0.05.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Compare Adherence and Persistence to HCV Therapy in the Reach Pathway to the Education-only Pathway.
Percentage of patients adhering to therapy in each arm (taking ≥ 85% of prescribed tablets) as reported in the observed therapy adherence log.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: Up to 16 weeks.
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm of the trial, where point-of-care hepatitis c virus RNA testing was offered in community pharmacies.
  Group Education-only Pathway: The control pathway of the trial, which represents conventional care.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 22; Education-only Pathway: 5
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 19; Education-only Pathway: 4

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Assess the Impact of Baseline Blood Tests on Treatment Decisions.
Percentage of patients in whom changes in therapy are advised due to blood test results, as recorded at start of HCV therapy.
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 2 weeks.
  Analysis population: This is the population of participants who initiated treatment, and therefore had an outcome available for whether their treatment was a standard or extended duration.
  Group Reach Pathway (Treatment Initiators): Those who initiated treatment in the intervention arm.
  Group Education-only Pathway (Treatment Initiators): Those who intitated treatment in the control arm.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway (Treatment Initiators): 22; Education-only Pathway (Treatment Initiators): 5
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway (Treatment Initiators): 4; Education-only Pathway (Treatment Initiators): 1

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Number of Participants Tested for HCV
Count of number of eligible participants tested for HCV
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 16 months.
  Analysis population: Consented population
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm
  Group Education-only Pathway: Control arm
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 148; Education-only Pathway: 62
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 144; Education-only Pathway: 17

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Number of Participants Treated for HCV
Number of eligible participants treated for HCV
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 12 months.
  Analysis population: Consented participants
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm
  Group Education-only Pathway: Control arm
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 148; Education-only Pathway: 62
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 22; Education-only Pathway: 5

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Number of Participants Achieved SVR
Number of eligible participants who achieved SVR (cured of HCV infection)
  Reported as COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, unit: Participants, time frame: 12 weeks after end of treatment.
  Analysis population: Eligible participants
  Group Reach Pathway: Interventional arm
  Group Education-only Pathway: Control arm
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Reach Pathway: 148; Education-only Pathway: 62
  Measured value -- Reach Pathway: 18; Education-only Pathway: 2

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): serious events in 1 of 148 at risk; other events in 5 of 148 at risk. Those who consented to participate in the internventional component of the trial by taking a HCV test in the internvention arm. Note, this differs from the overall number who 'participated' in the trial by receiving OST at a participating pharmacy (n=1,410).
Safety group Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): serious events in 0 of 62 at risk; other events in 2 of 62 at risk. Those who consented to participate in the internventional component of the trial by taking a HCV test in the control arm. Note, this differs from the overall number who 'participated' in the trial by receiving OST at a participating pharmacy (n=1,410).
Serious adverse event -- Recreational drug overdose (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62
Other adverse event -- Pyrexia of unknown origin. (Immune system disorders): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/62
Other adverse event -- Bilateral radial wrist fractures secondary to fall. (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62
Other adverse event -- Back pain secondary to fall from bicycle. (General disorders): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/62
Other adverse event -- Psychosis in the background of increasing paranoia and delusions; secondary to drug misuse. (Psychiatric disorders): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62
Other adverse event -- Cellulitis left lower leg. (Infections and infestations): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62
Other adverse event -- Right Leg deep vein thrombosis. (Vascular disorders): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62
Other adverse event -- Assault: multiple wounds left side of face (Social circumstances): Reach Pathway (Consented to Test): 1/148; Education-only Pathway (Consented to Test): 0/62

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03935906; report t61; lead sponsor University of Dundee.]
