Clinical Study to Investigate the Efficacy and Safety of Wilate During Prophylaxis in Previously Treated Patients With Von Willebrand Disease (VWD)
Trial registration: NCT04052698    Lead sponsor: Octapharma    Report id: t62
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: PHASE3    Enrollment: 43 participants
Conditions studied: Von Willebrand Diseases
Study start: 2020-06-18    Primary completion / completion: 2022-04-23

SUMMARY
This is a prospective, non-controlled, international, multi-center phase 3 study investigating the efficacy and safety of Wilate in previously treated adult patients with VWD, to obtain additional data on the safety and efficacy of Wilate in previously treated patients with VWD undergoing regular prophylaxis.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: NA. Intervention model: SINGLE_GROUP. Primary purpose: TREATMENT. Masking: NONE.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: All patients (EXPERIMENTAL)
Patients with type 3, type 2 (except 2N), or severe type 1 VWD aged ≥6 years at screening receiving Wilate for prophylactic treatment.
Interventions: Drug: Wilate

INTERVENTION DETAIL
DRUG: Wilate. Produced from the plasma of human donors, Wilate is presented as a powder or solvent for intravenous injection containing normally 500 IU or 1000 IU human VWF and human FVIII per vial. The ratio between VWF ristocetin co-factor activity (VWF:RCo) and FVIII:C is 1:1. The product contains approximately 100 IU/ml human VWF when reconstituted with 5ml/10mL water for injection with 0.1% polysorbate 80.

The specific activity of Wilate is ≥67 IU VWF:RCo/mg protein. The injection or infusion rate should not exceed 2-3mL per minute.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 6 Years. Maximum age: not stated. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

Patients who meet all of the following criteria are eligible for the study:

* Aged ≥6 years at the time of screening
* VWD type 1 (baseline von Willebrand factor activity \[VWF:Ristocetin Co-factor (RCo)\] \<30 IU/dL, 2A, 2B, 2M, or 3 according to medical history requiring substitution therapy with a VWF-containing product to control bleeding
* Currently receiving on-demand treatment with a VWF-containing product with at least 1, and an average of ≥2, documented spontaneous BEs per month in the last 6 months, with at least 2 of these BEs requiring treatment with a VWF-containing product
* Availability of records to reliably evaluate type, frequency, and treatment of BEs for at least 6 months of on-demand treatment before screening
* Female patients of child-bearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test at screening and agree to use adequate birth control measures; in case hormonal contra-ception is used, the medication class should remain unchanged for the duration of the study
* All patients to provide voluntarily given, fully informed written and signed consent obtained before any study-related procedures are conducted

Exclusion Criteria:

Patients who meet any of the following criteria are not eligible for the study:

* Having received on-demand or prophylactic treatment with a VWF-containing product but having no records available to reliably evaluate the type, frequency, and treatment of BEs over a period of at least 6 months of on-demand treatment
* History, or current suspicion, of VWF or FVIII inhibitors
* Medical history of a thromboembolic event within 1 year before enrolment
* Severe liver or kidney diseases (alanine aminotransferase \[ALAT\] and aspartate trans-aminase \[ASAT\] levels \>5 times of upper limit of normal, creatinine \>120 µmol/L)
* Platelet count \<100,000/µL at screening (except for VWD type 2B)
* Body weight \<20 kg at screening
* Patients receiving, or scheduled to receive, immunosuppressant drugs (other than an-tiretroviral chemotherapy), such as prednisone (equivalent to \>10 mg/day), or similar drugs
* Pregnant or breast-feeding at the time of enrolment
* Cervical or uterine conditions causing abnormal uterine bleeding (including infection, dysplasia)
* Treatment with any IMP in another interventional clinical study currently or within 4 weeks before enrolment
* Other coagulation disorders or bleeding disorders due to anatomical reasons
* Known hypersensitivity to any of the components of the study drug

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Total Annualized Bleeding Rate (TABR). Time frame: 12 months. The TABR was calculated as the total number of spontaneous bleeds, traumatic bleeds, and other bleeds (except menstrual bleeds) occurring in the time period between first dose of the investigational medicinal product (IMP) and the Study Completion Visit, divided by the duration (in years) between first dose of IMP and the Study Completion Visit.
Primary endpoint 2: Comparison of Total Annualized Bleeding Rates (TABR) During Prophylaxis Treatment in Study WIL-31 to On-demand Treatment in the Same Patient Population in the Preceding Study WIL-29. Time frame: 12 Months. Estimated TABR number calculated using a negative binomial counting regression model. Comparison between this number calculated for studies WIL-29 (NCT04053699) and WIL-31. For the comparison of results from WIL-31 to WIL-29 an estimated total annualized bleeding rate was calculated for each cohort, and compared with a negative binomial counting model. As these were estimated rates, there is only one value for each cohort with no measure of spread
Secondary endpoint 1: Spontaneous Annualized Bleeding Rate (SABR). Time frame: 12 months. Spontaneous annualized bleeding rate (SABR) calculated in analogy with TABR
Secondary endpoint 2: Comparison of Spontaneous Annualized Bleeding Rates (SABR) During Prophylaxis Treatment in Study WIL-31 to On-demand Treatment in the Same Patient Population in the Preceding Study WIL-29.. Time frame: 12 Months. Estimated SABR number calculated using a negative binomial counting regression model. Comparison between this number calculated for studies WIL-29 (NCT04053699) and WIL-31. For the comparison of results from WIL-31 to WIL-29 an estimated total annualized bleeding rate was calculated for each cohort, and compared with a negative binomial counting model. As these were estimated rates, there is only one value for each cohort with no measure of spread
Secondary endpoint 3: Wilate Consumption for Prophylaxis (mFAS Population). Time frame: 12 months. Data on the consumption of Wilate (VWF/FVIII IU/kg per month and per week per patient) for prophylactic treatment
Secondary endpoint 4: Incremental In Vivo Recovery (IVR) of Von Willebrand Factor Activity (VWF:RCo). Time frame: From baseline and 12-month visit. Incremental VWF:RCo IVR of Wilate over time (at baseline and at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of treatment)
Secondary endpoint 5: Incremental In Vivo Recovery (IVR) of FVIII. Time frame: Baseline and 12-month visit. FVIII:C of Wilate in pediatric patients (at baseline PK visit) measured by chromogenic assay
Secondary endpoint 6: Efficacy of Wilate in the Treatment of Breakthrough Bleeding Events (BEs). Time frame: 12 months. Treatment efficacy will be assessed at the end of a BE by the patient using predefined criteria of 'Excellent', 'Good', 'Moderate' or 'None'. All effectiveness ratings assessed as either "excellent" or "good" will be considered "successfully treated".
Secondary endpoint 7: Wilate Exposure for Prophylaxis (mFAS Population). Time frame: 12 months. Data on the exposure days of Wilate prophylactic treatment

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: Prophylactic treatment with Wilate of previously treated patients (PTPs) with Type 3, Type 2 (except 2N), or severe Type 1 VWD.
Period: Overall Study
  STARTED -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 43
  Safety Analysis Set (SAF) -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 43
  Modified Full Analysis Set (mFAS) -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 33
  COMPLETED -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 30
  NOT COMPLETED -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 13

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: Prophylactic treatment with Wilate of previously treated patients (PTPs) with Type 3, Type 2 (except 2N), or severe Type 1 VWD.
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEAN, years)
  value -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 22.4 (spread 14.59)
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Sex / Female -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 17
  Sex / Male -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 26
Baseline measure: Race/Ethnicity, Customized (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  White -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 42
  Black or African American -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 1
Baseline measure: Height (MEAN, centimetres)
  value -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 161.3 (spread 18.22)
Baseline measure: Weight (MEAN, kilograms)
  value -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 62.4 (spread 24.96)
Baseline measure: Body Mass Index (BMI) (MEAN, kg/m2)
  value -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 22.9 (spread 6.21)
Baseline measure: Blood Group (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Blood Group A -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 22
  Blood Group B -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 6
  Blood Group AB -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 1
Baseline measure: VWD Type (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Type I VWD: low levels of von Willebrand factor, and potentially lower levels of factor VIII than normal. Type 2 VWD: genetic mutation leading to disfunction of von Willebrand factor. Divided into subtypes 2A, 2B, 2M, and 2N, each caused by a different gene mutation. Type 3 VWD: low levels or no von Willebrand factor, and low levels of factor ...
  Severe Type 1 VWD -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 6
  Type 2 VWD -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 5
  Type 3 VWD -- Wilate Routine Prophylaxis in Patients With VWD: 22

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Total Annualized Bleeding Rate (TABR)
The TABR was calculated as the total number of spontaneous bleeds, traumatic bleeds, and other bleeds (except menstrual bleeds) occurring in the time period between first dose of the investigational medicinal product (IMP) and the Study Completion Visit, divided by the duration (in years) between first dose of IMP and the Study Completion Visit.
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: bleeding events per year, time frame: 12 months.
  Group 6-<12 Yrs: Age of patients
  Group 12-<17 Yrs: Age of patients
  Group ≥17 Yrs: Age of patients
  Group Total: Total annualized bleeding rates in study WIL-31
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- 6-<12 Yrs: 9; 12-<17 Yrs: 6; ≥17 Yrs: 18; Total: 33
  Measured value -- 6-<12 Yrs: 3.73 (spread 4.838); 12-<17 Yrs: 4.28 (spread 4.647); ≥17 Yrs: 6.31 (spread 9.634); Total: 5.24 (spread 7.745)

PRIMARY OUTCOME 2: Comparison of Total Annualized Bleeding Rates (TABR) During Prophylaxis Treatment in Study WIL-31 to On-demand Treatment in the Same Patient Population in the Preceding Study WIL-29
Estimated TABR number calculated using a negative binomial counting regression model. Comparison between this number calculated for studies WIL-29 (NCT04053699) and WIL-31. For the comparison of results from WIL-31 to WIL-29 an estimated total annualized bleeding rate was calculated for each cohort, and compared with a negative binomial counting model. As these were estimated rates, there is only one value for each cohort with no measure of spread
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: bleeding events per year, time frame: 12 Months.
  Group WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): Includes the same patients that constitute the mFAS population in WIL-31.
  Group mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): 33; mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): 33
  Measured value -- WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): 33.3751; mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): 5.4914
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment) vs mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment) -- method: Regression, Linear -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 0.1645 -- 95% confidence interval 0.10194 to 0.26558 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    1-sided test where the mean ratio is less than 0.5 utilizing a negative binomial counting regression model. One-sided alpha level of 2.5%.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Spontaneous Annualized Bleeding Rate (SABR)
Spontaneous annualized bleeding rate (SABR) calculated in analogy with TABR
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: bleeding events per year, time frame: 12 months.
  Group 6<12 Years: Age of participants
  Group 12<17 Years: Age of participants
  Group ≥17 Years: Age of participants
  Group Total: Total spontaneous annualized bleeding rates (SABR) across all age groups
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- 6<12 Years: 9; 12<17 Years: 6; ≥17 Years: 18; Total: 33
  Measured value -- 6<12 Years: 2.53 (spread 4.145); 12<17 Years: 6 (spread 1.49); ≥17 Years: 4.16 (spread 7.382); Total: 3.23 (spread 5.915)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Comparison of Spontaneous Annualized Bleeding Rates (SABR) During Prophylaxis Treatment in Study WIL-31 to On-demand Treatment in the Same Patient Population in the Preceding Study WIL-29.
Estimated SABR number calculated using a negative binomial counting regression model. Comparison between this number calculated for studies WIL-29 (NCT04053699) and WIL-31. For the comparison of results from WIL-31 to WIL-29 an estimated total annualized bleeding rate was calculated for each cohort, and compared with a negative binomial counting model. As these were estimated rates, there is only one value for each cohort with no measure of spread
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: bleeding events per year, time frame: 12 Months.
  Group WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): Includes the same patients that constitute the mFAS population in WIL-31
  Group mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): 33; mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): 33
  Measured value -- WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment): 24.4168; mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment): 3.3925
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared WIL-29 (On-demand Treatment) vs mFAS - WIL-31 (Prophylaxis Treatment) -- method: Regression, Linear -- Mean Difference (Final Values): 0.1389 -- 95% confidence interval 0.07664 to 0.25187 -- P-value: <0.0001 -- test type: NON_INFERIORITY.
    1-sided test where the mean ratio is less than 0.5 utilizing a negative binomial counting regression model. One-sided alpha level of 2.5%.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Wilate Consumption for Prophylaxis (mFAS Population)
Data on the consumption of Wilate (VWF/FVIII IU/kg per month and per week per patient) for prophylactic treatment
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: IU/kilogram, time frame: 12 months.
  Group mFAS: The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- mFAS: 33
  Measured Dose per exposure day -- mFAS: 31.06 (spread 6.589)
  Measured Dose per injection -- mFAS: 31.04 (spread 6.559)
  Measured Dose per Week in Study -- mFAS: 66.06 (spread 23.359)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Incremental In Vivo Recovery (IVR) of Von Willebrand Factor Activity (VWF:RCo)
Incremental VWF:RCo IVR of Wilate over time (at baseline and at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of treatment)
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: kg/dL, time frame: From baseline and 12-month visit.
  Group mFAS Population: The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- mFAS Population: 33
  Measured Baseline -- mFAS Population: 1.439 (spread 0.5259)
  Measured 12-Month Visit -- mFAS Population: 1.273 (spread 0.6040)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Incremental In Vivo Recovery (IVR) of FVIII
FVIII:C of Wilate in pediatric patients (at baseline PK visit) measured by chromogenic assay
  Reported as MEAN with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: kg/dL, time frame: Baseline and 12-month visit.
  Group mFAS Population: The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- mFAS Population: 33
  Measured Baseline -- mFAS Population: 1.697 [1.47 to 1.95]
  Measured 12-month visit -- mFAS Population: 2.140 [2.04 to 2.48]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 6: Efficacy of Wilate in the Treatment of Breakthrough Bleeding Events (BEs)
Treatment efficacy will be assessed at the end of a BE by the patient using predefined criteria of 'Excellent', 'Good', 'Moderate' or 'None'. All effectiveness ratings assessed as either "excellent" or "good" will be considered "successfully treated".
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: bleeding episodes treated, time frame: 12 months.
  Group Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: The efficacy assessment of bleeding episodes at the end of a BE was evaluated on a 4-point scale by the patient/legal guardian (together with the investigator in case of on-site treatment).
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: 33
  Participants analysed (Bleeding events treated) -- Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: 121
  Measured Excellent -- Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: 109
  Measured Good -- Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: 11
  Measured Moderate -- Efficacy Assessment of Treatment of Bleeding Episodes: 1

SECONDARY OUTCOME 7: Wilate Exposure for Prophylaxis (mFAS Population)
Data on the exposure days of Wilate prophylactic treatment
  Reported as MEAN with Standard Deviation, unit: days, time frame: 12 months.
  Group mFAS: The modified full analysis set (mFAS) included all enrolled patients who received at least one dose of IMP after the baseline IVR visit in adults or the baseline PK visit in children, and excluded all patients for whom laboratory results did not confirm the patient's VWD status
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- mFAS: 33
  Measured value -- mFAS: 105.55 (spread 32.782)

SECONDARY OUTCOME 8: Efficacy Rating for Wilate in Surgical Prophylaxis
Efficacy will be assessed by the surgeon at the end of surgery and by the hematologist at the end of the postoperative period using predefined criteria of 'Excellent', 'Good', 'Moderate' or 'None'. In addition, an overall assessment using the 'Excellent', 'Good', 'Moderate' or 'None' scale taking both the intra- and postoperative assessments into account will be made at the end of the postoperative period by the investigator based on an algorithm.
  Reported as NUMBER, unit: surgeries, time frame: 12 months.
  Analysis population: A total of 3 patients had 13 surgeries that were included in the SURG population.10 of these surgeries were minor and 3 were major.
  Group Number of Surgeries: Total number of surgeries performed
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Number of Surgeries: 3
  Participants analysed (Number of surgeries) -- Number of Surgeries: 13
  Measured Efficacy Assessment Rated 'Excellent' -- Number of Surgeries: 13
  Measured Efficacy Assessment Rated 'Good' -- Number of Surgeries: 0
  Measured Efficacy Assessment Rated 'Moderate' -- Number of Surgeries: 0

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Wilate: serious events in 4 of 43 at risk; other events in 26 of 43 at risk. All patients who participated in the study and received at least 1 dose of Wilate were included in the analysis of adverse events
Serious adverse event -- Menorrhagia (Reproductive system and breast disorders): Wilate: 1/43
Serious adverse event -- Limb injury (Injury, poisoning and procedural complications): Wilate: 1/43
Serious adverse event -- Food poisoning (Gastrointestinal disorders): Wilate: 1/43
Serious adverse event -- Haemorrhodial haemorrhage (Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders): Wilate: 1/43
Other adverse event -- COVID-19 infection (Infections and infestations): Wilate: 3/43
Other adverse event -- Nasopharyngitis (Infections and infestations): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Respiratory tract infection (Infections and infestations): Wilate: 5/43
Other adverse event -- Hypersensitivity (Immune system disorders): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Headache (Nervous system disorders): Wilate: 7/43
Other adverse event -- Rhinitis allergic (Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Pruitus (Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Pain in extremity (Musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Pyrexia (General disorders): Wilate: 2/43
Other adverse event -- Parvovirus B19 test positive (Investigations): Wilate: 2/43

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04052698; report t62; lead sponsor Octapharma.]
