De-Implementation of Unnecessary Surgical Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Children
Trial acronym: OPerAtiC
Trial registration: NCT04366440    Lead sponsor: Washington University School of Medicine    Report id: t66
Overall status: COMPLETED    Phase: NA    Enrollment: 18267 participants
Conditions studied: Surgical Site Infection
Keywords: children, antimicrobial stewardship, post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis, Deimplementation
Study start: 2020-11-01    Primary completion / completion: 2024-11-30
Collaborators: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ)

SUMMARY
The overall objective of this study is to identify the best strategy to eliminate unnecessary antibiotic use after surgery in pediatric surgical procedures considered low-risk for an SSI. Based on literature and our preliminary data suggesting surgeons will not fully accept standardized order sets based on current guidelines, the investigators hypothesize that order set modification combined with ASP facilitation will outperform standard order set modification alone in de-implementing unnecessary postoperative antibiotic use.

DETAILED DESCRIPTION
Antibiotics have revolutionized healthcare allowing clinicians the ability to treat life-threatening infections and to prevent infections following life-saving surgery. Unfortunately, antibiotic overuse results in antibiotic resistant bacteria and unnecessary adverse events including Clostridioides difficile infections (CDI). Data demonstrate that antibiotic resistant bacteria and CDI annually kill up to 150,000 and 29,000 Americans, respectively. Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis is a common area for unnecessary antibiotic use among children. Recent CDC surgical site infection (SSI) guidelines and the AAP Choosing Wisely Campaign recommend no postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis for procedures considered low risk for an SSI.

In this study, our team will develop and test two theoretically informed strategies to eliminate ("de-implement") unnecessary postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis through the collaboration of surgeons and antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASPs). One promising strategy is the implementation of standard surgical order sets, which offer relative ease of implementation and a systematic approach across surgical subspecialties. While evidence suggests that order set standardization is a good approach, barriers to implementation are commonly noted, especially the lack of engagement with clinicians affected by change when initiating a new strategy. As such, complementary strategies are needed to extend the impact of order set standardization.

This study will be guided by the i-PARIHS framework (Integrated Framework for Promoting Action on Research Implementation in Health Services), an implementation science framework designed to guide implementation of evidence-based practices. This framework posits that successful implementation of evidence into practice is a function of the quality and type of evidence to be implemented, the characteristics of the context where the evidence will be implemented, and the means by which it is integrated or facilitated into practice. Four primary constructs comprise the i-PARIHS framework: the innovation, recipients, context, and facilitation. Innovation describes the evidence and knowledge regarding a particular issue, as well as the qualities of the evidence that may influence how it is perceived by the potential user, recognizing that evidence may or may not be valuable to the end user based on local circumstances and priorities. Recipients are actors involved in implementation who may be affected by and influence the implementation of evidence. Context characterizes the circumstances in which knowledge and innovation uptake occurs, consisting of multiple factors at the micro, meso, and macro levels. Finally, integral to this framework is facilitation as the active mechanism by which uptake and implementation of evidence occurs, making it an ideal and appropriate fit for this study.

All research activities for this study will be conducted in 9 children's hospitals that participate in both the SHARPS Collaborative and NSQIP-P. Our participating hospitals are geographically dispersed and (like most children's hospitals) are located in urban settings. SHARPS Collaborative hospitals feature active ASPs operated by dedicated pharmacists and physician leaders. Clinicians (MD/DO or PharmD) overseeing ASPs and surgical champions in participating hospitals will implement the proposed strategies and collect implementation outcomes that quantify the extent to which the test strategies are successfully deployed in the hospital. The daily work of these individuals to improve antibiotic use includes frequent interaction with surgical specialties that perform clean and clean-contaminated surgeries. Implementing our proposed strategies via established ASP clinicians and a surgical leader (rather than, for example, directly by a member of the research team) will leverage existing relationships between these clinicians and their associated surgical teams, creating a more realistic circumstance under which new ASP strategies are implemented. This approach will provide better insight into the feasibility of implementing these strategies in a sustainable way in the future. In addition to being SHARPS Collaborative hospitals, our participating hospitals will also be NSQIP-P hospitals, each with a full-time, trained dedicated data abstractor collecting data on surgeries and surgical outcomes.

The investigators will compare the efficacy of the two strategies designed to reduce unnecessary postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis, using a cross-sectional stepped-wedge design. The investigators have identified 9 Children's Hospitals from across the US to participate in the study. Each of the 9 hospitals will be randomized into one of 3 clusters (cluster size = 3). All hospitals will begin with the control intervention-implementation of order set review and modification-at time 0. Each Step will last 6 months. Prior to the beginning of Step 1, Cluster 1 hospitals will receive the experimental intervention -order set review and modification plus facilitation. Just prior to steps 1, 2 and 3, the ASP teams will receive a 2-day in-person workshop led by the implementation scientist (Co-I Dr. McKay) and PI Dr. Newland, covering the specific facilitation strategies to be utilized. Every 6 months, an additional cluster will initiate the experimental condition (Steps 2 and 3). The amount of time each cluster will receive the experimental condition will be 30 months (Cluster 1), 24 months (Cluster 2), and 18 months (Cluster 3). Monthly study webinars will occur with all sites in step 0. During steps 1 and 2, sites in the experimental arm will have a monthly webinar separate from the group still in the control arm. By step 3 all sites will be a part of the same monthly webinar.

TRIAL DESIGN
Allocation: RANDOMIZED. Intervention model: SEQUENTIAL. Primary purpose: OTHER. Masking: NONE.
A stepped-wedge study design will be utilized. All sites will begin in the control intervention, order set review and modification. Sequentially, clusters of 3 hospitals will begin in the experimental intervention, order set review and modification plus facilitation.

ARMS AND INTERVENTIONS
Arm: Order set review and modification (OTHER)
The antimicrobial stewardship program will review and change order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Interventions: Other: Order set review and modification
Arm: Order Set review and Modification plus facilitation (OTHER)
The antimicrobial stewardship program will receive facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Interventions: Behavioral: Order set review and modification with facilitation

INTERVENTION DETAIL
BEHAVIORAL: Order set review and modification with facilitation. The antimicrobial stewardship program will receive facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
OTHER: Order set review and modification. The antimicrobial stewardship program will work to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.

ELIGIBILITY
Sex eligible: ALL. Minimum age: 0 Days. Maximum age: 75 Years. Healthy volunteers accepted: False.
Inclusion Criteria:

1. Surgeries performed at the Children's Hospitals included in the study and are collected by NSQIP-P.
2. Clean and clean-contaminated surgical procedures within the following specialties that are included in NSQIP-P:

General Surgery, Neurosurgery, Orthopedics, Otolaryngology, Plastic Surgery, Otolaryngology, and Urology

Exclusion Criteria:

1\. Children undergoing clean or clean-contaminated procedures that are not collected by NSQIP-P data abstractors.

PRE-SPECIFIED ENDPOINTS
Primary endpoint 1: Percentage of Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases in Children Receiving Post-operative Antibiotic Prophylaxis.. Time frame: 3 years. Clean and clean-contaminated surgical cases in children were assessed for whether they received post operative prophylaxis utilizing the Pediatric National Surgical Quality Improvement Project (NSQIP) database. A percentage was determined with the numerator being total number of clean and clean-contaminated cases receiving post operative surgical prophylaxis and the denominator is the total number of clean and clean-contaminated cases. The percentage of cases reflect the percentage of participants who received post operative surgical prophylaxis
Secondary endpoint 1: Rate of Surgical Site Infections (SSI) in Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases. Time frame: 3 years. Among the captured clean and clean-contaminated cases utilized in the primary outcome, the SSI rate per 100 cases was determined in patients both receiving and not receiving post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis.
Secondary endpoint 2: Rate of Clostridioides Difficile Infections (CDI) in Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases. Time frame: 3 years. Among the captured clean and clean-contaminated cases utilized in the primary outcome, the CDI rate per 100 cases was determined in patients both receiving and not receiving post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis

PARTICIPANT FLOW
Flow group Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): Baseline: Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.

ASP facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Flow group Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): Baseline: Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.

ASP facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Flow group Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): Baseline: Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.

ASP facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Period: Step 0
  STARTED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1157; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 831; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 1000
  Baseline -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1156; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 830; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 999
  ASP Facilitation -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 0; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 0; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 0
  COMPLETED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1157; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 831; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 1000
  NOT COMPLETED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 0; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 0; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 0
Period: Step 1
  STARTED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1115; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 981; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 1038
  Baseline -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 0; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 981; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 1038
  ASP Facilitation -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1115; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 0; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 0
  COMPLETED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 1115; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 981; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 1038
  NOT COMPLETED -- Sequence 1: Baseline (6 Months) ASP Facilitation (30 Months): 0; Sequence 2: Baseline (12 Months) ASP Facilitation (24 Months): 0; Sequence 3: Baseline (18 Months) ASP Facilitation (18 Months): 0

BASELINE CHARACTERISTICS
Baseline group Order Set Review and Modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program reviewed and changed order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.
Baseline group Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification with facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
Baseline group Total: Total of all reporting groups
Baseline measure: Age, Continuous (MEDIAN, years)
  value -- Order Set Review and Modification: 8.5 [1.6 to 14.0]; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 9.4 [2.2 to 14.0]; Total: 9.2 [2.0 to 14.0]
Baseline measure: Sex: Female, Male (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Female -- Order Set Review and Modification: 2977; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 6263; Total: 9240
  Male -- Order Set Review and Modification: 2933; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 6094; Total: 9027
Baseline measure: Race/Ethnicity, Customized (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Black or African American -- Order Set Review and Modification: 458; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 1110; Total: 1568
  Other -- Order Set Review and Modification: 1176; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 2526; Total: 3702
  White -- Order Set Review and Modification: 4276; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 8721; Total: 12997
Baseline measure: Region of Enrollment (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  United States -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357; Total: 18267
Baseline measure: American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  The ASA Score categorizes patients from ASA I to ASA VI based on their preoperative health status. Assignment is made by the anesthesiologist during the pre-anesthesia evaluation ASA I: Normal healthy patient without acute or chronic illness ASA II: Patient with mild systemic disease ASA III: Patient with severe systemic disease ASA IV: Patient with severe systemic disease that is ...
  ASA 1-2 -- Order Set Review and Modification: 3575; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 7622; Total: 11197
  ASA 3-5 -- Order Set Review and Modification: 2335; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 4735; Total: 7070
Baseline measure: Insurance Type (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  Private -- Order Set Review and Modification: 2441; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 5145; Total: 7586
  Public/Self Pay/Unknown -- Order Set Review and Modification: 3469; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 7212; Total: 10681
Baseline measure: Surgical Specialty (COUNT_OF_PARTICIPANTS, Participants)
  General Surgery -- Order Set Review and Modification: 1268; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 2542; Total: 3810
  Neurosurgery -- Order Set Review and Modification: 1239; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 2485; Total: 3724
  Orthopedic Surgery -- Order Set Review and Modification: 1702; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 3993; Total: 5695

PRIMARY OUTCOME 1: Percentage of Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases in Children Receiving Post-operative Antibiotic Prophylaxis.
Clean and clean-contaminated surgical cases in children were assessed for whether they received post operative prophylaxis utilizing the Pediatric National Surgical Quality Improvement Project (NSQIP) database. A percentage was determined with the numerator being total number of clean and clean-contaminated cases receiving post operative surgical prophylaxis and the denominator is the total number of clean and clean-contaminated cases. The percentage of cases reflect the percentage of participants who received post operative surgical prophylaxis
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: percentage of cases, time frame: 3 years.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program reviewed and changed order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification with facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Participants analysed (Cases) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Measured value -- Order Set Review and Modification: 9.98 [8.0 to 13.0]; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 10.54 [9.0 to 13.0]
  Statistical analysis 1 -- compared Order Set Review and Modification -- method: GEE model with arm and step independent -- P-value: 0.88 -- test type: SUPERIORITY.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 1: Rate of Surgical Site Infections (SSI) in Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases
Among the captured clean and clean-contaminated cases utilized in the primary outcome, the SSI rate per 100 cases was determined in patients both receiving and not receiving post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis.
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: number of infections per 100 cases, time frame: 3 years.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program reviewed and changed order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification with facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Participants analysed (Cases) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Measured value -- Order Set Review and Modification: 1.96 [1.62 to 2.35]; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 2.03 [1.79 to 2.30]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 2: Rate of Clostridioides Difficile Infections (CDI) in Clean and Clean-contaminated Cases
Among the captured clean and clean-contaminated cases utilized in the primary outcome, the CDI rate per 100 cases was determined in patients both receiving and not receiving post-operative antibiotic prophylaxis
  Reported as NUMBER with 95% Confidence Interval, unit: number of infections per 100 cases, time frame: 3 years.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program reviewed and changed order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.
  Group Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification with facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.
  Participants analysed (Participants) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Participants analysed (Cases) -- Order Set Review and Modification: 5910; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 12357
  Measured value -- Order Set Review and Modification: 0.15 [0.07 to 0.29]; Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: 0.06 [0.03 to 0.13]

SECONDARY OUTCOME 3: Implementation Outcome: Acceptability of the Interventions
A validated 4 question survey will be used to assess the acceptability of each intervention.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: 3 years.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 4: Implementation Outcome: Feasibility of the Interventions
A validated 4 question survey will be used to assess the feasibility of each intervention.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: 3 years.

SECONDARY OUTCOME 5: Implementation Outcome: Appropriateness of the Interventions
A validated 4 question survey will be used to assess the appropriateness of each intervention.
  Reported as value, unit: not stated, time frame: 3 years.

ADVERSE EVENTS
Non-serious events are reported at a frequency threshold of 0%.
Safety group Order Set Review and Modification: serious events in 0 of 5910 at risk; other events in 0 of 5910 at risk. The antimicrobial stewardship program reviewed and changed order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification: The antimicrobial stewardship program worked to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics by reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures.
Safety group Order Set Review and Modification Plus Facilitation: serious events in 0 of 12357 at risk; other events in 0 of 12357 at risk. The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

Order set review and modification with facilitation: The antimicrobial stewardship program received facilitation training to aid in reviewing and changing order sets of clean or clean-contaminated procedures to eliminate unnecessary post-operative antibiotics.

LIMITATIONS AND CAVEATS
The clinical data is not specific to the procedures and areas the ASP teams always focused their efforts.

This study included 9 children's hospital across the US, these hospitals had mature, high functioning ASPs with financial support for both physicians and pharmacists.

This study occurred during the COVID-19 Pandemic where many of the ASP team members were key leaders in addressing the response potentially decreasing the effectiveness of the interventions.

[Source record: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT04366440; report t66; lead sponsor Washington University School of Medicine.]
