ClinicalTrials.gov record NCT03574597
Record version 200, submitted 2024-08-06

Brief title: Semaglutide Effects on Heart Disease and Stroke in Patients With Overweight or Obesity
Official title: SELECT - Semaglutide Effects on Cardiovascular Outcomes in People With Overweight or Obesity
Lead sponsor: Novo Nordisk A/S

Status and dates
  Overall status: COMPLETED
  Study start: 2018-10-24 (ACTUAL)
  Primary completion: 2023-06-21 (ACTUAL)
  Study completion: 2023-06-29 (ACTUAL)

Design
  Study type: INTERVENTIONAL
  Phase: PHASE3
  allocation: RANDOMIZED
  interventionModel: PARALLEL
  primaryPurpose: TREATMENT
  maskingInfo:
    masking: QUADRUPLE
    maskingDescription: Sponsor staff involved in the clinical trial is masked according to company standard procedures
    whoMasked: PARTICIPANT, CARE_PROVIDER, INVESTIGATOR, OUTCOMES_ASSESSOR
  Enrollment: 17604 (ACTUAL)

Brief summary
  The researchers are doing the study to see if semaglutide may reduce the risk of having cardiovascular events in patients with overweight or obesity and with prior cardiovascular disease. The participant will either get semaglutide (active medicine) or placebo ("dummy" medicine). Which treatment the participants get is decided by chance. The participant's chance of getting semaglutide or placebo is the same. The participant will get the study medicine in a pen. The participants will need to use the pen to inject the study medicine in a skinfold once a week. The study will last for about 2.5 to 5 years. Participants will have up to 25 clinic visits with the study doctor.

Arms and interventions
  Arm: Semaglutide (EXPERIMENTAL)
    Participants will receive semaglutide as an adjunct to standard-of-care. Estimated trial duration for an individual subject is from 31 to 59 months.
  Arm: Placebo (semaglutide) (PLACEBO_COMPARATOR)
    Participants will receive placebo (semaglutide) as an adjunct to standard-of-care. Estimated trial duration for an individual subject is from 31 to 59 months.
  Intervention: DRUG Semaglutide
  Intervention: DRUG Placebo (semaglutide)

Outcome measures
  [Primary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomization to First Occurrence of a Composite Outcome Measure Consisting of: Cardiovascular (CV) Death, Non-fatal Myocardial Infarction (MI), or Non-fatal Stroke
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of composite outcome measure consisted of CV death (undetermined cause of death presumed CV death), non-fatal MI, or non-fatal stroke are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to CV Death
    Description: Number of participants with CV death are presented. The outcome measure was evalulated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of a Composite Heart Failure (HF) Outcome Measure Consisting of: HF Hospitalisation, Urgent HF Visit or CV Death
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of a composite HF outcome measure consisted of HF hospitalisation, urgent HF visit or CV death are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to All-cause Death
    Description: Number of participants with all-cause death are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of an Expanded Composite CV Outcome Measure Consisting of: CV Death, Non-fatal MI, Non-fatal Stroke, Coronary Revascularisation or Unstable Angina Pectoris (UAP) Requiring Hospitalisation
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of an expanded composite CV outcome measure consisted of CV death, non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, coronary revascularisation or UAP requiring hospitalisation are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of a Composite Outcome Measure Consisting of: All-cause Death, Non-fatal MI, or Non-fatal Stroke
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of a composite outcome measure consisted of all-cause death, non-fatal MI, or non-fatal stroke are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of Non-fatal MI
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of non-fatal MI are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of Non-fatal Stroke
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of non-fatal stroke are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of Coronary Revascularisation
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of coronary revascularisation are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of UAP Requiring Hospitalisation
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of UAP requiring hospitalisation are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of HF Requiring Hospitalisation or Urgent HF Visit
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of HF requiring hospitalisation or urgent HF visit are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of Glycosylated Haemoglobin (HbA1c) Greater Than Equals to (>=) 48 Millimole Per Mole (mmol/Mol) (6.5 Percentage [%])
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of HbA1c >= 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to First Occurrence of a 5-component Composite Nephropathy Outcome Measure
    Description: Number of participants with first occurrence of a 5-component composite nephropathy outcome measure consisted of onset of persistent macroalbuminuria (UACR \> 300 milligram per gram \[mg/g\]), persistent 50% reduction in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) compared with baseline (randomisation), onset of persistent eGFR \< 15 ml/min/1.73m\^2, initiation of chronic renal replacement therapy (dialysis or transplantation) or renal death. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants From Time of Randomisation to HbA1c >= 39 mmol/Mol (5.7%) (for Participants With a Screening HbA1c <39 mmol/Mol [5.7%])
    Description: Number of participants with HbA1c >= 39 mmol/mol (5.7%) are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: From randomisation (week 0) up to 240 weeks
  [Secondary outcome] Participants With HbA1c < 39 mmol/Mol (5.7%) (for Participants With a Screening HbA1c >= 39 mmol/Mol [5.7%])
    Description: Number of participants with HbA1c \< 39 mmol/mol (5.7%) are presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: At week 52, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Systolic Blood Pressure (SBP)
    Description: Change in SBP from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Diastolic Blood Pressure (DBP)
    Description: Change in DBP from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Pulse
    Description: Change in pulse from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in High Sensitivity C-Reactive Protein (hsCRP) - Ratio to Baseline
    Description: Change in hsCRP (milligram per liter \[mg/L\]) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 presented as ratio to baseline (week 0). The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Total Cholesterol - Ratio to Baseline
    Description: Change in total cholesterol (milligram per deciliter \[mg/dL\]) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented as ratio to baseline (week 0). The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) Cholesterol - Ratio to Baseline
    Description: Change in HDL (mg/dL) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented as ratio to baseline (week 0). The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Low Density Lipoprotein (LDL) Cholesterol - Ratio to Baseline
    Description: Change in LDL (mg/dL) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented as ratio to baseline (week 0). The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Triglycerides - Ratio to Baseline
    Description: Change in triglycerides (mg/dL) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented as ratio to baseline (week 0). The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Body Weight
    Description: Percentage change in body weight from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in Waist Circumference
    Description: Change is waist circumference from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change From Randomisation (Week 0) in Participant Reported Outcome (PRO): EuroQol Five Dimensions Five Level Questionnaire (EQ-5D-5L) Index Score to Week 104
    Description: EQ-5D-5L is a PRO tool used to estimate impact on participant's health-related quality of life and provides a description of their problems by dimensions (descriptive system). EQ-5D has 5 dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain, anxiety/depression, and each dimension has 5 levels: not at all, mild, moderate, severe, extreme. Participant marks most appropriate statement in each dimension, resulting in 1-digit number and digits from 5 dimensions can be combined in 5-digit number describing participant's health state. Index score records an average health status according to dimensions using an algorithm, ranges 0-1 with higher score indicates better health status. Outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period (defined as date of randomisation to one of the dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant \[who were lost to follow-up\], date of death).
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change From Randomisation (Week 0) in PRO: EuroQol Five Dimensions Visual Analogue Scale (EQ-5D-VAS) to Week 104
    Description: EQ-5D-5L is a PRO tool used to estimate impact on participant's health-related quality of life and provides a description of their problems by dimensions (descriptive system). EQ-5D has 5 dimensions: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain, anxiety/depression, and each dimension has 5 levels: not at all, mild, moderate, severe, extreme. Participant marks most appropriate statement in each dimension, resulting in 1-digit number and digits from 5 dimensions can be combined in 5-digit number describing participant's health state. VAS component records a participant's overall self-rated health on a range of 0-100 with higher score indicates better self-reported health status. Outcome measure was evaluated based on data from in-trial observation period (defined as date of randomisation to one of the dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant \[who were lost to follow-up\], date of death).
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in HbA1c - Percentage
    Description: Change in HbA1c (percentage) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaulated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104
  [Secondary outcome] Change in HbA1c - mmol/Mol
    Description: Change in HbA1c (mmol/mol) from randomisation (week 0) to week 104 is presented. The outcome measure was evaulated based on data from in-trial observation period. In-trial observation period defined as the period from date of randomisation to one of the following dates, whichever comes first: date of follow-up visit, date when participant withdrew consent, date of last contact with participant for participants who were lost to follow-up (participant did not complete the trial and did not withdraw consent), date of death.
    Time frame: Week 0, week 104

Eligibility
  Sex: ALL  Minimum age: 45 Years
  Inclusion Criteria:
  
  * Informed consent obtained before any trial-related activities. Trial-related activities are any procedures that are carried out as part of the trial, including activities to determine suitability for the trial
  * Male or female, age greater than or equal to 45 years at the time of signing informed consent
  * Body mass index (BMI) greater than or equal to 27 kg/m\^2
  * Have established cardiovascular (CV) disease as evidenced by at least one of the following: prior myocardial infarction; prior stroke (ischemic or haemorrhagic stroke); or symptomatic peripheral arterial disease (PAD), as evidenced by intermittent claudication with ankle-brachial index (ABI) less than 0.85 (at rest), or peripheral arterial revascularization procedure, or amputation due to atherosclerotic disease
  
  Exclusion Criteria:
  
  Cardiovascular-related:
  
  * Any of the following: myocardial infarction, stroke, hospitalisation for unstable angina pectoris or transient ischaemic attack within the past 60 days prior to the day of screening
  * Planned coronary, carotid or peripheral artery revascularisation known on the day of screening
  * Presently classified as being in New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV heart failure
  
  Glycaemia-related:
  
  * HbA1c greater than or equal to 48 mmol/mol (6.5 %) as measured by the central laboratory at screening
  * History of type 1 or type 2 diabetes (history of gestational diabetes is allowed)
  * Treatment with glucose-lowering agents within 90 days before screening
  * Treatment with any glucagon-like-peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA) within 90 days before screening
  
  General safety:
  
  * History or presence of chronic pancreatitis
  * Presence of acute pancreatitis within the past 180 days prior to the day of screening
  * Personal or first degree relative(s) history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 or medullary thyroid carcinoma
  * End stage renal disease or chronic or intermittent haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis
  * Presence or history of malignant neoplasms within the past 5 years prior to the day of screening. Basal and squamous cell skin cancer and any carcinoma in-situ are allowed
  * Severe psychiatric disorder which in the investigator's opinion could compromise compliance with the protocol
  * Known or suspected hypersensitivity to trial products or related products
  * Previous participation in this trial. Participation is defined as randomisation
  * Receipt of any investigational medicinal product within 30 days before screening
  * Female who is pregnant, breast-feeding or intends to become pregnant or is of child-bearing potential and not using a highly effective contraceptive method
  * Any disorder, unwillingness or inability, which in the investigator's opinion, might jeopardise the participant's safety or compliance with the protocol
