24       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
     (/ष्ख्इािधक ृ त अिधकारी क े  ह/ष्खजऔ ता/ष6इ्इर)  
  /ष्खजऔ था न : ………………………….. 
  /ष्ऐख:दनांक  : ………………………… 
     (यथोिचत /ष्ख्इािधकारी क/ष्ऐखइ सील या मोहर)  
    
अित/ष्ऐख्र/ष6इ:इ त िनरी/ष6इ्इण  
(य/ष्ऐख:द अपेि/ष6इ्इत हो तो)  
ह/ष्खजऔ ता/ष6इ्इ/ष्ऐख्रत  
   
   (/ष्ख्इािधक ृ त अिधकारी क े  ह/ष्खजऔ ता/ष6इ्इर)  
     /ष्खजऔ था न : ……………………………… 
/ष्ऐख:दनांक  : ………….………………….. 
  (यथो िचत /ष्ख्इािधकारी क/ष्ऐखइ सील या मोहर)  
 [फा. सं. एसआर-23011/3/2015] 
आलोक /ष्ख::ीवा/ष्खजऔ त व, अपर सिचव 
 
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING 
NOTIFICATION   
New Delhi, the  29th February, 2016 
G.S.R. 202(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 218A  read with section 457 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), the Centr al Government, having regard to the provisions of t he 
Maritime Labour Convention, and in consultation wit h such organisations in India to be the representat ive of 
the employers of seamen and of seamen, hereby makes the following rules, namely :- 
CHAPTER I 
Preliminary  
1. Short title and commencement. -  (1) These rules may be called the Merchant Shippin g (Maritime 
Labour) Rules, 2016. 
(2)  They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette. 
2. Applicability.—  These rules shall apply to all seafarers working o n all Indian flag ships engaged in 
commercial activities, but does not apply to — 
(a) ships which navigate exclusively in inland wate rs or waters within, or closely adjacent to, 
sheltered waters or areas where any law for the time being in force relating to ports apply;  
(b) ships engaged in fishing activities; (c) traditionally built ships such as dhows and junks; and  
(d) ships of war or naval auxiliaries.  
3. Definitions. -  (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a)  "Act" means the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958);  
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 25 
 
(b)  “collective bargaining agreement” means an agreement signed, from time to time, between the 
seafarers’ trade unions and the Indian ship owners for an employment of seafarers on board 
Indian flag ships;  
(c)  “Form” means the Form annexed to these rules; 
(d)   “gross tonnage” means the measure of the overall s ize of a ship determined in accordance 
with Merchant Shipping (Tonnage Measurement of Ships) Rules,1987;  
(e)  “international voyage” means a voyage from a countr y to a port outside such a country or 
from a port or between two ports in a country outside India; 
(f)  “recognised organisations” means a person or body o f persons authorised by the Director 
General of Shipping for the purpose of implementation of these rules; 
(g)  “recruitment and placement service” means any person, company, institution, agency or other 
organisation, in the public or private sector, which is engaged in recruiting seafarers on behalf 
of employers or placing seafarers with employers; 
(h)  “seafarers' employment agreement” includes—  
i.  a contract of employment; 
ii.  articles of agreement; 
(i)  “ship owner” includes another organisation or perso n, such as the manager, agent or bareboat 
charterer, who has assumed the responsibility for the operation of the ship from the owner and 
who, on assuming such responsibility, has agreed to  take over the duties and responsibilities 
imposed on ship owners in accordance with the marit ime labour convention, regardless of 
whether any other organisations or persons fulfil certain duties or responsibilities on behalf of 
the ship owner; 
(j)  “specified” means specified by the Director General  of Shipping through a Merchant 
Shipping Notice. 
(2)  Words and expressions used in these rules and not d efined but defined in the Act shall have 
the same meaning as assigned to them in the Act. 
CHAPTER II 
Minimum requirements for seafarers to work on ships.  
4. Minimum age. —  No person below the age of sixteen years shall be employed or engaged to work on 
a ship subject to such restrictions regarding night work, health and safety or any other hazardous wor k as may 
be notified by the Director General of Shipping with the approval of Central Government from time to time.  
5.  Medical fitness certificate. —  No person shall be engaged as seafarer unless he i s certified as 
medically fit and holds a medical fitness certificate as provided under the Act.  
6. Training and qualification. —  (1) The ship owner shall ensure that the seafarers  shall not work on a 
ship unless they are trained or certified as competent or otherwise qualified to perform their duties. 
(2) The ship owner shall ensure that the seafarers shall not be permitted to work on a ship unless the y 
have successfully completed training for personal safety on board ship. 
(3)  For the purpose of sub-rules (1) and (2), the Direc tor General of Shipping shall specify the 
training and certification taking into account the mandatory instruments adopted by the International Maritime 
Organisation. 
7.  Recruitment and Placement —  Recruitment and placement of Indian seafarers shall be in accordance 
with the rules made under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  
 
26       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
CHAPTER III 
Conditions of employment 
8.  Seafarers’ employment agreements.—  (1) Every Indian flag ship shall comply with the f ollowing 
requirements regarding seafarers’ employment agreement, namely:-  
(a)  seafarers working on Indian flag ships shall have a  seafarers’ employment agreement signed by 
both the seafarer and the ship owner or a represent ative of the ship owner or where they are not 
employees, evidence of contractual or similar arrangements providing them with decent working 
and living conditions on board the ship as required by the Act and the rules made thereunder;  
(b)  seafarers signing a seafarers’ employment agreement  shall be given an opportunity to examine 
and seek advice on the agreement before signing, an d such other facilities as are necessary to 
ensure that they have freely entered into an agreem ent with a sufficient understanding of their 
rights and responsibilities; 
(c)  the ship owner and seafarer concerned shall each ha ve a signed original of the seafarers’ 
employment agreement; 
(d)  the ship owner shall ensure that clear information as to the conditions of the employment is 
easily obtained on board by seafarers, including th e master of the ship and that such information 
including a copy of the seafarers’ employment agreement is accessible to the Director General of 
Shipping or any other entity so notified including port state authorities in ports to be visited;  
(e)  at the end of, or termination of, contract, every s eafarer’s continuous discharge certificate shall 
be endorsed with record of employment on board the ship. 
 (2) Where a collective bargaining agreement in ful l or part forms part of a seafarers’ employment 
agreement, a copy of that agreement shall be made available on board.  
(3)  The seafarers’ employment agreement and any ap plicable collective bargaining agreement 
shall be in English. 
(4)  The ship owner or its licensed recruitment and plac ement service provider shall file the 
articles of agreement signed with the seafarer to t he shipping master or other related authority within the time 
limit as specified by the Director General of Shipping. 
(5)  Seafarers’ employment agreements shall in all cases contain the following particulars, inter-
alia , namely.- 
a)  the seafarers’ full name, date of birth, age and place of birth; 
b)  the name and address of the ship owner; 
c)  the place where and date when the seafarers’ employment agreement is entered into; 
    
d)  the capacity in which the seafarer is to be employed; 
e)   the amount of the wages of the seafarers or, where  applicable, the formula used for 
calculating them; 
f)  the amount of paid annual leave or, where applicable, the formula used for calculating it; 
g)  the termination of the agreement and the conditions thereof, including,— 
(i)  if the agreement has been made for an indefinite period, the conditions entitling either 
party to terminate it, the required period of notic e, which shall not be less for the ship 
owner than for the seafarer; 
(ii)  if the agreement has been made for a definite period, the date fixed for its expiry; and 
(iii)  if the agreement has been made for a voyage, the po rt of destination and the time 
which has to expire after arrival before the seafarer should be discharged; 
(h)  the health and social security protection to b e provided to the seafarer by the ship owner; 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 27 
 
(i)  the seafarers’ entitlement to repatriation; 
(j)  reference to the collective bargaining agreeme nt, if applicable; and 
(k)   any other particulars or the format as may be  specified by the Director General of Shipping, in 
consultation with the representatives of ship owners and the seafarers; 
(6)  The minimum period of notice to be given by th e seafarers and ship owners for the early 
termination of a seafarers’ employment agreement sh all be in accordance with the collective bargaining  
agreement or seafarer employment agreement, but in any case shall not be shorter than seven days.  
(7)  A period of notice shorter than the minimum pe riod as in sub–rule (6) may be given in 
circumstances which are recognised under the applic able collective bargaining agreements as justifying  
termination of the employment agreement at shorter notice or without notice and in determining these 
circumstances, it shall be ensured by the ship owne r that the need of the seafarer to terminate, witho ut 
penalty, the employment agreement on shorter notice  or without notice for compassionate or other urgen t 
reasons is taken into account. 
(8)  Seafarers’ entitlement for compensation from t he ship owner in case of injury, loss or 
unemployment arising from loss of the ship or found ering shall be specified in the collective bargaini ng 
agreement or the Seafarers’ Employment Agreement. 
9. Wages.— (1) The ship owner shall make payments due to seaf arers working on board their ships at no 
greater than monthly intervals:  
Provided that in case of any collective bargaining agreement for the wages as mentioned in sub-rule 
(1), the same shall be paid as per the agreement at no greater than monthly intervals. 
(2) The ship owner shall ensure that seafarers are given a monthly account of the payments due 
and the amounts paid, including wages, additional p ayments and the rate of exchange used where payment  
has been made in foreign currency. 
(3) The ship owner shall take measures to provide s eafarers with a means to transmit all or part 
of their earnings to their families or dependents or legal beneficiaries. 
(4) The ship owner shall formulate measures to ensu re that seafarers are able to transmit their 
earnings to their families which include:- 
(a)  a system for enabling seafarers, at the time of the ir entering employment or during it, to allot, if 
they so desire, a proportion of their wages for rem ittance at regular intervals to their families by 
bank transfers or similar means;  
(b)  a requirement that allotments shall be remitted in due time and directly to the person or persons 
nominated by the seafarers;  
(c)  any charge for the service under sub-rule (3) and c lauses (a) and (b) of sub-rule (4) shall be 
reasonable in amount, and unless otherwise provided the rate of currency exchange shall be at the 
prevailing market rate or the official rate prescri bed by the Reserve Bank of India and not be 
unfavourable to the seafarer.  
(5)  The wages included in the collective bargaining agr eement or the Seafarers’ Employment 
Agreement shall be in accordance with the guidelines as laid down in the Maritime Labour Convention.  
10.  Hours of work and rest.—  (1) For the purpose of these rules, the term.- 
(a) “hours of work” means time during which seafare rs are required to do work on account of the 
ship; 
(b) “hours of rest” means time outside the hours of  work but does not include short breaks or 
meal breaks up to one hour during the hours of work. 
(2)  The normal working hours standard for seafarer s shall not exceed an eight-hour day with one-
day rest per week and rest on public holidays as per collective bargaining agreement or seafarers' employment 
agreement. 
28       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
(3)  The ship owner shall adopt minimum hours of th e rest which shall be,- 
(i)  not less than ten hours in any twenty-four hou r period; and 
(ii)  not less than seventy-seven hours in total fo r a period of seven days in 
different spells.  
(4) Minimum ten hours of rest may be divided into n o more than two periods, one of which shall 
be at least six hours in length and the interval be tween consecutive periods of rest shall not exceed fourteen 
hours. 
(5) Musters, fire-fighting and lifeboat drills, and  drills provided by the Act and rules made 
thereunder and by the International instruments shall be conducted in a manner that minimises the disturbance 
of rest period and does not induce fatigue. 
(6) When a seafarer is on call, such as when a mach inery space is unattended, the seafarer shall 
have an adequate compensatory rest period if the normal period of rest is disturbed by call-outs to work. 
(7) If no collective bargaining agreement or arbitr ation award exists or if the Director General of 
Shipping determines that the provisions in the agre ement or award in respect of sub-rule (5) or sub-ru le (6) 
are inadequate, the Director General of Shipping ma y specify such provisions to ensure the seafarers 
concerned to have sufficient rest.  
 (8) The ship owner shall ensure the posting, in an  easily accessible place, of a table with the 
shipboard working arrangements, which shall contain for every position at least.— 
(a)  the schedule of service at sea and service in port; and 
(b)   the minimum hours of rest as agreed upon with in the frame-work of the applicable collective 
bargaining agreements. 
 (9)  The table referred to in sub-rule (8) shall b e established in a standardised format as specified  by 
the Director General of Shipping in the working language or languages of the ship and in English. 
 (10)  The ship owner shall maintain records of sea farers’ daily hours of rest to allow monitoring of 
compliance with the provision of sub-rules (3) to (9). 
 (11)  The records shall be in a standardised forma t specified by the Director General of Shipping 
taking into account any available guidelines of the  International Labour Organisation and the format s hall be 
in any standard format prepared by the Organisation in the languages required by sub-rule (9).  
(12)  Copy of the records pertaining to the seafare rs shall be endorsed by the master or a person 
authorised by the master. 
(13) (a) Nothing contained in this rule shall preve nt the right of the master of a ship to require a 
seafarer to perform any hours of work necessary for  the immediate safety of the ship, persons on board  or 
cargo, or for the purpose of giving assistance to other ships or persons in distress at sea; 
(b) In accordance with the provisions of clause (a) , the master may suspend the schedule of hours of 
work or hours of rest and require a seafarer to per form any hours of work necessary until the normal s ituation 
has been restored;  
(c) As soon as practicable, after the normal situation has been restored, the master shall ensure that any 
seafarers who have performed work in a scheduled rest period are provided with an adequate period of rest. 
 (14) (a) relaxations from the required hours of re st under sub-rule (3) and sub-rule (4) may be allow ed 
for not more than two consecutive weeks provided th at the rest period is not less than seventy hours i n any 
seven day period, and the interval between two peri ods of relaxation on board shall not be less than t wice the 
duration of the relaxation; 
(b)  the ten hours of rest in a twenty four hour pe riod provided during the relaxation may be 
divided into no more than three periods, one of which shall be at least six hours in length, and the said periods 
shall not be less than one hour in length;  
(c)  Interval between consecutive periods of rest s hall not exceed fourteen hours: Provided that no 
relaxation shall be made for duty beyond twenty four hour in any seven day period. 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 29 
 
11. Entitlement to Leave. -  (1) The ship owner shall establish the following o perational parameters 
and practices to ensure that seafarers are provided with the adequate leave, namely:- 
(a) seafarers employed on ships shall be given paid  annual leave of at least 2.5 calendar days per 
month of employment or pro rata; 
(b) seafarers shall be granted shore leave of adequ ate period to safe-guard their health and well-bein g 
and with the operational requirements of their positions. 
 (2) Any agreement to forgo the minimum annual leav e with pay specified in this rule, except in 
cases provided for by the Director General of Shipp ing, shall be prohibited; provided that, the divisi on of 
annual leave into parts, or the accumulation of suc h annual leave due in respect of one year together with a 
subsequent period of leave is authorised subject to mutual agreement between the ship owner and the se afarer 
concerned. 
12. Repatriation. - (1) The ship owner shall provide financial securit y in the manner as specified by Director 
General of Shipping, to ensure that seafarers are d uly repatriated in accordance with the provisions o f this 
rule. 
(2) The ship owner shall ensure that seafarer on th eir ships are repatriated in the following 
circumstances without any cost to the seafarers, namely.- 
a)  if the seafarers’ employment agreement expires ; 
b)  when the seafarers’ employment agreement is terminated- 
i.  by the ship owner; or 
ii.  by the seafarer; 
 for justified reasons, as per collective bargaining agreement/seafarer employment agreement; and also   
(c) when the seafarers are no longer able to carry out their duties under their employment agreement o r 
cannot be expected to carry them out in the specifi c circumstances, as per collective bargaining 
agreement/seafarer employment agreement;  
(d) on compassionate grounds as per collective barg aining agreement/seafarer employment agreement; 
(e) in the event of their abandonment.  
Explanation. - For the purposes of this clause, a seafarer shall be deemed to have been abandoned where, in 
violation of the requirements of the Act or these r ules or the terms of the seafarers’ employment agre ement, 
the ship owner.- 
(a)  fails to cover the cost of the seafarer’s repa triation; or  
(b)  has left the seafarer without the necessary ma intenance and support (including adequate food, 
accommodation, drinking water supplies, essential f uel for survival on board the ship and 
necessary medical care); or 
(c)  has otherwise unilaterally severed their ties with the seafarer including failure to pay 
contractual wages for a period of at least two months.  
(3)  The ship owner shall ensure that there are appropriate provisions in collective bargaining agreements, 
specifying.- 
a)  the circumstances in which seafarers are entitled t o repatriation in accordance with the 
provisions of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-rule (2); 
b)  the maximum duration of service periods on board fo llowing which a seafarer is entitled to 
repatriation – which shall be less than twelve months; and 
c)  the precise entitlements to be accorded by ship owners for repatriation, including those relating to 
the destinations of repatriation, the mode of trans port, the items of expense to be covered and 
other arrangements to be made by ship owners. 
(4) The ship owner shall not make any provision req uiring that seafarers make an advance payment 
towards the cost of repatriation at the beginning o f their employment, and also from recovering the co st of 
30       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
repatriation from the wages of seafarers or other entitlements except where the seafarer has been found, as per 
the applicable collective bargaining agreements, to be in default of the seafarer’s employment obligations.  
(5) Nothing contained in this rule shall prejudice any right of the ship owner to recover the cost of 
repatriation under third-party contractual arrangements.  
(6) Each ship owner shall make available to seafare rs, a copy of the applicable provisions regarding 
repatriation in English. 
(7) If a ship owner fails to make arrangements for or to meet the cost of repatriation of seafarers wh o are 
entitled to be repatriated- 
(a)  the Director General of Shipping shall arrange  for repatriation of the seafarers concerned or the  
country from which the seafarers are to be repatria ted or the country of which they are a national 
may arrange for their repatriation and in all such cases the cost shall be recovered from the 
financial security referred to in sub-rules (1) and (12) of rule 12; 
(b)  the expenses of repatriation shall in no case be a charge upon the seafarers, except as provided for 
in sub- rule (4). 
(8)  Taking into account the applicable internation al instruments, including the International 
Convention on Arrest of Ships, 1999, the Director G eneral of Shipping who has arranged the cost of 
repatriation pursuant to this rule may detain, or r equest the detention of, the ship of the owner of t he 
concerned ship until the reimbursement has been made in accordance with clause (c) of sub-rule (7); 
(9)  Director General of Shipping shall facilitate the repatriation of seafarers serving on ships whic h 
call at its ports or pass through its territorial or internal waters, and their replacement on board; 
(10) In particular, the right of repatriation to an y seafarers shall not be refused due to financial 
circumstances of the ship owner or for the inability of the ship owner or unwillingness to replace a seafarer. 
(11) Ship owner shall ensure that the copy of these  rules are carried and are available on board to th e 
seafarers. 
(12) Every ship to which these rules apply shall ca rry a certificate or other documentary evidence of 
financial security issued by the financial security  provider and a copy of the same shall be posted in  a 
conspicuous place on board where it is available to  the seafarers. Where there is more than one financ ial 
security provider, the document provided by each provider shall be carried on board. 
(13)  The certificate or documentary evidence of fi nancial security shall contain the information as 
required in Form 1. 
(14) Financial security system shall be sufficient to cover the following, namely.— 
(a)  outstanding wages and other entitlements due from t he ship owner to the seafarer under the 
employment agreement, the relevant collective barga ining agreement, limited to four months of 
any such outstanding wages and four months of any such outstanding entitlements; 
(b)  all expenses reasonably incurred by the seafarer, including the cost of repatriation referred to sub- 
rule (15); 
(c)  the essential needs of the seafarer including such items, namely, adequate food, clothing where 
necessary, accommodation, drinking water, essential  fuel for survival on board the ship, 
necessary medical care and any other reasonable cos ts or charges from the act or omission 
constituting the abandonment until the seafarer’s arrival at home. 
(15)  Cost of repatriation shall cover travel by ap propriate and expeditious means, normally by air, 
and include provision for food and accommodation of  the seafarers from the time of leaving the ship un til 
arrival at the seafarer’s home, necessary medical c are, passage and transport of personal effect and a ny other 
reasonable costs or charges arising from the abandonment. 
(16)  The financial security shall not cease before  the end of the period of validity of the financial  
security. 
(17)  If the providers of financial security has ma de any payment to any seafarers in accordance with 
the provisions of these rules, such provider shall,  up to the amount it has paid and in accordance wit h the 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 31 
 
applicable law, acquire by subrogation, assignment or otherwise, the right which the seafarers would h ave 
enjoyed. 
13.  Seafarer compensation for the ship’s loss or f oundering.— (1) The ship owner shall ensure that, in 
every case of loss or foundering of any ship, the s hip owner shall pay to each seafarer on board an in demnity 
against unemployment resulting from such loss or fo undering which shall be specified in the collective  
bargaining agreement.  
(2)  The provision of sub-rule (1) shall be without  prejudice to any other rights a seafarer may 
have under any other law for the time being in forc e for losses or injuries arising from a ship’s loss  or 
foundering. 
14. Manning levels.—  (1)  The ship owner shall ensure that each ship sh all employ on board as per the 
safe manning document issued by Mercantile Marine D epartment from time to time so that the ships are 
operated safely, efficiently and with due regard to  security under all conditions, taking into account  concerns 
about seafarer fatigue and the particular nature and conditions of the voyage. 
 (2) The ship owner shall ensure that every ship is  manned by a crew that is adequate, in terms of siz e 
and qualifications, to ensure the safety and securi ty of the ship and its personnel, under all operati ng 
conditions, in accordance with the minimum safe man ning document as specified by the Director General of 
Shipping.  
 (3) Director General of Shipping shall, when deter mining, approving or revising the manning levels, 
take into account the need to avoid or minimise the excessive hours of work so as to ensure sufficient rest and 
to limit fatigue, and also the principles in the ap plicable international instruments, especially thos e of the 
International Maritime Organisation, on manning levels. 
(4) The Director General of Shipping shall also tak e into account all the requirements of rule 17 in 
determining manning levels. 
15.  Career and skill development and opportunities  for seafarers’ employment.—  (1) Director 
General of Shipping shall encourage career and skil l development and employment opportunities for 
seafarers, in order to provide the maritime sector with a stable and competent workforce. 
(2) The aim of the policies referred in sub-rule (1 ), shall be to help the seafarers, strengthen their  
competencies, qualifications and employment opportunities. 
(3) Director General of Shipping, after consulting the owners of the ship and seafarers’ organisations  
concerned, establish clear objectives for the vocat ional guidance, education and training of seafarers  whose 
duties on board ship primarily relate to the safe o peration and navigation of the ship, including ongo ing 
training. 
CHAPTER IV 
16. Accommodation and recreational facilities.—  (1) Accommodation and recreational facilities on b oard 
ships shall be in accordance with Merchant Shipping  (Crew Accommodation) Rules, 1960 and Merchant 
Shipping (Seafarers’ Accommodation) Rules, 2016.  
 (2) The inspections required under rule 25 shall b e carried out when.- 
(a) ship is registered or re-registered; or 
(b) the seafarer accommodation on a ship has been substantially altered.  
(3) The ship owner shall provide recreational facilities on board ships at no cost to the seafarer. 
17.  Food and catering.—  (1) (a) The ship owner shall provide variety food of required quality, quantity 
and nutritional value and water, including drinking water which covers the requirement of the complement on 
board the ship, their religious requirements and cu ltural practices pertaining to food, duration and n ature of 
voyage.  
(b)  The organisation and equipment of catering dep artment shall be such as to permit the 
provision of adequate, varied and nutritious meals prepared and served in hygienic conditions. 
 (2) The quality and quantity of food supplied shal l be in conformity with the collective bargaining 
agreement or as may be specified by the Director General of Shipping. 
32       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
 (3) The ship owner shall ensure that the food and water including drinking water is provided to the 
seafarers free of charge during the period of engagement. 
 (4) The ship owner shall ensure that the seafarers  who are engaged as cooks of the ship are trained, 
qualified and found competent as specified by the Director General of Shipping.  
 (5) Catering staff shall be trained or instructed for their positions on board ship. 
 (6) On ships operating with a specified manning of  less than ten which, by virtue of the size of the crew 
or the trading pattern, may not be required to carr y a fully qualified cook, anyone processing the foo d in the 
galley shall be trained or instructed in areas incl uding food and personal hygiene and handling and st orage of 
food on board ship. 
 (7) In the case of exceptional necessity, the Dire ctor General of Shipping may, issue a dispensation 
permitting a non-fully qualified cook to serve in a  specified ship for a specified period, until the n ext 
convenient port of call or for a period not exceeding one month: 
 Provided that the person to whom the dispensation is issued is trained or instructed in areas includi ng 
food and personal hygiene and handling and storage of food on board ship. 
(8)  The ship owner shall ensure that frequent docu mented inspections are carried out on board ships, 
by or under the authority of the master, with respect to— 
a)  supply of food, water and drinking water; 
b)  all spaces and equipment used for the storage and handling of food, water and drinking water; 
and 
c)  galley and other equipment for the preparation and service of meals. 
(9)  No seafarer under the age of eighteen shall be  employed or engaged or work as a cook with 
the ship.  
CHAPTER V 
Health protection, Medical care, Welfare and Social protection  
18.  Medical care on board ship and ashore.— (1) The ship owner shall adopt such measures for p roviding 
protection of health and medical care, including es sential dental care, at no cost to the seafarers, f or seafarers 
working on board a ship which — 
a)  ensure the application to seafarers, of any general  provisions on occupational protection of health 
and medical care relevant to their duties, and of s pecial provisions specific to work on board ship 
whilst working on board; 
b)  ensure that seafarers are given protection of healt h and medical care including prompt access to 
the necessary medicines, medical equipment in accor dance with the provisions of the Merchant 
Shipping (Medicine, Medical stores appliances and F irst Aid Equipment) Rules, 1994, and 
facilities for diagnosis and treatment and to medical information and expertise;  
c)  give seafarers the right to visit a qualified medical practitioner or dentist without delay in ports of 
call, where practicable, at no cost to the seafarer; 
d)  ensure that medical care and protection of health s ervices while a seafarer is on board ship or 
landed in a foreign port are provided free of charg e to seafarers; and are not limited to treatment 
of sick or injured seafarers but include measures o f a preventive character such as health 
promotion and health education programmes.  
(2)  The ship owner shall adopt a standard medical report form for use by the masters of the ship 
and relevant onshore and on-board medical personnel  as specified by the Director General of Shipping a nd 
the form when completed, its contents shall be kept  confidential and shall only be used to facilitate the 
treatment of seafarers. 
(3)  The Ship to which Merchant Shipping (Carriage of Medical Officers) Rules, 1961 apply shall 
carry medical practitioner on board.  
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 33 
 
(4)  (a) The ship which does not carry a medical pr actitioner shall be required to have either at 
least one seafarer on board who is in charge of med ical care and administering medicine as part of the ir 
regular duties or at least one seafarer on board competent to provide medical first aid.  
 (b) Persons in charge of medical care on board who  are not medical practitioner shall have 
satisfactorily completed training in medical care t hat meets the requirements of Standard of Training 
Certification and Watch Keeping Convention.  
 (c) Seafarers designated to provide medical first aid shall have satisfactorily completed training in  
medical first aid that meets the requirements of Standard of Training Certification and Watch keeping.  
(5)  (a) The ship owner shall ensure by a prearrang ed system that medical advice by radio or 
satellite communication to ships at sea, including specialist advice is available on all twenty four h ours of a 
day.  
(b) Such medical advice, including the onward trans mission of medical messages by radio or satellite 
communication between a ship and those ashore givin g the advice, shall be available free of charge to all 
ships irrespective of the flag that they fly. 
19.  The Liability of the Ship Owner. —  (1) The ship owner shall ensure to provide seafare rs employed 
on the ships with a right to material assistance an d support with respect to the financial consequence s of 
sickness, injury or death occurring while they are serving under a seafarers’ employment agreement or arising 
from their employment under such agreement.  
(2)  Nothing contained in sub-rule (1) shall affect  any other legal remedy available to a seafarer 
under any law for the time being in force.  
(3)  The ship owner shall be responsible for protec tion of health and medical care of all seafarers 
working on board the ship in accordance with the following minimum standards, namely.— 
a)  The ship owner shall be liable to bear the costs fo r seafarers working on their ship in respect 
of sickness and injury of the seafarers occurring b etween the date of commencing of the duty 
and the date upon which they are deemed duly repatr iated, or arising from their employment 
between those dates; 
b)  The ship owner shall provide financial security to assure compensation in the event of the 
death or long-term disability of seafarers due to a n occupational injury, illness or hazard, as 
set out in the seafarers’ employment agreement or collective agreement; 
c)  The ship owner shall be liable to defray the expens e of medical care, including medical 
treatment and the supply of the necessary medicines and therapeutic appliances, and boarding 
and lodging away from home until the sickness or in capacity has been declared to be of a 
permanent character; and 
d)  The ship owner shall be liable to pay the cost of f uneral expenses in the case of death 
occurring on board or ashore during the period of engagement. 
(4)  The Director General of Shipping may limit the  liability of the ship owner to defray the 
expenses of medical care and aboard and lodging to a period which shall not be less than sixteen weeks  from 
the day of the injury or the commencement of the sickness. 
(5) Where the sickness or injury results in incapacity for work, the ship owner shall be liable.- 
a)  to pay full wages till the sick or injured seafarer s remain on board or until the seafarers have 
been repatriated in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement; 
b)  to pay wages in whole or in part in accordance with  the provisions of law for the time being 
in force or as provided for in collective agreement  from the time when the seafarers are 
repatriated or landed until their recovery or, if e arlier, until they are entitled to cash benefit 
under the law for the time being in force.  
(6)  The Director General of Shipping may limit the  liability of the ship owner to pay wages in 
whole or in part in respect of a seafarers no longe r on board to period which shall not be less than s ixteen 
weeks from the days of the injury or the commencement of the sickness. 
34       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
(7)  The Director General of Shipping may exclude t he ship owner from liability in respect of— 
a)  injury, not sickness, incurred otherwise than in th e service of the ship; injury or sickness due to 
the wilful misconduct of the sick, injured or deceased seafarers; and 
b)  sickness or infirmity intentionally concealed when the engagement is entered into. 
(8) The Director General of Shipping may exempt the  ship owner from liability to defray the expense 
of medical care and board and lodging and funeral expenses in so far as such liability is assumed by the public 
authorities. 
(9)  The ship owner or his representatives shall ta ke measures for safeguarding property left on 
board by sick, injured or deceased seafarers and for returning it to them or to their next to kin. 
(10) The ship owner shall ensure that the system of  financial security to assure compensation as 
provided in clause (b) of sub-rule (3) for contract ual claims, meet the following minimum requirements , 
namely:— 
(a)  the contractual compensation, as set out in the sea farers’ employment agreement and without 
prejudice to clause (c ) sub- rule (10), shall be paid in full and without delay; 
(b)  there shall be no demand to accept a payment less than the contractual amount; 
(c)  whereas the nature of the long-term disability of a  seafarers makes it difficult to assess the 
full compensation to which the seafarers may be ent itled, an interim payment shall be made 
to the seafarers so as to avoid undue hardship; 
(d)  the seafarers shall receive payment in accordance w ith the provisions of sub-rule (3), without 
prejudice to other legal right, but such payment ma y other claim made by the seafarers 
against the ship owner and arising from the same incident; and 
(e)  the claim for concerned compensation may be brought  directly by the seafarers concerned, or 
their next of kin, or a representative of the seafarers or designated beneficiary. 
(f)  the evidence of financial security shall be as per Form –2. 
(11)  The ship owner shall not cancel or terminate the financial security without giving a notice in 
writing to the seafarer. 
(12)  The ship owner shall ensure that no financial  security shall be cancelled or terminated by the 
provider of the financial security without giving n otice of atleast thirty days in advance, to the Dir ector 
General of Shipping by the provider of financial security. 
(13)  (a) The ship owner shall ensure that his ship s carry on board a certificate or other 
documentary evidence of financial security issued b y the financial security provider and copy of the s ame 
shall be posted in a conspicuous place on board where it is available to the seafarers;  
(b) Where more than one financial security provider  provides the cover, the document 
provided by each provider shall be carried on board. 
(14)  Financial security shall not cease before the  end of the period of validity of the financial 
security unless the financial security providers ha s given prior notification of at least thirty days to the 
competent authority of the flag State. 
(15)  Financial security shall provide for the paym ent of all contractual claims covered by it which 
arise during the period for which the document is valid. 
(16)  The certificate, other documentary evidence o f financial security shall contain the 
information specified in Form-1 and it shall be in English or accompanied by an English translation. 
(17)  For the purposes of sub-rule (10), the term “ contractual claim” means any claim which relates 
to death or long-term disability of seafarers due t o an occupational injury, illness or hazard as set out in the 
seafarers’ employment agreement or collective bargaining agreement. 
(18)  The system of financial security, as provided  in sub-rule (10), may be in the form of a social 
security scheme or insurance or fund or other similar arrangements. The form of the financial security shall be 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 35 
 
determined by the Director General of Shipping afte r consultation with the ship owners’ and seafarers’  
organisations concerned. 
(19)  The ship owner shall receive, deal with and i mpartially settle contractual claims relating to 
compensation referred to in this rule through expeditious and fair procedures.  
20.  Health and safety protection and prevention of  accident.— The Director General of Shipping may 
specify separate guidelines from time to time, for the management of occupational safety and protectio n of 
health on board the ships. 
21.  Access to shore based welfare facilities.—  The Director General of Shipping may specify separ ate 
guidelines from time to time for providing seafarer s on ships that are in Indian ports with access to adequate 
welfare facilities and services. 
22.  Social security.—  (1)To achieve social security the following branch es of social security protections 
shall be adopted, namely.-  
a)  medical care; 
b)  sickness benefit; 
c)  nemployment benefit; 
d)  ld-age benefit; 
e)  mployment injury benefit; 
f)  amily benefit; 
g)  aternity benefit; 
h)  invalidity benefit and survivors’ benefit. 
(2) The social security protection referred to in s ub-rule (1) shall be in addition to the protection 
provided under rules 18 and 19. 
(3) The Director General of Shipping shall establis h social security protection progressively for all its 
seafarers serving on board Indian ships or on board  other flag state ships, in collaboration with the 
stakeholder’s equivalent schemes as per the national circumstances. 
CHAPTER VI 
FLAG STATE RESPONSIBLITIES  
23. Implementation of the maritime labour conventio n.— (1) The Director General of Shipping shall 
establish an effective system for.— 
(a)  the inspection and certification of the mariti me labour conditions by itself or through any 
recognised organisation in accordance with the provisions of the convention; 
(b)  the issuance, endorsement and renewal, of inte rim or full time Maritime Labour Certificate 
along with the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compl iance, complying with the provisions 
of the convention. 
(2) The Director General of Shipping shall provide the International Labour Office with a current 
list of recognised organisations authorised to act on its behalf and it shall keep this list up to date.  
(3) The list, referred to in sub-rule (1), shall sp ecify the functions that the recognised organisatio ns 
have been authorised to carry out and the list shall be made available to the public. 
(4) The Director General of Shipping shall specify the manner for maintaining the records of 
inspections of ships that fly the Indian Flag. 
(5) The Director General of Shipping shall publish an annual report on such inspection within a 
reasonable time, not exceeding six months, after the end of the year.  
24.  Maritime labour certificate and declaration of  maritime labour compliance.— (1) Director General 
of Shipping or by any officer, authority or organis ation authorised by him in this behalf shall issue a Maritime 
Labour Certificate in accordance with Maritime Labour Convention. 
36       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
(2)  Director General or by any officer, authority or organisation authorised by him in this behalf , 
shall issue a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance in respect of a ship that it meets with the requirements 
and standards set out in provisions of the Maritime Labour Convention. 
 (3)   The ships covered under this rule shall carr y and maintain a declaration of maritime labour 
compliance stating the requirements for implementin g these rules for the working and living conditions  for 
seafarers and setting out the measures adopted by t he ship owner to ensure compliance with the require ments 
on the ship or ships concerned. 
(4)  The declaration of maritime labour compliance shall be in two parts, Part I and Part II and 
shall be in the Form-3 and Form-4 respectively. 
(5) Maritime labour Certificate may be issued on an interim basis in the Form-5: 
(a)  to a new ships on delivery; or 
(b)  when a ship changes flag; or 
(c)  when a ship owner assumes responsibility for the op eration of a ship which is new to 
that ship owner. 
(6) Such interim maritime labour certificate may be  issued by the recognised organisation or any 
other person authorised by the Director General of Shipping for a period not exceeding six months, fol lowing 
verification that— 
(a)  the ship has been inspected as far as reasonab le and practical ,for the matters listed in the 
Form-6; 
(b)  the ship owner has demonstrated to the recogni sed organisation or any other person 
authorised by the Director General of Shipping that  the ship has adequate procedures to 
comply with this rule; 
(c)  the master is familiar with the requirements o f these rules and the responsibilities for its 
implementation; and 
(d)  relevant information has been submitted to the  recognised organisation or any other person 
authorised by the Director General of Shipping to p roduce a declaration of maritime labour 
compliance.  
(7)  The ships covered under this rule shall be iss ued a Maritime Labour Certificate in Form -7 by 
the recognised organisations or any other person au thorised by Director General of Shipping certifying  that 
the working and living conditions of seafarers on t he ship, including measures for ongoing compliance to be 
included in the declaration of maritime labour compliance referred to in sub- rule (3) have been inspected and 
meet the requirements for implementing the Convention. 
25. Inspection and Enforcement.— (1) The Director G eneral of Shipping shall establish an effective and  
coordinated system of regular inspections, monitori ng and other control measures to ensure that the sh ips, to 
which these rules apply, comply with the requirements of these rules. 
(2)  The Director General of Shipping shall maintai n a system of inspection of the conditions for 
seafarers on ships to which this rule apply, which shall include verification that the measures relati ng to 
working and living conditions as set out in the declaration of maritime labour compliance, are being followed, 
and that the requirements of these rules are met. 
(3)  If the Director General of Shipping or an offi cer authorised by him, receives a complaint 
which it does not consider manifestly unfounded or obtains evidence that a ship to which these rules a pply 
does not conform to the requirements of these rules or that there are serious deficiencies in the implementation 
of the measures set out in the declaration of marit ime labour compliance, the Director General of Ship ping or 
an officer authorised by him shall take necessary steps to investigate the matter and ensure that acti on is taken 
to remedy any deficiencies found.  
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 37 
 
 (4)  The Director General of Shipping may issue cl ear guidelines to the inspecting authority as to 
the tasks to be performed and shall empower them:  
(a)  to board a ship that flies the Indian flag; 
(b) to carry out any examination, test or inquiry w hich they may consider necessary in order to 
satisfy themselves that the standards are being strictly observed; and 
(c)  to require that any deficiency is remedied and , where they have grounds to believe that 
deficiencies constitute a serious breach of the requirements of these rules, including seafarers’ 
rights, or represent a significant danger to seafar ers’ safety, health or security, to prohibit a 
ship from leaving port until necessary remedial actions are taken. 
(5)  Any action taken to pursuant clause (c) of sub -rule 4 shall be subject to right of appeal to 
administrative authority as may be specified by the Director General of Shipping. 
26. On board complaint procedures:—  The Indian Flag ship shall adopt following on boar d complaint 
procedures:—  
  (1) Any aggrieved seafarer serving on board an In dian flag ship shall, as soon as is feasible, submi t a 
written complaint to his Head of Department on boar d (deck or engine), which shall be immediately and 
formally acknowledged by the Head of Department to the seafarer concerned.     
(2) If the Head of Department cannot resolve the se afarer’s complaint to the satisfaction of the 
seafarer, within a prescribed time limit of three days of receipt of the complaint, the Head of Department shall 
refer it to the Master of the ship, who shall handl e the matter personally and settle the issue within  seven days 
of receipt of complaint. 
(3) A seafarer shall, at all times, have the unequi vocal right to be accompanied and to be 
represented by another seafarer of his choice on bo ard the ship concerned, while making the complaint or for 
the follow - up work thereon. 
(4) All complaints and decisions on the complaint s hall be duly recorded in the official record 
book and a copy of the decision taken, in each case , shall be provided to the seafarer concerned by th e said 
issue resolving authority. A proper documentary rec ord of all the complaints and actions taken on each  
complaint shall be kept on board and shall be avail able for an inspection by the authorities concerned  for a 
period of at least three years of receipt of complaint.   
(5) If the Master of the vessel cannot resolve the complaint on board, he shall take it up with to 
the ship owner concerned, under and due immediate i ntimation to the seafarer. The ship owner shall res olve 
the matter, without any delay, but not later than w ithin a maximum period of one month of receipt of 
complaint. Contact details of the ship owner for re solving seafarer’s complaints shall be made availab le 
onboard, by the Master of the vessel. The ship owne r shall, in resolving the complaint, take the assis tance of 
the Committee that may be set up by it, comprising the seafarers union(s) also. 
 (6) If the complaint of the seafarer is not resolv ed by the recruitment and placement service or 
ship owner within one month, including the Committe e also represented by the seafarers union, the seaf arer 
shall have the right to approach the competent auth ority, through the Grievance Redressal Mechanism as may 
be issued by the Director General from time to time . The complaint so registered with the authority sh all 
contain the copies of the complaint made by the sea farer to all his superiors, as mentioned above, inc luding to 
the recruitment and placement service or ship owner or Union (if any) and the replies given thereto by them, if 
any. 
 (7) A seafarer on board a vessel calling at a fore ign port, in between a voyage shall also have the 
right to separately report his complaint alleging b reach of the requirement of, the Maritime Labour 
Convention, 2006 including seafarers’ rights, to th e authorised officer at that port, under the Mariti me Labour 
Convention on-shore seafarer complaint handling procedures. 
38       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
 (8) In all such cases, seafarers shall also have t he right to file their complaints directly with the  
Master or recruitment and placement service provider or ship owner or any other legal entity that the seafarers 
may consider appropriate for the purpose.  
27.  Port State Inspections:—  The Director General of Shipping shall establish t he procedure for 
inspection as required under the convention for fulfilling its port state responsibilities. 
28. Onshore seafarer complaint-handling procedures. -(1) An on shore complaint redressal procedure 
shall be followed in all Indian ports as specified by the Director General of Shipping, in consultatio n with the 
ship owners and seafarers’ organisations concerned,  who are parties to the Collective Bargaining Agree ment as 
reflected in the seafarers employment agreement, where applicable. 
(2) The Director General of Shipping shall take nec essary steps to safeguard the confidentiality of 
seafarers making the complaints. 
Form-1 
[See rule 12] 
Evidence of financial security  
 The certificate and other documentary evidence of financial security required under sub-rule (13) of 
rule 12 shall include the following information, namely:- 
(a) Name of the ship; 
(b) Port of registry of the ship; 
(c) Call sign of the ship; 
(d) International Maritime Organisation number of t he ship; 
(e) Name and address of the provider or providers o f the financial security; 
(f) Contact details of the person or entity respons ible for handing seafarer’s contractual claims; 
(g) Name of the owner of the ship; 
(h) Period of validity of the financial security; a nd 
(i) An attestation from the financial security prov ider that the financial security meet the requirement of 
rule 12. 
Form-2 
[See rule 19] 
Evidence of financial security  
 The certificate and other documentary evidence of financial security required under sub-rule 10 (f) of 
rule 19 shall include the following information, namely:- 
(a) Name of the ship; 
(b) Port of registry of the ship; 
(c) Call sign of the ship; 
(d) International Maritime Organisation number of t he ship; 
(e) Name and address of the provider or providers o f the financial security; 
(f) Contact details of the person or entity respons ible for handing seafarer’s contractual claims; 
(g) Name of the owner of the ship; 
(h) Period of validity of the financial security; a nd 
(i) An attestation from the financial security prov ider that the financial security meet the requirement of 
rule 19. 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 39 
 
Form-3 
[See rule 24 (5)] 
Declaration of Maritime Labour compliance – Part I 
(Note: This Declaration must be attached 
to the ship’s Maritime Labour Certificate)  
Issued under the authority of Director General of Shipping 
 With respect to the provisions of the Maritime Lab our Convention, 2006 the following referenced 
ship:- 
Name of ship IMO number Gross tonnage 
   
is maintained in accordance with the provisions of rule 24.  
The undersigned declares, on behalf of the abovementioned competent authority, that:- 
(a) the provision of the Maritime Labour Convention  are fully embodied in the  
 requirements referred to below: 
(b) these requirement are contained in the provisio ns referenced below; explanations concerning the 
content of those provisions are provided where necessary; 
(c) the detail of any substantial equivalencies und er Article VI, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Convention  are 
provided under the corresponding requirement listed  below in the section provided for this purpose 
below ( strike the statement which is not applicable ); 
(d) any exemption granted by the under rules (16) a nd (17) should be clearly indicated in the section 
provided for this purpose below; and 
(e) any ship-type specific requirements under natio nal legislation are also referenced under the 
requirement concerned. 
1. Minimum age (Rule 4) 
2. Medical certification (Rule 5)………………………………………… 
3. Qualification of seafarers (Rule 6)………………………………… …   
4. Seafarers’ employment agreement (Rule 8)…………………… …… 
5. Use of any licensed or certificated or regulated  private recruitment and placement service 
(Rule 7)…………………………………………… 
6. Hours of work or rest (Rule 10)………………………………………….  
7. Manning levels for the ship (Rule14)……………………………… … 
8. Accommodation (Rule16)…………………………………………….. 
9. On-board recreation facilities (Rule 16)…………………… ………… 
10. Food and catering (Rule 17)…………………………………………… 
11. Health and safety and accident prevention (Rule  18)………………... 
12. On-board medical care (Rule18)……………………………………… 
13. On-board complaint procedures (Rule 26)…………………… ……. 
14. Payment of wages (Rule 9)…………………………………………… 
   Name: …………………………. 
Title: …………………………….. 
                           Signature: ……………………… 
Place: …………………………… 
Date: ……………………………. 
 (Seal or stamped of the authority) 
40       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
 
Substantial equivalencies 
(Note: Strike out the statement which is not applicable ) 
 The following substantial equivalencies, as provid ed under Article VI, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the 
Convention, except where stated above, are noted (insert description if applicable): 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
No equivalency has granted. 
Name: ……...………………………. 
Title: ……………………………….. 
Signature: ………………………….. 
Place: ……………………………… 
Date: ………………………………. 
 (Seal or stamp of the authority) 
Exemptions 
(Note: Strike out the statement which is not applicable ) 
 The following exemptions granted by the competent authority) are noted: 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
No exemption has been granted. 
Name: ……………………………….  
Rule: ……………………………….. 
Signature: ………………………….. 
Place: ……………………………… 
Date: ………………………………. 
 (Seal or stamp of the authority, as appropriate) 
Form-4 
[See rule 24 (5)] 
Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance – Part II 
Measures adopted to ensure ongoing compliance between inspections 
 The following measures have been drawn up by the s hip owner, named in the Maritime Labour 
Certificate to which this declaration is attached to ensure ongoing compliance between inspections: 
(State below the measures drawn up to ensure compliance with each of the items in Part I) 
1. Minimum age (Rule 4) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
2. Medical certification (Rule 5) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
3. Qualification of seafarers (Rule 6) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 41 
 
4. Seafarers’ employment agreement (Rule 8) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
5. Use of any licensed or certificated or regulated  private recruitment and placement service (Rule 7) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
6. Hours of work or rest (Rule 10) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
7. Manning levels for the ship (Rule 14) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
8. Accommodation (Rule 16) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
9. On-board recreation facilities (Rule 16) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
10. Food and catering (Rule 17) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
11. Health and safety and accident prevention (Rule  18) 
 …………………………………………………………………………………….. 
12. On-board medical care (Rule 18) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
13. On-board complaint procedures (Rule 26) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
14. Payment of wages (Rule 9) 
 ……………………………………………………………………………………… 
I hereby certify that the above measure have been drawn up to ensure ongoing 
Compliance, between inspections, with the requirement listed in part I. 
Name of the owner of the ship:  …………………..……………………………………………. 
Company address: …………………….……………………………………………. 
Title: …………………………………………… 
Signature of the authorised signatory:……………………………………………….. 
Date: ……………………………………….. 
 (Stamp or seal of the ship owner) 
The above measures have been reviewed by ( insert name of competent authority or duly recognis ed 
organisation)  and, following inspection of the ship, have been d etermined as meeting the purpose set out 
under rule 24, regarding measures to ensure initial  and ongoing compliance with the requirements set o ut in 
Part I of this Declaration. 
Name: ………………………………. 
Rule: ……………………………….. 
Address: ..……………...................... 
 …………………….……………….. 
 ……..……………………………… 
42       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
Signature: ……………………….. 
 Place: …………………………… 
Date: ……………………………. 
(Seal or stamp of the authority, as appropriate) 
----------------------------------------- 
Form-5 
[See rule 24 (6)]  
Interim Maritime Labour Certificate 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
(Full designation of the issuing authority) 
by ………………………………………………………………………………………… 
(Full designation and address of the authority or duly authorised recognised organisations) 
Particular of the ship 
Name of ship ………………………………………………………………………… 
Distinctive number or letters…………………………………………………………. 
Port of registry ………………………………………………………………………….. 
Date of registry ………………………………………………………………………..... 
Gross tonnage……………………………………………………………………………  
International Maritime Organisation number 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
Type of ship ……………………………………………………………………………… 
Name and address of the owner of the ship………………………………………….  
…………………………………………………………………………………………….. 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
This is to certify, for the purpose of rule 24, that: 
(a) this ship has been inspected, as far as reasona ble and practicable, for the matters listed in Form-5 to 
these rules, taking into account verification of  items under (b), (c) and (d) below; 
(b) the owner of the ship has demonstrated to the c ompetent authority or recognised organisation that the 
ship has adequate procedures to comply with these rules. 
(c) the master is familiar with the requirements of  these rules and the responsibilities for implement ation; 
and 
(d) relevant information has been submitted to the competent authority or recognised organisation to 
produce a Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance. 
This Certificate is valid until ………………………. Subject to inspection is accordance with rules 24 and 25.  
Completion date of the inspection referred to under (a) above was…………… 
Issued at……………………………… on…………………………………………. 
Signature of the duly authorised official 
Issuing the interim certificate…………………………………………………………… 
(Seal or stamp of issuing authority, as appropriate) 
 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 43 
 
Form-6 
[See rule 24 (7) (a)] 
 The working and living conditions for seafarers th at shall be inspected and approved by the competent 
authority before certifying that the ship is in accordance with rule 24 are as under:- 
(1)  Minimum age: 
(2)  Medical certification: 
(3)  Qualification of seafarers:  
(4)  Seafarers’ employment agreements: 
(5)  Use of any licensed or certified or regulated private recruitment and placement service: 
(6)  Hours of work or rest: 
(7)  Manning levels for the ship: 
(8)  Accommodation: 
(9)  On-board recreational facilities: 
(10)  Food and catering: 
(11)  Health and safety and accident prevention: 
(12)  On-board medical care: 
(13)  On-board compliant procedures: 
(14)  Payment of wages: 
 
Form-7 
[See rule 24 (7)] 
Maritime Labour Certificate 
(Note: This Certificate shall have a Declaration 
of Maritime Labour Compliance attached) 
………………………………………………………………………………….. 
(Full designation of the issuing authority) 
by……………………………………………………………………………………….. 
(Full designation and address of the authority or r ecognised organisation duly authorised under the pr ovision 
of the rules) 
Particular of the ship 
Name of ship …………………………………………………………………………… 
Distinctive number or letters …………………………………………………………… 
Port of registry ………………………………………………………………………….. 
Date of registry ………………………………………………………………………….. 
Gross tonnage *  ……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
International Maritime Organisation number 
……………………………………………………………………………… 
Type of ship …………………………………………………………………………….. 
Name and address of the ship owner………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
……………………………………………………………………………………………… 
44       THE   GAZETTE   OF  INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY              [P ART  II—SEC . 3(i)]  
 
 *  For ships covered by the tonnage measurement interi m scheme adopted by the IMO, the gross 
tonnage is that which is included in the REMARKS co lumn of the International Tonnage Certificate 
(1969). See Article II(1)(c) of the Convention. 
This is to certify: 
 1. that this ship has been inspected and verified to be in compliance with the requirements of the 
Convention, and the provision of the attached Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance. 
 2. that the seafarers’ working and living conditio n specified in Form-6 were found to correspond 
to the abovementioned country’s national requiremen t implementing the Convention. These national 
requirements are summarised in the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance, Part I. 
 This certificate is valid until ………………….subject to  inspection in accordance with Rules 24 
and 25. 
This certificate is valid only when the Declaration of Maritime Labour Compliance issued 
at……………………………………………….. on……………………….. is attached. 
Completion date of the inspection on which this certificate is based was………… 
Issued at……………………………………… on ……………………………………… 
Signature of the duly authorised official issuing the Certificate 
(Seal or stamp of issuing authority, as appropriate) 
Endorsements for mandatory intermediate inspection and, if required,  
any additional inspection 
 This is to certify that the ship was inspected in accordance with the provisions of rule 25 and that the 
seafarers’ working and living conditions specified in the said rule were found to correspond to the 
requirement:      Signed…………………………… 
(to be completed between the second    (Signature o f authorised official) 
and third anniversary dates) 
        Place……………………………… 
        Date ……………………………… 
                               (Seal or stamp of th e authority, as appropriate) 
Additional endorsements (if required) 
This is to certify that the ship was the subject of  an additional inspection for the purpose of verify ing whether 
the ship continued to be in compliance with the req uirements implementing the Convention, as required by 
sub-rule (3) of rule 16 (re-registration or substantial alteration of accommodation)or for other reasons. 
Additional inspection:    Signed……………………………... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorised officia l) 
       Place ……………………………… 
       Date ………………………………. 
       (Seal or stamp of the authority, 
       as appropriate) 
Additional inspection:    Signed……………………………... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorised officia l) 
       Place ……………………………… 
        Date ………………………………. 
       (Seal or stamp of the authority, 
       as appropriate) 
¹Hkkx II µ[k.M 3(i)º Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k 45 
 
Additional inspection:    Signed……………………………... 
(if required)      (Signature of authorised officia l) 
       Place ……………………………… 
       Date ………………………………. 
       (Seal or stamp of the authority, 
       as appropriate) 
[F. No. SR-23011/3/2015] 
ALOK SRIVASTAVA, Addl. Secy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of  Printing at Government of  India  Press, Ring  Road,  Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.  
[भाग II—खण् ड 3(i)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण  3 
8. मूल  जनयमों  के जनयम  6 में ,-  
(क) ‘‘[देखें  जनयम  24(7)(क)]’’ कोष्ठक, िब्दों, अंकों और  अिर के स्ट्थान पर, ‘‘[देखें  जनयम  24(6)(क)]’’ कोष्ठक, 
िब्द, अंक और  अिर रखे  जाएं गे  ।  
(ख) मद  14 के पश्चात् जनम्नजलखत मदें  अंत:स्ट्थाजपत की जाएंगी , अथागत् :--  
‘‘15. संप्रत्यावतगन के जलए जवत्तीय प्रजतभूजत (जनयम  12) :  
16. पोत स्ट्वाजमयों के दाजयत्व से संबंजधत जवत्तीय प्रजतभूजत (जनयम  19)’’। 
[फा.सं. एसआर -20020/1/2021-एमएल ] 
जवक्रम हसह , संयुि सजचव  
स्ट्पष्टीकारक ज्ञापन: वाजणज्य पोत पररवहन  (समुद्री श्रम) संिोधन जनयम , 2021 को भारत  द्वारा अंतरराष्ट्रीय श्रम 
संगिन  द्वारा अंगीक ृ त समुद्री श्रम अजभसमय  में  27.4.2018 को दकए गए  संिोधनों को स्ट्वीकार दकए जाने  जाने  को ध्यान 
में  रखते  हुए  और  उन्हें भारत  में  26.12.2020 को प्रवृत्त दकए जाने  26 ददसंबर , 2020 से भूतलिी प्रभाव ददया  जा  रहा  है  
। इसजलए यह  प्रमाजणत दकया जाता  है  दक इस अजधसूचना को भूतलिी प्रभाव ददए  जाने  से कोई व्यजि प्रजतक ू ल रूप  से 
प्रभाजवत नहीं  हो  रहा  है  ।  
रटप्पण- मूल  जनयम , भारत  के राजपत्र , असाधारण , भाग  2, खंड 3, उपखंड (i), तारीख  29 फरवरी , 2016 को सा.का.जन. 
सं0 202(अ), तारीख  29 फरवरी , 2016 द्वारा प्रकाजित दकए गए  थे । 
 
MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
NOTIFICATION  
New Delhi, the 28th June, 2021 
G.S.R. 441(E).—In exercise of the powers co nferred by section 218A read with section 457 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), the Central Government, having regard to the provisions of the 
Maritime Labour Convention and in consultation with such organisations in India to be the most 
representative of the employers of seafarers, hereby makes the following rules to amend the Merchant 
Shipping (Maritime Labour) Rules, 2016, namely: - 
  1. Short title and Commencement. - (1) These rules may be called the Merchant Shipping 
(Maritime Labour) Amendment Rules,2021. 
(2)  They shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of December, 2020. 
 2. In the Merchant Shipping (Maritime Labour) Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal rules),rule 8, after sub-rule (8), the following sub-rule shall be inserted,namely: - 
 (9) A seafarer’s employment agreement shall continue to have effect while a seafarer is held 
captive on or off the ship as a result of acts of piracy or armed robbery against ships,regardless of 
whether the date fixed for its expiry has passed or either party has given notice to suspend or 
terminate it. 
Explanation. -For the purposes of this sub-rule. - 
a. the term“piracy”shall have the same meaning as assigned in Article 101 of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982; 
b. the term “armed robbery against ships” means any illegal act of violence or detention or any 
act of depredation, or threat thereof, other than an act of piracy, committed for private ends and 
directed against a ship or against persons or property onboard such a ship, within a country’s 
internal waters, archipelagic waters and territorial sea, or any act of inciting or of intentionally 
facilitating an act described above’. 
3. In the principal rules, in rule 9, after sub -rule (5), the fol lowing sub -rule shall be 
inserted,namely:— 
4  THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY    [PART II—SEC. 3(i)] 
“(6) Where a seafarer is held captive on or off the ship as a result of acts of piracy or armed 
robbery against ships, wages and other entitlements, including repatriation, under the seafarers’ 
employment agreemen t, relevant collective bargaining agreement or these rules, as applicable 
including the remittance of any allotments as provided in sub -rule (4),  shall continue to be paid 
and ensured by the ship-owner during the entire period of captivity and until the seafarer is released 
and duly repatriated in accordance with rule 12 or, where the seafarer dies while in captivity, until 
the date of death as determined in accordance with rule 9. 
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub -rule, the terms “piracy” and “ar med robbery against 
ships” shall have the same meaning as assigned in sub-rule (9) of rule8.” 
 4. In the principal rules, in rule 12, after sub -rule (17), the following sub -rule shall be 
inserted, namely: - 
“(18) The entitlement to repatriation may lapse i f the seafarers concerned do not claim it within a 
period of three (03)years or as provided in the collective agreements, except where they are held 
captive on or off the ship as a result of acts of piracy or armed robbery against ships. 
Explanation: For the purposes of this sub -rule, the terms piracy and armed robbery against ships 
shall have the same meaning as assigned in sub- rule (9) of rule 8.” 
 5. In the principal rules, after rule 26, the following rule shall be inserted,namely: - 
 “26A Marine casua lties. - The issues related to marine or shipping casualties shall be dealt in 
accordance with the provisions for Investigations and Inquiries under the Act.” 
6. In the principal rules, in Form 3, in item (e), after sub -item 14, the following sub items 
shall be inserted, namely: - 
 “15. Financial security for repatriation (Rule 12): 
 16. Financial security relating to ship-owners liability (Rule 19):” 
 7. In the principal rules, in Form-4, -  
(a) After serial number 14, following items shall be inserted, namely: 
 "15. Financial security for repatriation (rule12): 
16. Financial security relating to ship-owners liability (rule 19): 
 (b) below the word “Name”, for the word “Rule” the word “Title” shall be substituted”. 
8. In the principal rules, in Form-6, - 
(a)for the brackets, words, figures and letter “[See rule 24(7)(a)]”, the brackets, words, figures and 
letter “[See rule24(6)(a)]” shall be submitted.”; 
(b) after item 14, following items shall be inserted, namely: 
        “15.  Financial security for repatriation (Rule 12): 
        16.   Financial security relating to ship-owners liability (Rule 19):” 
  [F.No. SR-20020/1/2021-ML] 
VIKRAM SINGH, Jt. Secy. 
Explanatory Memorandum:  The Merchant Shipping (Maritime Labour) Amendment Rules, 2021 is 
being given retr ospective effect from 26th December,2020 in view of the acceptance by India to the 
amendments made on 27.04.2018 in the Maritime Labour Convention, 2006 adopted by the International 
LabourOrganrsation and the same has been entered into force in India on 26 .12.2020. Therefore, it is 
hereby certified that no person is being adversely affected by giving retrospective effect to this notification. 
 Note:  The principal rules were published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub -
section (i), dated the 29th February, 2016vide G.S.R.Number 202 (E), dated the 29th February, 2016.  
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 