Department of Health and Human Services
                           DEPARTMENTAL APPEALS BOARD
                                     Appellate Division

                                    Madison County Nursing Home
                                         Docket No. A-17-98
                                         Decision No. 2895
                                         September 17, 2018

                         FINAL DECISION ON REVIEW OF
                      ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE DECISION

Madison County Nursing Home (MCNH or Petitioner), a skilled nursing facility (SNF) in
Mississippi that participates in Medicare, requested review of the Administrative Law
Judge decision, Madison County Nursing Home, DAB CR4851 (2017) (ALJ Decision).
The ALJ granted summary judgment in favor of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS), concluding that MCNH was not in substantial compliance with
Medicare participation requirements for safeguarding and managing resident funds. The
ALJ also determined that he had no authority to review CMS’s determination that
MCNH’s noncompliance posed immediate jeopardy and that the $10,000 per-instance
civil money penalty (CMP) imposed by CMS for MCNH’s noncompliance was
reasonable.

For the reasons discussed below, we affirm the ALJ Decision.

Legal Background

To participate in Medicare, a SNF must be in “substantial compliance” with the
participation requirements in 42 C.F.R. Part 483, subpart B. 42 C.F.R. §§ 483.1,
488.400.1 A “deficiency” is a “failure to meet a participation requirement.” Id.
§ 488.301. A SNF is not in “substantial compliance” when it has one or more
deficiencies that have the potential for causing more than minimal harm to residents. Id.
The term “noncompliance,” as used in the regulations, is synonymous with lack of
substantial compliance. Id. (defining “noncompliance”).

         1
            On October 4, 2016, CMS issued a final rule that redesignated and revised the participation requirements
for long-term care facilities effective November 28, 2016. See Final Rule, Medicare and Medicaid Programs;
Reform of Requirements for Long-Term Care Facilities, 81 Fed. Reg. 68,688, 68,726 (Oct. 4, 2016). Unless
specified otherwise, this decision cites to the version of the regulations in effect in October 2013, when the surveys
that provided the bases for CMS’s determination were performed. See Carmel Convalescent Hosp., DAB No. 1584,
at 2 n.2 (1996) (applying regulations in effect on the date of the survey and resurvey).
                                             2

State agencies under contract with CMS perform onsite surveys to evaluate SNFs’
compliance with the requirements. 42 C.F.R. §§ 488.10(a), 488.11. Adverse survey
findings are reported on a form called a “Statement of Deficiencies.”

CMS may impose enforcement remedies, including a per-day and/or per-instance CMP,
on a SNF that is not in substantial compliance. 42 C.F.R. §§ 488.400, 488.402(b), (c),
488.406. CMS determines the amount of a CMP based on multiple factors, which
include the “seriousness” of the noncompliance. Id. §§ 488.404(b), 488.438(f).
“Seriousness” encompasses scope (“isolated,” “pattern,” or “widespread”) and severity
(whether the deficiency constituted no actual harm with a potential for minimal harm; no
actual harm with a potential for more than minimal harm that is not immediate jeopardy;
actual harm that is not immediate jeopardy, or immediate jeopardy). Id. § 488.404(b).
“Immediate jeopardy means a situation in which the provider’s noncompliance with one
or more requirements of participation has caused, or is likely to cause, serious injury,
harm, impairment, or death to a resident.” Id. § 488.301.

Among the participation requirements, section 483.10 imposes on each facility the duty
to “protect and promote the rights of each resident.” Subsection 483.10(c)(2) provides
that “[u]pon written authorization of a resident, the facility must hold, safeguard, manage,
and account for the personal funds of the resident deposited with the facility . . . .” The
SNF must deposit any resident’s personal funds in excess of $50 in an interest bearing
account separate from the facility’s operating accounts, id. § 483.10(c)(3), and establish
and maintain a system that assures a full and complete separate accounting of each
resident’s personal funds entrusted to the facility, id. § 483.10(c)(4).

Section 483.13(c) requires a SNF to “develop and implement written policies and
procedures that prohibit mistreatment, neglect, and abuse of residents and
misappropriation of resident property.” The regulations define “misappropriation of
resident property” to mean “the deliberate misplacement, exploitation, or wrongful,
temporary or permanent use of a resident’s belongings or money without the resident’s
consent.” 42 C.F.R. 488.301.

The overarching requirement governing facility administration, set out in the introductory
paragraph of section 483.75, provides that a “facility must be administered in a manner
that enables it to use its resources effectively and efficiently to attain or maintain the
highest practicable physical, mental, and psychosocial well-being of each resident.”

Case Background

The Mississippi Department of Health (state agency) conducted a complaint survey and a
partial extended survey of MCNH in October 2013. CMS Ex. 3, at 1. The state agency
found that MCNH was not in substantial compliance with multiple Medicare
participation requirements and that the noncompliance posed immediate jeopardy to
                                                         3

resident health and safety beginning November 2, 2012, and ending October 23, 2013.
CMS Ex. 5, at 1-3. The state agency also determined that the noncompliance constituted
substandard quality of care.2 Id.

On December 6, 2013, CMS issued a determination, based on the survey findings, that
MCNH was not in substantial compliance with: 42 C.F.R. §§ 483.10(c)(2)-(5),
483.13(c), and 483.75. CMS Ex. 6. CMS also determined that MCNH’s noncompliance
posed immediate jeopardy to MCNH residents and that its noncompliance with section
483.13(c) constituted substandard quality of care. CMS imposed multiple remedies
against MCNH, including a per-instance CMP of $10,000.3 Id. CMS determined that
MCNH returned to substantial compliance effective January 16, 2014. CMS Ex. 36.

MCNH requested an ALJ hearing to contest the CMS findings and remedies. CMS
moved for summary disposition. MCNH opposed CMS’s motion, asserting that insofar
as the case was ripe for summary disposition, it should be in MCNH’s favor and that
MCNH was entitled to judgment as a matter of law. P. Br. at 7.

The ALJ Decision

The ALJ concluded that summary judgment was appropriate because the parties did not
dispute the key facts material to the outcome of the case, but instead, “the legal
significance of those facts.” ALJ Decision at 2, 13. The ALJ listed a series of 21 “facts”
that were “either not disputed by the parties or, where there [was] a dispute, [the]
Petitioner’s version of the facts to the extent it [was] supported by evidence in the
record.” ALJ Decision at 9-12, and n.2. We note that MCNH’s request for review does
not dispute any of the facts enumerated by the ALJ, which we summarize as follows:

     MCNH had “Resident Trust Fund Policies,” which provided, among other things,
      that it “will, upon written authorization by the resident or responsible party, accept
      responsibility for holding, safeguarding and accounting for the resident’s personal
      funds . . . . The responsibility for the accuracy of the records remains with
      [Petitioner].” ALJ Decision at 10 (quoting CMS Ex. 13, at 12).

         2
           “Substandard quality of care” means one or more deficiencies related to 42 C.F.R. §§ 483.13, 483.15, or
483.25 that constitute either immediate jeopardy; a pattern of or widespread actual harm that is not immediate
jeopardy; or a widespread potential for more than minimal harm, but less than immediate jeopardy, with no actual
harm. 42 C.F.R. § 488.301.
         3
             CMS also notified MCNH that, as a result of its noncompliance, provisions for prohibiting approval of a
nurse aide training and competency evaluation program (NATCEP) for 2 years might be applicable. CMS Ex. 6.
MCNH was not conducting an NATCEP at the time of the institution of penalties; “therefore it technically did not
‘lose’ its approval of such a program.” RR at 12 n.9.
                                          4

 MCNH’s “Abuse Policy & Procedure” stated that residents have “the right to be
  free from . . . misappropriation of resident property,” defined as “the deliberate
  misplacement, exploitation, or wrongful, temporary or permanent use of a
  resident’s belongings or money without the resident’s consent.” ALJ Decision at
  9 (quoting CMS Ex. 13, at 2).

 MCNH accepted personal funds from multiple residents and placed funds in
  excess of $50 in trust in an account separate from MCNH’s operating accounts.
  ALJ Decision at 10 (citing CMS Ex. 10, at 1, 4, 6, 9, 15, 22, 27, 29, 32, 33; CMS
  Ex. 11; P. Ex. 6, at 2 ¶ 4).

 MCNH purchased a surety bond covering the total amount of funds held in the
  resident trust account. ALJ Decision at 10 (citing P. Ex. 1, at 2; P. Ex. 6, at 2 ¶ 4).

 Prior to the October 2013 surveys, MCNH usually appointed its Director of Social
  Services to manage the resident trust account and carry out MCNH’s Resident
  Trust Fund Policies, although MCNH had another employee conduct a monthly
  balancing and reconciliation of the bank statements related to the trust account.
  ALJ Decision at 10 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 4, 5-6 ¶¶ 11, 17).

 MCNH hired a social worker, ANR, as Director of Social Services in November
  2011, and trained ANR in January 2012 to take over management of the resident
  trust account beginning in February 2012. ANR served as the Resident Trust Fund
  Account Manager through August 2013. ALJ Decision at 10 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 4
  ¶ 12, 5 ¶ 16).

 On October 14, 2013, while the survey was ongoing, a surveyor requested
  documentation for a resident trust account transaction dated July 25, 2013. ALJ
  Decision at 11 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 6 ¶ 18).

 MCNH’s general practice was to keep “a copy of the check,” drawn from the
  resident trust account, “and the form indicating where the resident or legal
  representative would have signed for the authorization with two witnesses.” ALJ
  Decision at 11 (quoting P. Ex. 6, at 6 ¶ 18).

 MCNH’s Administrator asked ANR for the documentation supporting the July 25,
  2013 transaction, and she was unable to produce it. ALJ Decision at 11 (citing P.
  Ex. 6, at 6 ¶ 18).

 Ultimately, this transaction raised the suspicions of the resident involved, her son,
  and MCNH staff and led MCNH’s Administrator to call for an internal audit and
  investigation, and thereafter an independent accounting firm audit of all resident
                                                         5

        trust fund account transactions for the past 12 months. ALJ Decision at 11 (citing
        P. Ex. 6, at 6-8 ¶¶ 20-25).

     On September 1, 2013 ANR was replaced as the Resident Trust Fund Account
      Manager. ALJ Decision at 10 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 5 ¶ 16).

     The independent audit revealed that while ANR acted as the Resident Trust Fund
      Account Manager, during a period beginning in November 2012 through October
      2013, there were numerous instances of suspicious activity related to the account
      that affected multiple residents. ALJ Decision at 11 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 5, 7-8
      ¶¶ 16, 23-28).

     The auditor’s investigation revealed that, due to suspicious activity and/or clerical
      errors, an amount totaling $3,117 for multiple residents was “in question.” ALJ
      Decision at 11 (citing P. Ex. 6, at 8-9 ¶¶ 25-28).

     MCNH admitted that ANR “concocted and executed a devious, long-running
      fraud against [Petitioner] and its residents,” intentionally “misappropriat[ed] larger
      and larger amounts” over time until she was removed as Resident Trust Fund
      Account Manager, and “stole approximately $1,110 from one resident between
      July 25 and August 26, 2013.” ALJ Decision at 11-12 (quoting P. Ex. 6, at 9-10,
      ¶¶ 31-32; P. Br. at 6, 9-11, 17).

     To cover up her fraudulent scheme, ANR “forg[ed] signatures and creat[ed]
      documents to give the appearance of appropriate transactions . . . .” ALJ Decision
      at 12 (quoting P. Ex. 6, at 10 ¶ 31).

Granting summary judgment in favor of CMS, the ALJ determined that MCNH was
responsible for ANR’s misconduct for purposes of assessing its compliance with the
Medicare participation requirements. Through ANR’s deliberate fraudulent activities and
intentional misappropriation of money from several residents’ accounts over the course
of many months, the ALJ determined, MCNH violated sections 483.10(c)(2), 483.13(c),
and 483.75. In reaching this conclusion, the ALJ accepted for summary judgment
purposes that MCNH had established fraud controls, policies and procedures to protect
resident funds, but determined those policies and procedures were “insufficient to free
[MCNH] from responsibility for ANR’s fraud and misappropriation.” ALJ Decision at
14.4 The ALJ further determined that MCNH’s deficiencies constituted noncompliance

        4
           MCNH asserted that it had fraud controls in place, which included criminal record checks, staff
education, witness and signature requirements, monthly balancing, and quarterly statements to residents/family
members. P. Br. at 11.
                                                      6

with the participation requirements because they had at least the potential to cause more
than minimal harm to residents. The ALJ next concluded that he had no authority to
address CMS’s finding that MCNH’s noncompliance posed immediate jeopardy. Lastly,
the ALJ determined that the amount of the CMP was reasonable.

Standard of Review

We review whether summary judgment is appropriate de novo, construing the facts in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party and giving that party the benefit of all
reasonable inferences. See Pearsall Nursing & Rehab. Ctr., DAB No. 2692, at 5 (2016)
(citing Livingston Care Ctr., DAB No. 1871, at 5 (2003), aff’d, Livingston Care Ctr. v.
U.S. Dept. of Health & Human Servs., 388 F.3d 168, 172-73 (6th Cir. 2004)).

Our standard of review on a disputed conclusion of law is whether the ALJ Decision is
erroneous. Guidelines -- Appellate Review of Decisions of Administrative Law Judges
Affecting a Provider’s Participation in the Medicare and Medicaid Programs,
https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/dab/different-appeals-at-dab/appeals-toboard/guidelines/participation//index.html.

Discussion5

    1. Summary judgment is appropriate.

Summary judgment is appropriate when there is no genuine dispute about a fact or facts
material to the outcome of the case and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law. Celotex Corp. v Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 322-25 (1986). The party moving
for summary judgment has the initial burden of demonstrating that there is no genuine
issue of material fact for trial and that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Celotex, 477 U.S. at 323. If the moving party carries that burden, “the nonmoving party
must come forward with ‘specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.’”
Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587 (1986) (quoting
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e)).

“To defeat an adequately supported summary judgment motion, the non-moving party
may not rely on the denials in its pleadings or briefs, but must furnish evidence of a
dispute concerning a material fact – a fact that, if proven, would affect the outcome of the
case under governing law.” Senior Rehab. & Skilled Nursing Ctr., DAB No. 2300, at 3

        5
            The ALJ Decision addressed several procedural and evidentiary matters prior to discussing whether
summary judgment was appropriate. ALJ Decision at 5-9. Among the preliminary matters, the ALJ overruled
objections by CMS to multiple MCNH exhibits. We need not decide whether the ALJ erred or abused his discretion
in any of those rulings since they were not material to his decision and are not material to ours.
                                                      7

(2010), aff’d, Senior Rehab. & Skilled Nursing Ctr. v. Health & Human Servs., 405 F.
App’x 820 (5th Cir. 2010). A party “must do more than ‘show that there is some
metaphysical doubt as to the material facts . . . . Where the record, taken as a whole,
could not lead a rational trier of fact to find for the nonmoving party, there is no genuine
issue for trial.’” Mission Hosp. Reg’l Med. Ctr., DAB No. 2459, at 5 (2012) (quoting
Matsushita, 475 U.S. at 586-587), aff’d, Mission Hosp. Reg’l Med. Ctr. v. Sebelius, No.
SACV 12-01171 AG (MLG), 2013 WL 7219511 (C.D. Cal. 2013), aff’d sub nom.
Mission Hosp. Reg’l Med. Ctr. v. Burwell, 819 F.3d 1112 (9th Cir. 2016).

In examining the evidence to determine the appropriateness of summary judgment, the
adjudicator must draw all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party. Brightview Care Ctr., DAB No. 2132, at 2, 9 (2007). Drawing factual
inferences in the light most favorable to the non-moving party does not require that a
reviewer draw unreasonable inferences or accept the non-moving party’s legal
conclusions. Brightview at 10; Cedar Lake Nursing Home, DAB No. 2344, at 7 (2010).

MCNH’s request for review does not take exception to any of the facts enumerated by the
ALJ and summarized above. Rather, MCNH contends that the ALJ improperly granted
summary judgment in favor of CMS because “the property which was misappropriated
by a rogue employee of MCNH was at all times safeguarded and protected by a surety
bond.” Request for Review (RR) at 1-2. Consequently, MCNH says, it was in
substantial compliance because “at no time was there any potential for more than
minimal harm to the residents at issue . . . .” Id. at 1. MCNH further alleges that the ALJ
should have reviewed CMS’s immediate jeopardy designation based on equitable
principles because, MCNH alleges, CMS has engaged in affirmative misconduct in its
treatment of MCNH. The immediate jeopardy finding, MCNH further contends, is
clearly erroneous. Lastly, MCNH argues that the $10,000 CMP amount is unreasonable.6

MCNH’s arguments do not raise any genuine dispute about a fact or facts material to the
outcome of this case. Rather, MCNH’s contentions in part challenge the ALJ’s
determinations about the legal consequences of the undisputed facts and in part relate to
inferences drawn from the undisputed facts. We therefore conclude that summary
judgment is appropriate, and, for the reasons detailed below, we reject MCNH’s
arguments.

        6
           MCNH also asserted that CMS’s Response Brief was untimely because CMS filed it 31 days after
MCNH filed its July 24, 2017 Request for Review of the ALJ Decision. Reply at 1 n.2. CMS’s submission was
timely. As stated in the Board’s acknowledgment of MCNH’s Request for Review, CMS’s response brief was due
30 days after CMS received the Request for Review. “The date CMS received an e-mail from DAB E-File that the
case was docketed, July 25, 2017, is considered the date of receipt,” the Board explained. A-17-98
Acknowledgment of Request for Review at 1. CMS’s August 24, 2017 submission was therefore timely.
                                            8

   2. MCNH was not in substantial compliance with 42 C.F.R. §§ 483.10(c)(2),
      483.13(c), and 483.75 based on the undisputed facts.

          a. MCNH is responsible for ANR’s misconduct for purposes of evaluating its
             compliance with the Medicare participation requirements.

MCNH contends on appeal, as it did before the ALJ, that all of the “cited violations of
federal regulations in this matter” arose from “a rogue MCNH employee implementing a
devious plan of fraud and theft to misappropriate multiple small amounts of money from
individual residents’ trust accounts over time.” RR at 9-10. MCNH argued that it should
not be held responsible for ANR’s “intentional and calculated fraudulent and criminal
actions,” which she committed against MCNH as well as its residents. Petitioner Br. (P.
Br.) at 1. Moreover, MCNH said that it fully complied with the participation
requirements through its numerous fraud controls, policies and practices, and it could not
reasonably have suspected ANR of misfeasance. Id. at 11-13. MCNH also asserted that
the circumstances in this matter were distinguishable from those at issue in Emerald
Oaks, DAB No. 1800 (2001), which CMS cited to support its claim that MCNH could not
disown ANR’s misconduct. P. Br. at 13-14; CMS Br. at 10. Emerald Oaks, MCNH said,
involved a nurse “acting within the scope of her employment by providing care to
residents, she just provided it poorly.” P. Br. at 13 (citing Emerald Oaks at 7 n.3). In
contrast, MCNH asserted, ANR “deliberately concealed” her fraudulent activities, she
acted alone, her misconduct was not “care-related,” and her theft was not within the
scope of her employment. P. Br. at 13-14.

The Board has repeatedly held that a SNF acts through its staff and administrators, who
as agents of their employers “make and implement policies, provide care, and perform
the various responsibilities called for” by federal programs. Beverly Health Care
Lumberton, DAB Ruling No. 2008-05, Denial of Petition for Reopening of DAB No.
2156, at 6 (2008); Springhill Senior Residence, DAB No. 2513, at 14 (2013) (for the
purpose of evaluating facility compliance with Medicare participation requirements, a
facility acts through staff and cannot dissociate itself from the consequences of its
employees’ actions); Kindred Transitional Care & Rehab. – Greenfield, DAB No. 2792,
at 14 (2017) (a facility “is properly held responsible” for employee misfeasance “by
virtue of the obligations it assumes as a condition for receiving federal healthcare
program monies”). Therefore, a SNF “whose administration and staff have been found
not to be substantially complying with federal requirements is itself subject to
administrative enforcement remedies” and “cannot avoid such remedies merely by
attempting to disown the acts and omissions of its own staff and administration since the
facility elected to rely on them to carry out its commitments.” Beverly, DAB Ruling No.
2008-05, at 6.
                                             9

Furthermore, the Board previously has determined that a facility’s responsibility for
employee misconduct is not limited to circumstances where employees improperly or
poorly executed assigned duties. Rather, the Board has made clear, an employee’s
deliberate wrongdoing – and even criminal misconduct – may properly be imputed to the
facility where the employee had “the means and opportunity” to commit the misfeasance,
by virtue of his or her assigned duties and facility access. Kindred at 14 (holding facility
responsible for nursing assistant’s sexual abuse and attempted sexual abuse of residents
where employee “was in the facility and had access to the residents because the facility
placed in him in the position to provide personal care to the residents, in the course of
which he committed these acts”); Springhill at 14 (holding facility responsible for illicit
images and videos of residents taken by nursing assistants while on duty and assigned to
assist residents with activities of daily living).

Consistent with prior Board decisions, we conclude that the ALJ did not err in imputing
ANR’s misconduct to MCNH for purposes of evaluating whether MCNH complied with
the Medicare participation requirements. MCNH acknowledged that it hired, trained and
appointed ANR to serve as its Resident Trust Fund Account Manager for a period of
more than one year. While ANR undisputedly abused that position by engaging in fraud
and theft and deliberately concealed her misconduct from her employer, she had access to
the resident funds and was able to carry out the misconduct because of the fiduciary
duties and responsibilities that MCNH assigned to her, as the ALJ observed. ALJ
Decision at 13. Moreover, we agree with the ALJ that “the fact that ANR was even able
to act alone in misappropriating funds speaks to the inadequacy of Petitioner’s safeguards
for the resident trust account.” Id. at 15. Accordingly, we conclude that MCNH cannot
disown ANR’s misfeasance for purposes of evaluating its compliance with the Medicare
participation requirements.

Furthermore, the fact that ANR’s misconduct was not “care-related” does not make
MCNH any less responsible for it. SNFs have a regulatory duty to develop and
implement policies and procedures to protect residents from misappropriation of funds,
just as they must to protect residents from abuse and neglect. ALJ Decision at 15 (citing
42 C.F.R. § 483.13(c)); see also Final Rule, Medicare & Medicaid Programs; Survey,
Certification and Enforcement of Skilled Nursing Facilities and Nursing Facilities, 59
Fed. Reg. 56116, 56117 (Nov. 10, 1994) (stating that the enforcement scheme “was built
on the assumption that all requirements must be met and enforced and that requirements
take on greater or lesser significance depending on the circumstances and resident
outcomes in a particular facility” (emphasis added)). Indeed, section 483.13(c), by its
own terms, makes clear that misappropriation of resident property is no less improper
staff treatment of residents than mistreatment, abuse or neglect.

       Staff treatment of residents. The facility must develop and implement
       written policies and procedures that prohibit mistreatment, neglect, and
       abuse of residents and misappropriation of resident property.
                                             10

42 C.F.R. § 483.13(c) (emphasis added); see also 42 C.F.R. § 483.13(c)(2) (providing
that “all alleged violations involving mistreatment, neglect, or abuse, including . . .
misappropriation of resident property are reported immediately to [the persons identified
in the regulation]” (emphasis added)). In addition, as discussed below, a violation of
resident rights (including misappropriation of resident property) may carry the potential
for more than minimal harm or even severe harm. Accordingly, we not only agree with
the ALJ that there is “no reason to hold Petitioner to a lower standard in this case simply
because its staff is accused of misappropriation rather than abuse or neglect[,]” ALJ
Decision at 15, but conclude that the regulations do not permit such a lower standard.

We also note that the rationale for holding a facility responsible for the actions of
dishonest or incompetent employees applies equally to care-related and non-care-related
staff. Facilities carry out their responsibilities for meeting the participation requirements
“in part through their selection, training and supervision of their staff.” Life Care Ctr. of
Gwinnett, DAB No. 2240, at 12-13 (2009) (holding facility responsible for failing to
implement anti-neglect policies as demonstrated by the actions of staff). Therefore, a
facility is in the best position “to take action to prevent incompetent or dishonest
individuals from harming residents.” Id. Sanctions on facilities for failing to develop or
implement policies and procedures to prohibit misappropriation of resident funds serve
the same goal, in part, as sanctions for failing to develop or implement policies and
procedures to prevent resident neglect or abuse – to encourage “facilities to maintain
hiring, training and supervision practices that protect residents.” Id. Therefore, to permit
facilities to avoid sanctions where an employee assigned to manage resident funds
engages in fraud or theft would allow facilities to “cut corners on staffing, training or
supervision,” yet escape responsibility, and would thus disincentivize facilities from
taking actions to prevent recurrence. Id.

Accordingly, we conclude that MCNH was accountable for ANR’s misconduct for the
purpose of assessing MCNH’s compliance with the Medicare participation requirements.
                                                         11

             b. Undisputed facts demonstrate that MCNH failed to meet the
                participation requirements in 42 C.F.R. §§ 483.10(c)(2), 483.13(c),
                and 483.75.7

As set out above, section 483.10(c)(2) imposed on MCNH the duty “[u]pon written
authorization of a resident,” to “hold, safeguard, manage, and account for the personal
funds of the resident deposited with the facility[.]” To comply with section 483.10(c)(2),
MCNH developed written Resident Trust Fund Policies, which incorporated the language
of the regulation and provided that “[t]he responsibility for the accuracy of the records
remains with MCNH.” Id. CMS Ex. 13, at 12. We accept for purposes of summary
judgment that MCNH trained ANR on these and other established facility policies and
procedures for holding and managing residents’ personal funds in trust. P. Ex. 6, at 5
¶¶ 15, 16. Nevertheless, it is undisputed that over the course of nearly a year, ANR
mismanaged and misappropriated funds from multiple residents’ accounts by forging
signatures and creating false documents, and she stole approximately $1,110 from one
resident between July 25 and August 26, 2013. P. Br. at 6, 9-11, 17; P. Ex. 6, at 9-10
¶¶ 31, 32. As the ALJ noted, MCNH itself characterized ANR’s misconduct as “theft.”
ALJ Decision at 12 n.3 (citing P. Br. at 9). Based on these uncontested facts and the
facility’s responsibility for ANH’s misconduct discussed above, we conclude that MCNH
failed to meet its regulatory duties under section 483.10(c)(2). Simply put, MCNH
residents’ rights to have their personal funds held, safeguarded and properly managed
were plainly violated through ANR’s deliberate theft and deception.

We also conclude that the undisputed facts demonstrate that MCNH failed to meet the
requirements in section 483.13(c) to “develop and implement written policies and
procedures that prohibit mistreatment, neglect, and abuse of residents and
misappropriation of resident property.” Applying section 483.13(c) in cases of neglect,
the Board has stated that noncompliance “can be based on either failure to develop
policies or procedures adequate to prevent neglect, or failure to implement such policies.”
Glenoaks Nursing Ctr., DAB No. 2522, at 12 (2013); see also Southpark Meadows
Nursing & Rehab. Center, DAB No. 2703, at 6 (2016). In the same context, the Board
has held, “multiple or sufficient examples of neglect may support a reasonable inference
that a facility has failed to develop or implement policies and procedures that prohibit

         7
            CMS also argued before the ALJ that MCNH did not substantially comply with 42 C.F.R. § 483.10(c)(3),
requiring a facility to deposit each resident’s personal funds exceeding $50 in an interest-bearing account. The ALJ
concluded that he need not address this allegation because the allegations he did address supported the imposition of
remedies and the reasonableness of the CMP amount. ALJ Decision at 13 n.4 (citing Claiborne-Hughes Health Ctr.
v. Sebelius, 609 F.3d 839, at 847 (6th Cir. 2010); Carrington Place of Muscatine, DAB No. 2321, at 20-21 (2010)).
For the reasons discussed above, we agree that MCNH’s other deficiencies justified the imposition and
reasonableness of the CMP amount. Consequently, we concur in the ALJ’s conclusion that it is not necessary to
address whether MCNH complied with section 483.10(c)(3).
                                             12

neglect.” Dumas Nursing and Rehab., L.P., DAB No. 2347, at 15 (2010) (citations
omitted). “The focus,” however, “is not simply on the number or nature” of the
incidents, but on whether the facts surrounding the incidents “demonstrate an underlying
breakdown” or “systemic problem” in the facility’s implementation of its policies.
Oceanside Nursing & Rehab. Ctr., DAB No. 2382, at 11 (2011); Columbus Nursing &
Rehab. Ctr., DAB No. 2247, at 28 (2009).

The same principles logically apply where misappropriation of resident funds is at issue.
Accordingly, to satisfy the requirements of section 483.13(c), MCNH was required not
only to develop written policies to protect residents from deliberate, exploitive or
wrongful use of resident property or money, but also to implement such policies. Here,
we accept for summary judgment purposes that MCNH developed written policies and
procedures to prohibit the misappropriation of resident property, including policies and
processes for holding and safeguarding resident funds in trust. See CMS Ex. 13, at 1-4,
12-14. We conclude, however, that the undisputed facts show that MCNH did not satisfy
its duty to implement those policies. It is undisputed that the individual hired and
assigned by MCNH as the Resident Trust Fund Account Manager engaged in a deliberate
and wrongful scheme to exploit residents by steeling and mismanaging their money. She
directly and repeatedly violated facility policy, her fraudulent activities involved multiple
residents, and her misconduct took place over a period of nearly a year. Given the
frequency, duration, and scope of her misfeasance, we agree with the ALJ that the only
reasonable inference is that MCNH’s “implementation of its anti-misappropriation policy
broke down at a fundamental level.” ALJ Decision at 17-18.

The facility administration requirements provide that a SNF “must be administered in a
manner that enables it to use its resources effectively and efficiently to attain or maintain
the highest practicable physical, mental, and psychosocial well-being of each resident.”
42 C.F.R. § 483.75. MCNH argued that it “had fraud controls” and “multiple policies
and procedures in place which prohibit theft, exploitation and/or misappropriation of
resident property.” P. Br. at 11-13. In addition, MCNH asserted, due to ANH’s
intentionally deceptive practices, management could not reasonably have suspected or
detected that she was engaging in misappropriation. Id. at 10-11. These assertions
appear to be an argument that management was administering facility resources
effectively to ensure the well-being of its residents, as required under section 483.75. We
disagree.

The Board has determined that “a finding that a facility was noncompliant with section
483.75 may, in appropriate circumstances, derive from findings of noncompliance with
other participation requirements.” Oceanside at 15-16 (citing Stone Cnty. Nursing &
Rehab. Ctr., DAB No. 2276, at 15-16 (2009) (citing cases)). We agree with the ALJ that
such circumstances exist in this case. ANR’s misconduct was not limited to a single
instance of misappropriation of money from one resident’s trust account. Rather, she
engaged in numerous suspicious activities, forged signatures, created false documents
                                                          13

and repeatedly violated facility documentation procedures over the course of nearly a
year, mismanaging funds in multiple residents’ accounts. That these activities continued
unchecked over many months plainly demonstrates that MCNH lacked the supervisory
and administrative mechanisms necessary to ensure that it met its regulatory obligations.

             c. MCNH was not in substantial compliance because its deficiencies posed
                the potential for more than minimal harm to resident health or safety.

As stated above, “substantial compliance means a level of compliance with the
requirements of participation such that any identified deficiencies pose no greater
risk to resident health or safety than the potential for causing minimal harm.” 42
C.F.R. § 488.301 (also defining “noncompliance” as “any deficiency that causes a
facility to not be in substantial compliance”). Therefore, summary judgment in
favor of CMS is proper only if, giving MCNH the benefit of all reasonable
inferences, the undisputed facts show that its deficiencies posed the potential for
more than minimal harm to resident health or safety.

MCNH argues that “the actions taken by [ANR] simply never posed any danger to
patient health or safety.” Reply at 4. According to MCNH, CMS failed to meet
its initial burden on summary judgment “if for no other reason that the simple,
undisputed fact in the record that ‘Petitioner purchased a surety bond covering the
total amount held in the trust account on behalf of Petitioner’s residents.’” RR at 9
(quoting ALJ Decision at 10 (emphasis in RR)). Because the surety bond covered
the entirety of funds in the patient trust accounts and was “untouchable by the
employee,” MCNH says, there “was simply no potential that the residents could
actually suffer any loss” or “mental anguish (as alleged by the ALJ) over this
situation.” 8 RR at 10 (emphasis in RR). “The circumstances also show that none
of the money taken was earmarked for or affected resident care,” MCNH says, and
“no involved resident knew the theft had even happened until after the facility
discovered the theft, and all money was returned to the residents by the facility.”
Reply at 5. Moreover, MCNH asserts, “a loss of confidence, no matter how
‘profound,’ does not equal danger to patient health or safety.” Id.

The regulations require every SNF to “purchase a surety bond, or otherwise provide
assurance satisfactory to [CMS], to assure the security of all personal funds of residents
deposited with the facility.” 42 C.F.R. § 483.10(c)(7). The CMS State Operations
Manual (SOM), in turn, describes a “surety bond” as “an agreement between the

         8
           We note that the surety bond MCNH obtained contains conditions. MCNH has not addressed those
conditions or what effect, if any, they might have on the ability of residents to recover any losses or the timing of
any such recovery. See P. Ex. 1, at 1.
                                                         14

principal (the facility), the surety (the insurance company), and the obligee (. . . either the
resident or the State acting on behalf of the resident), wherein the facility and the
insurance company agree to compensate the resident (or the State on behalf of the
resident) for any loss of residents’ funds that the facility holds, safeguards, manages, and
accounts for.” CMS Pub. 100-07, App. PP (Guidance to Surveyors for Long Term Care
Facilities).

A surety bond is only effective to repay funds stolen from resident accounts, however, if
the fraud or theft is discovered, and, importantly, only pays after the fraud is discovered.
A surety bond provides for compensation of financial loss once it is discovered; it does
not prevent the loss. While the theft remains uncovered, the resident’s financial wellbeing is threatened or compromised.9 Here, it is undisputed that ANR’s misconduct
lasted for nearly a year and was not exposed until one resident’s responsible party (son)
raised questions about withdrawals from the resident’s account and the state agency
surveyor asked for documentation of several resident trust account transactions. In light
of these facts, we reject Petitioner’s claim that its purchase of a surety bond meant that
there was no possibility that a resident would suffer any financial loss because of its
deficiencies. Accordingly, we cannot reasonably infer that MCNH’s deficiencies posed
no potential for residents to suffer significant financial losses.

Furthermore, MCNH’s argument that there was no threat to patient health or safety
disregards the potential for psychosocial harm that may result from the misappropriation
of resident property or money. Psychological harm is as cognizable a form of injury as
physical harm for purposes of evaluating deficiencies with the Medicare participation
requirements. Kindred at 23 (citing, inter alia, Springhill at 18; SOM, App. Q
(Guidelines for Determining Immediate Jeopardy) at 3 (“[p]sychological harm is as
serious as physical harm”), 4-6 (Issues with associated “Immediate Jeopardy Triggers”
include failure to protect from psychological harm)). In addition, program requirements
take into account that nursing home residents are a vulnerable population; most have
serious physical and mental impairments or conditions. Daughters of Miriam Ctr. DAB
No. 2067, at 13-14 (2007). Accordingly, the Board has concluded that a facility’s failure
to timely investigate the misappropriation of resident property may constitute
noncompliance. Rosewood Care Ctr. of Swansea, DAB No. 2721 (2016), aff’d sub nom.,
Rosewood Care Ctr. of Swansea v. Price, 868 F.3d 605 (7th Cir. 2017).

         9
           Under the Mississippi Vulnerable Adults Act, any nursing home resident is considered a vulnerable
person and exploitation against vulnerable persons includes theft or misuse of a resident’s resources for another
person’s profit, advantage or unjust enrichment. Miss. Code Ann. § 43-47-5 (2018).
                                                        15

Moreover, CMS’s current guidance for nursing home surveyors, which reflects enhanced
knowledge about resident safety and health outcomes, recognizes misappropriation of
nursing home resident property or money as a source of psychosocial harm, including
mental anguish. Instructive for our purposes, the SOM investigative protocol for an
allegation of misappropriation of resident property directs surveyors, among other things,
to review interdisciplinary notes that relate to the alleged misappropriation for
documentation of any change in the resident’s mood and demeanor before and after the
alleged misappropriation, such as “distrust,” “fear,” “angry outbursts,” “tearfulness,”
“agitation,” “panic attacks” and “changes in sleeping patterns.” SOM, App. PP, F602.10
The SOM also instructs surveyors to take into account that “[f]acility staff are in a
position that may be perceived as one of power over a resident.” Id.

In light of the fact that ANR held a position of trust and authority as Director of
Social Services and Resident Trust Fund Account Manager, and recognizing that
nursing home residents are a vulnerable population, susceptible to at least
psychosocial harm from misappropriation of their property or money, we concur
in the ALJ’s conclusion that MCNH’s deficiencies created a potential for more
than minimal harm. ALJ Decision at 19. As the ALJ recognized, while “the sums
stolen were relatively small, the real issue is that Petitioner’s residents entrusted
Petitioner with that money, and Petitioner’s employee[’s] misappropriation of that
money represents a serious breach of that trust.” Id. at 21 n.6. Thus, “the only
reasonable inference that [may be drawn] from the undisputed facts of this case is
that ANR’s misconduct carried at least the potential to cause more than minimal
harm to Petitioner’s residents.” Id. at 19 (emphasis in ALJ Decision). By virtue
of ANR’s position and the nature of the misfeasance, we agree with the ALJ, her
misconduct – for which, we have concluded, MCNH is ultimately responsible –
posed the potential for more than minimal harm to resident health.

        10
             The SOM contains CMS interpretive guidance; it does not have the force and effect of law. Beverly
Health & Rehab. Servs. v. Thompson, 223 F. Supp. 2d 73, 99-106 (D.D.C. 2002), aff’g Beverly Health & Rehab. –
Spring Hill, DAB No. 1696 (1999). The current version of Appendix PP, “Guidelines to Surveyors for Long Term
Care Facilities,” (Rev. 173, 11-22-17), is available in PDF format on the CMS website at
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Guidance/Manuals /index.html.) Appendix Q of the SOM,
“Guidelines for Determining Immediate Jeopardy,” does not include examples of misappropriation in the list of
“trigger” circumstances for surveyors to investigate for immediate jeopardy, as noted by MCNH. P. Br. at 19 (citing
P. Ex. 20 (SOM App. Q)). Appendix Q expressly states, however, that the immediate jeopardy “triggers” listed are
“general examples and … not all-inclusive.” Moreover, that the earlier version of Appendix PP did not describe the
psychosocial harm that may result from misappropriation of resident property and that Appendix Q does not
expressly list misappropriation of resident property as an immediate jeopardy “trigger” does not preclude CMS, the
ALJ, or us from considering whether MCNH’s deficiencies posed the potential for more than minimal harm.
                                             16

   3. The ALJ’s conclusion that CMS’s immediate jeopardy determination is not
      reviewable in this forum is free from error.

The ALJ stated that under the governing regulations, an ALJ may review CMS’s
scope and severity findings (including a finding of immediate jeopardy) “only if a
successful challenge would affect: (l) the range of the CMP amounts that CMS
could collect; or (2) a finding of substandard quality of care that results in the loss
of approval of a facility’s NATCEP.” ALJ Decision at 20 (citing 42 C.F.R.
§ 498.3(b)(14), (d)(10)(i)-(ii)). MCNH argued that its challenge fell into the first
category. ALJ Decision at 20 (citing P. Reply at 3-4). The ALJ disagreed,
explaining that because CMS imposed a per-instance CMP against MCNH, a
successful challenge to the immediate jeopardy finding would not affect the range
of the CMP amount that CMS could collect. Hence, the ALJ concluded, he had no
authority to review the immediate jeopardy finding.

The ALJ’s conclusion is correct. During the period of the surveys and CMS’s
determination, the monetary range for a per-instance CMP was $1,000-$10,000.
42 C.F.R. §§ 488.408(d)(1)(iv), (e)(1)(iv). This range applied to all per-instance
CMPs, regardless of the level of noncompliance. Id.; compare 42 C.F.R.
§§ 488.408(d)(1)(iii) and 488.408(e)(1)(iii) (providing two ranges for per-day
CMPs, depending on the level of noncompliance). Because CMS imposed a “perinstance” CMP, and because per-instance CMPs are imposed within a single dollar
range ($1,000 to $10,000), see 42 C.F.R. § 488.438(a)(2), a successful challenge
to CMS’s immediate jeopardy finding would not have affected the range of the
CMP that could be imposed. See, e.g., NMS Healthcare of Hagerstown, DAB No.
2603, at 6-7 (2014), appeal dismissed, NMS Healthcare of Hagerstown v. U.S.
Dep’t of Health & Human Servs., 619 F. App’x 225 (4th Cir. 2015). Furthermore,
the second category does not apply either. Although the state agency made a
substandard quality of care finding in this case that, as a matter of law, removed
any authority MCNH may have had to conduct a NATCEP, MCNH acknowledged
that it did not have a NATCEP when CMS issued its notices of noncompliance.
RR at 12 n.9. We conclude that, because review of the immediate jeopardy
finding would not affect the applicable CMP range, and because the substandard
quality of care finding did not result in MCNH losing approval of a nurse aide
training program, MCNH does not have a right to an ALJ hearing or Board review
concerning CMS’s immediate jeopardy determination. Oaks of Mid City Nursing
& Rehab. Ctr., DAB No 2375, at 23-24 (2011).

MCNH acknowledges the limitation imposed by the regulations, but contends that
CMS’s immediate jeopardy determination is subject to review “because equitable
estoppel is allowed where there is affirmative misconduct on the part of CMS” and
CMS engaged in such misconduct here. RR at 4. MCNH alleges that CMS
imposed an immediate jeopardy designation “for a situation which clearly does not
                                             17

justify it, and then intentionally took every step it could in an attempt to make that
designation unappealable.” Id. at 1. According to MCNH, CMS acted in bad faith
by twice revising the SOD with descriptive language to show there was an
immediate jeopardy situation where it did not exist; by intentionally withholding
independent informal dispute resolution (IIDR) process findings that immediate
jeopardy did not exist; by unfairly singling out MCNH when multiple other
facilities had similar misappropriation deficiencies but were cited at lower levels
of noncompliance; and by imposing the per-instance CMP to preclude review of
the immediate jeopardy designation on appeal. Id. at 2-3. “In light of the bad
faith with which CMS has conducted this entire matter and which constitutes
affirmative misconduct on CMS’s part,” MCNH asks for “equitable relief in the
form of review of CMS’s [immediate jeopardy] finding, even though such a
designation does not affect the range of penalties available for a per-instance civil
monetary penalty.” Reply at 8; see also RR at 4.

ALJs and the Board are bound by applicable statutes and regulations, and may not ignore
or refuse to apply those laws. Experts Are Us, Inc., DAB No. 2322, at 10 (2010); see
also Sentinel Med. Labs., Inc., DAB No. 1762, at 9 (2001), aff'd sub nom., Teitelbaum v.
Health Care Fin. Admin., 32 F. App’x 865 (9th Cir. 2002). The regulations applicable to
this case clearly preclude review of CMS’s immediate jeopardy determination because
CMS elected to impose a per-instance CMP, and MCNH did not lose approval of
NATCEP. They also preclude ALJ and Board review of CMS’s choice of alternative
sanction or remedy, in this case the per-instance CMP to which MCNH objects. 42
C.F.R. § 498.3(d)(11). In sum, we are bound by the regulations, which do not recognize
an exception for reviewing an immediate jeopardy determination based on principles of
equity.

Moreover, MCNH’s allegation of “bad faith” on the part of CMS is based on a
mischaracterization of the legal effect of IIDR findings. MCNH says that the IIDR
“overturned the [immediate jeopardy] finding, reducing all cited deficiencies from a
K level scope/severity to non-[immediate jeopardy level] deficiencies.” RR at 7
(emphasis in RR). CMS is not bound to follow or defer to an IIDR determination,
however. “The informal dispute resolution process (which includes IIDR) offers
facilities an informal opportunity to dispute survey findings.” Kindred at 21 (citing 42
C.F.R. §§ 488.331, 488.431; SOM, Ch. 7, §§ 7212, 7213). CMS is not required to accept
informal dispute resolution results, and it “has the ultimate authority for the survey
findings and imposition of CMPs.” Kindred at 21 (citing 42 C.F.R. § 488.431 (IIDR);
SOM, Ch. 7, § 7213.3 (IIDR); SOM, Ch. 7, § 7213.4 (IIDR “is not intended to be a
formal or evidentiary hearing nor are the results of the [IIDR] process an initial
determination that gives rise to appeal rights pursuant to [42 C.F.R. § 498.3(b)]. The
[IIDR] results are recommendations to the State and CMS and are not subject to a formal
appeal.”)). Furthermore, “once CMS proceeds with enforcement action following
completion of [a] state agency level investigation, on the facility’s appeal of CMS’s
                                             18

deficiency citation to the ALJ, the outcome of the informal dispute resolution process is
no longer the issue.” Kindred at 22.

We further find no merit in MCNH’s argument that CMS treats cases of misappropriation
inconsistently and that this should be a basis for reviewing and reversing CMS’s
immediate jeopardy determination here. MCNH avers that it has received far harsher
treatment than other facilities whose noncompliance based on misappropriation of
residents’ money involved larger sums of money, more residents, and longer periods of
noncompliance. RR at 17. Moreover, MCNH contends, “CMS so clearly understands”
that misappropriation of property cannot pose immediate jeopardy that it cited immediate
jeopardy only four times in cases cited under Tag F-159 (facility management of resident
personal funds) from February 5, 2009 through November 7, 2014. Id. at 16.

We first reject the notion that CMS is “inconsistent” simply because it chooses to impose
different remedies in different cases when it is carrying out its responsibility to enforce
the nursing home regulations. Moreover, the Board previously has held that “CMS’s
treatment of other facilities cannot undercut [an appellant’s] responsibility to show that it
was in compliance with the applicable legal requirements or remove CMS’s authority to
take actions which it is authorized by statute and regulation to take in response to a
facility’s noncompliance.” Jewish Home of Eastern Pa., DAB No. 2254, at 14-15 (2009)
(rejecting SNF request for Board to review and compare either the level of
noncompliance or the choice of remedies in that case with those which SNF considered
similarly-situated) (citations omitted), aff’d, Jewish Home of Eastern Pa. v. Ctrs. for
Medicare & Medicaid Servs., 693 F.3d 359 (3rd Cir. 2012). Accordingly, whether CMS
has evaluated cases of misappropriation differently is not relevant for purposes of this
appeal. As the Board stated in the Jewish Home case, “allegations by a party against
which an action has been taken that the treatment accorded to it is harsher than that
accorded to others similarly situated do not prohibit an agency of this Department from
exercising its responsibility to enforce statutory requirements[.]” Id. at 15 (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted); see also NMS Healthcare of Hagerstown (rejecting
claim that ALJ erred by declining to compare CMS immediate jeopardy determination
based on excessively hot water temperatures in residents’ rooms to determinations of
scope and severity in other cases involving excessively hot water temperatures);
Crawford Healthcare & Rehab., DAB No. 2738, at 21 (2016) (rejecting argument that
CMP amounts should be reduced based on comparison of penalty amount in another case
which SNF alleged involved similar circumstances) (citing cases).

   4. The amount of the CMP is reasonable.

On appeal of a CMS determination of noncompliance that led to the imposition of a
CMP, a SNF may challenge the amount of the penalty on the ground that it is
unreasonable. See, e.g., Lutheran Home at Trinity Oaks, DAB No. 2111, at 21 (2007).
In evaluating whether the CMS-imposed penalty amount is reasonable, an ALJ (or the
                                            19

Board) considers the factors specified in section 488.438(f) of the regulations. Senior
Rehab. at 19-20. Those factors are: (1) the SNF’s history of noncompliance; (2) the
SNF’s financial condition; (3) factors specified in 42 C.F.R. § 488.404 (i.e., the severity
and scope of the noncompliance, and “the relationship of the one deficiency to other
deficiencies resulting in noncompliance”); and (4) the SNF’s degree of culpability, which
includes neglect, indifference, or disregard for resident care, comfort or safety. 42 C.F.R.
§§ 488.438(f), 488.404. An ALJ (and the Board) reviews the reasonableness of the CMP
de novo, based on the facts and evidence contained in the appeal record. Emerald Oaks
at 13; CarePlex of Silver Spring, DAB No. 1683, at 14-15 (1999).

As noted, during the period at issue here, the penalty amount for a per-instance CMP was
$1,000 to $10,000, regardless of whether the noncompliance constituted immediate
jeopardy. 42 C.F.R. § 488.438(a)(2), 488.408(d)(1)(iv). CMS imposed the maximum
amount within that range, $10,000, for MCNH’s noncompliance. The ALJ concluded
that amount was reasonable.

On appeal of the ALJ Decision, MCNH argues that the amount of the CMP is
unreasonable because it was in substantial compliance. RR at 22. Alternatively, MCNH
contends, if its deficiencies constituted noncompliance, the circumstances did not rise to
the level of immediate jeopardy. Id. MCNH also says that “the CMP amount is
unreasonable in light of the factors at 42 C.F.R. § 488.404, and should be lowered
accordingly.” Id. Before the ALJ, MCNH asserted that the CMP amount was
unreasonable in light of its past history. Specifically, MCNH said, it had been cited for
no immediate jeopardy deficiencies in at least the prior 12 years, no deficiencies related
to sections 483.10(c)(2)-(5), 483.13(c), or 483.75 in any survey for at least the two years
prior to the October 2013 surveys, and it had no prior history of misappropriation of
resident property. P. Br. at 24-25. MCNH also contended that it was not culpable. Id. at
25.

Applying the relevant factors to the undisputed facts in this case, we conclude that the
CMP amount imposed by CMS was reasonable. Accepting for purposes of summary
judgement that MCNH had no recent history of noncompliance that posed immediate
jeopardy or violations involving the same participation requirements at issue here, the
seriousness of the deficiencies in this matter alone justifies the imposition of the
maximum penalty amount in the per-instance CMP range. As discussed above, an
MCNH employee who was in a position of trust and authority, and in whom MCNH had
placed fiduciary responsibilities, engaged in a long-running fraud that involved numerous
residents’ accounts. While MCNH had policies and procedures designed to prevent
misappropriation, the misfeasance occurred and continued for nearly a year. Thus,
MCNH failed to comply with Medicare requirements for safeguarding residents’ funds,
protecting residents from misappropriation of their money, and effective administration,
and these failures posed the potential for more than minimal harm to resident health and
safety. Indeed, CMS determined that the deficiencies were so serious as to constitute
                                           20

immediate jeopardy, and we have no authority to review that determination. Lastly, as
noted by the ALJ, section 488.438(f)(4) of the regulations states that the “absence of
culpability is not a mitigating circumstance in reducing the amount of the penalty.”
Accordingly, even if we accepted that NCNH was not culpable, we could not reduce the
CMP amount for that reason. Moreover, NCNH’s culpability argument is based on its
argument that it cannot be held responsible for the theft committed by its employee, an
argument we have rejected.

Conclusion

For the reasons discussed above, we affirm the ALJ Decision.

                                                                      /s/
                                                Leslie A. Sussan

                                                                      /s/
                                                Constance B. Tobias

                                                                      /s/
                                                Sheila Ann Hegy
                                                Presiding Board Member