Tropical Cyclone Report
Hurricane Sandy
(AL182012)
22 – 29 October 2012
Eric S. Blake, Todd B. Kimberlain, Robert J. Berg, John P. Cangialosi and John L. Beven II
National Hurricane Center
12 February 2013

Sandy was a classic late-season hurricane in the southwestern Caribbean Sea. The
cyclone made landfall as a category 1 hurricane (on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale) in
Jamaica, and as a 100-kt category 3 hurricane in eastern Cuba before quickly weakening to a
category 1 hurricane while moving through the central and northwestern Bahamas. Sandy
underwent a complex evolution and grew considerably in size while over the Bahamas, and
continued to grow despite weakening into a tropical storm north of those islands. The system restrengthened into a hurricane while it moved northeastward, parallel to the coast of the
southeastern United States, and reached a secondary peak intensity of 85 kt while it turned
northwestward toward the mid-Atlantic states. Sandy weakened somewhat and then made
landfall as a post-tropical cyclone near Brigantine, New Jersey with 70-kt maximum sustained
winds. Because of its tremendous size, however, Sandy drove a catastrophic storm surge into the
New Jersey and New York coastlines. Preliminary U.S. damage estimates are near $50 billion,
making Sandy the second-costliest cyclone to hit the United States since 19001. There were at
least 147 direct deaths2 recorded across the Atlantic basin due to Sandy, with 72 of these
fatalities occurring in the mid-Atlantic and northeastern United States. This is the greatest
number of U.S. direct fatalities related to a tropical cyclone outside of the southern states since
Hurricane Agnes in 1972.

a.

Synoptic History

Sandy’s origin is primarily associated with a tropical wave that left the west coast of
Africa on 11 October. The wave encountered a large upper-level trough over the eastern Atlantic
on 12-13 October and produced an extensive area of showers and thunderstorms, but the shear
was too strong for development. Little convection occurred near the wave axis for the next
several days, likely due to upper-level convergence over the tropical Atlantic to the east of
Hurricane Rafael. During that time, the wave passed near a weak pre-existing disturbance in the
Intertropical Convergence Zone, and the two systems became difficult to distinguish by 17
October. The wave entered the eastern Caribbean Sea early on 18 October, with only a weak
wind shift and some showers noted in the Windward Islands. Disorganized convection then
1

When not adjusted for inflation, population and wealth normalization. Sandy ranks sixth when accounting for
those factors (records of costliest cyclones began in 1900).
2
Deaths occurring as a direct result of the forces of the cyclone are referred to as “direct” deaths. These would
include those persons who drowned in storm surge, rough seas, rip currents, and freshwater floods. Direct deaths
also include casualties resulting from lightning and wind-related events (e.g., collapsing structures). Deaths
occurring from such factors as heart attacks, house fires, electrocutions from downed power lines, vehicle accidents
on wet roads, etc., are considered “indirect” deaths.

1

increased on 19 October over the east-central Caribbean Sea, within an environment of moderate
westerly shear associated with a mid- to upper-level trough over the Greater Antilles.
Overall, however, the environment was becoming more conducive for development, and
pressures were falling over much of the central Caribbean Sea, likely due to a well-defined rising
branch of the Madden-Julian Oscillation passing through the area (Fig. 1). Primitive banding
features formed early on 20 October, and the extent of deep convection greatly increased. The
convection probably contributed to the formation of a broad low-pressure area located a few
hundred miles south of Haiti late that day. The low moved slowly toward the west and
southwest on 21 October while high pressure strengthened over the Gulf of Mexico and the
southwestern Atlantic Ocean. Although some westerly shear was still affecting the system, the
motion toward the southwest brought the low into a reduced shear environment associated with
an upper-level anticyclone building over the southwestern Caribbean Sea. Surface and satellite
data suggest that the circulation of the low became well defined about 200 n mi south of Jamaica
by late on 21 October. Although convection briefly waned, a strong band of deep convection
formed near and south of the center early on 22 October. This convective band was organized
enough by 1200 UTC that day to mark the formation of a tropical depression in the southwestern
Caribbean Sea, about 305 n mi south-southwest of Kingston, Jamaica. The “best track” chart of
the cyclone’s path is given in Fig. 2, with the wind and pressure histories shown in Figs. 3 and 4,
respectively. The best track positions and intensities are listed in Table 13.
Thunderstorms increased near and north of the center, and data from an Air Force
Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft indicated that the depression became a tropical storm 6 h after
genesis. Further development of Sandy was initially rather slow while the storm completed a
small cyclonic loop, with the cyclone’s peak winds only increasing by 10 kt in the first 24 h.
Strengthening occurred at a faster rate by late on 23 October, with the band becoming more
prominent east and south of the center (Fig. 5b). A middle- to upper-level trough digging over
the northwestern Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico caused Sandy to accelerate northnortheastward. Aircraft data indicate that Sandy became a hurricane at 1200 UTC 24 October
while centered about 80 n mi south of Kingston with an eye becoming apparent on visible and
microwave satellite images (Fig. 5d). The hurricane then intensified at a faster pace with its
center reaching the southeastern coast of Jamaica near the community of Bull Bay, about
midway between Kingston and South Haven, at about 1900 UTC; at the time of landfall Sandy’s
intensity was 75 kt. The brief passage over Jamaica did not seem to affect Sandy much, and the
cyclone rapidly intensified after it moved over the deep warm waters of the Cayman Trench to
the south of Cuba (Fig. 5e). Data from an Air Force Reserve aircraft suggest that the cyclone
became a major hurricane, with maximum sustained winds estimated at 100 kt, shortly before
making landfall in Cuba (Fig. 6) at 0525 UTC 25 October about 10 n mi west of the city of
Santiago de Cuba.
The center of Sandy spent about 5 h crossing eastern Cuba before emerging into the
Atlantic Ocean south of Ragged Island in the Bahamas. The hurricane weakened slightly during
its brief time over Cuba, but then weakened more quickly by late in the day as a result of strong
3

A digital record of the complete best track, including wind radii, can be found on line at ftp://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf.
Data for the current year’s storms are located in the btk directory, while previous years’ data are located in the
archive directory.

2

southwesterly shear. Shortwave ridging over the western Atlantic and a negatively tilted upperlevel trough caused Sandy to slow and gradually turn toward the northwest. This pattern steered
the cyclone through the Bahamas, with the center passing between Long Island and Great Exuma
on 25 October, between Cat Island and Eleuthera early the next day, and skirting the east coast of
Great Abaco late on 26 October. Although Sandy weakened below hurricane strength by 0000
UTC 27 October when it moved northward away from Great Abaco, the size of the storm had
greatly increased, with the average radii of tropical-storm-force winds roughly doubling since the
time of landfall in Cuba. This change in structure resulted from the interaction of Sandy with the
aforementioned upper-level trough, including warm advection aloft and a considerable increase
in upper-level divergence, in addition to the cyclone’s movement into a modified continental air
mass near and north of the Bahamas.
After passing the Bahamas, Sandy gradually turned toward the northeast and its forward
speed increased in advance of a mid-tropospheric trough over the central United States. Sandy
regained hurricane strength by 1200 UTC 27 October when the center was about 125 n mi northnortheast of Great Abaco (Fig. 7b). Although Sandy had become a hurricane again, the structure
of the cyclone was quite unusual. Reconnaissance data indicated that the radius of maximum
winds was very large, over 100 n mi, and the strongest winds were located in the western (left)
semicircle of the cyclone. In addition, satellite, surface and dropsonde data showed that a warm
front was forming a few hundred miles from the center in the northeast quadrant, with another
weak stationary boundary to the northwest of the center (Fig. 8) serving to enhance the
convection and strong winds there. However, the stationary front never reached the center of
circulation, and the front weakened the following day as the hurricane moved northeastward
away from the upper trough.
Sandy passed a few hundred miles southeast of North Carolina on 28 October, and the
cyclone took on a more tropical appearance near its center with hints of an eye in microwave
imagery (Fig. 7d). By early on 29 October, the hurricane’s track bent toward the north when
Sandy encountered an anomalous blocking pattern over the North Atlantic (Fig. 9), preventing
the cyclone from moving out to sea. While the large mid-tropospheric high built into
northeastern North America, the central United States trough deepened. A piece of this trough
moved into the southeastern United States and provided baroclinic forcing for Sandy, along with
a significant decrease in vertical wind shear. These factors, in addition to the cyclone’s moving
over the warm Gulf Stream waters (Fig. 10), caused Sandy to re-intensify early on 29 October,
and the hurricane reached a secondary peak intensity of 85 kt near 1200 UTC (Fig. 11) about 220
n mi southeast of Atlantic City, New Jersey.
The trough over the southeastern United States helped to accelerate Sandy toward the
northwest later on 29 October, and the cyclone moved at an average forward speed of 20 kt from
the time of the secondary intensity peak until landfall. However, the hurricane moved over much
cooler waters and into a cold air mass located over the eastern United States and northwestern
Atlantic Ocean. These factors contributed to the system’s weakening and hastened its loss of
tropical characteristics. Surface, reconnaissance, and satellite data, discussed further in section b
below, suggest that Sandy became extratropical4 by 2100 UTC 29 October while the center of
4

The primary distinction between tropical and extratropical cyclones is their energy source. Tropical cyclones
derive their energy predominantly from the release of latent heat of condensation relatively close to the center, while

3

circulation was about 45 n mi southeast of Atlantic City. The center of Post-tropical Cyclone
Sandy5 then made landfall at about 2330 UTC near Brigantine, New Jersey, just to the northeast
of Atlantic City, with an estimated intensity of 70 kt and a minimum pressure of 945 mb6.
After landfall, the cyclone turned toward the west-northwest and slowed, gradually
weakening while its center moved through southern New Jersey, northern Delaware and southern
Pennsylvania. The center of the cyclone became ill defined over northeastern Ohio after 1200
UTC 31 October, and the remnants of Sandy moved northward to northeastward over Ontario,
Canada for the next day or two before merging with a low pressure area over eastern Canada.

b.

Meteorological Statistics

Observations in Sandy (Figs. 3 and 4) include satellite-based Dvorak technique intensity
estimates from the Tropical Analysis and Forecast Branch (TAFB) and the Satellite Analysis
Branch (SAB), as well as the Advanced Dvorak Technique from the University of WisconsinMadison/Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies (UW-CIMSS). Data and
imagery from NOAA polar-orbiting satellites including the Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit
(AMSU), the NASA Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM), Defense Meteorological
Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites and the European Advanced Scatterometer (ASCAT)
satellite, among others, were also useful in constructing the best track of Sandy.
Twenty-four reconnaissance missions were flown in and around Sandy. These missions
included flights of the C-130 aircraft from the Air Force Reserve 53rd Weather Reconnaissance
Squadron, the NOAA WP-3D aircraft, and the NOAA G-IV jet. These aircraft provided data
that were crucial in determining the intensity and structure of Sandy. National Weather Service
(NWS) WSR 88-D radar data from Mt. Holly, NJ and radar data from the Institute of
Meteorology of Cuba were used to make center fixes.
Selected ship reports of winds of tropical storm force associated with Sandy are given in
Table 2, and selected surface observations from land stations and buoys are given in Table 3.
Winds / Pressure
Sandy made its first landfall in Jamaica as a category 1 hurricane on 24 October, and it
was the first hurricane landfall there since Gilbert in 1988 (although Ivan in 2004 brought
sustained hurricane-force winds to the island). Although there were no official reports of
hurricane-force winds, these conditions likely occurred over a narrow swath over the far eastern
part of Jamaica during the afternoon hours on 24 October, with widespread tropical-storm-force
extratropical cyclones rely mainly on baroclinic processes (large-scale temperature contrasts between warm and cold
air masses).
5
The term “post-tropical” is used in NWS advisory products to refer to any closed low-pressure system that no
longer qualifies as a tropical cyclone. However, such systems can continue carrying heavy rains and damaging
winds. Post-tropical cyclones can be either frontal (extratropical) or non-frontal lows.
6
Landfall is defined as the intersection of the surface center of a cyclone with a coastline. It is important to note
that although Sandy made landfall as an extratropical low, its strong winds, heavy rains and storm surge had been
felt onshore for many hours while Sandy was still a hurricane.

4

winds occurring elsewhere. The lowest pressure reported on land was 972.1 mb at the Kingston
Airport during the eye passage.
Operationally, the peak intensity of Sandy was assessed to be 95 kt. The 100-kt analyzed
peak intensity in post-analysis is based on a blend of a 700-mb flight-level wind of 117 kt (which
normally corresponds to an intensity of about 105 kt) at 0409 UTC 25 October and peak steppedfrequency microwave radiometer (SFMR) values of 95 kt at 0502 UTC. The flight-level and
SFMR winds were rapidly increasing in the few hours before landfall in Cuba at 0525 UTC,
consistent with the marked increase in organization on satellite (Fig. 6) and radar (Fig. 12)
images. Given that the 95-kt surface wind was measured in the south quadrant (not the east,
where the maximum winds are typically located for a northward-moving cyclone) and the fact
that a peak flight-level wind of 126 kt was observed about 6 h after landfall, it is estimated in
post-analysis that Sandy had maximum sustained winds of about 100 kt at landfall in Cuba,
making it a category 3 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale.
Winds of hurricane force likely occurred over a narrow stretch of eastern Cuba in
Santiago de Cuba and Holguín provinces. A peak 1-min wind of 81 kt was observed in Cabo
Lucrecia along the northeastern coast of Cuba, where wind gusts of over 100 kt were measured.
Maximum 1-min winds of 78 kt with a gust to 99 kt were also recorded in the city of Santiago de
Cuba before the anemometer failed. A wind gust of 143 kt from Gran Piedra indicates that
extreme wind gusts occurred over elevated terrain near and east of the center. Figure 13 shows
selected wind gusts for surface stations and buoys in the Caribbean Sea, western Atlantic Ocean
and the southeastern coast of the United States.
The analyzed secondary peak intensity of 85 kt about 12 h before landfall in New Jersey
(Fig. 11) is based on peak 700-mb winds of 94 kt at 1014 UTC 29 October and peak SFMR
values of 84 kt at 1210 UTC that day.
Figure 14 shows selected sustained winds observed over the northeastern and MidAtlantic coasts and Fig. 15 shows peak wind gusts in those areas. There was one sustained
hurricane-force wind reported: Great Gull Island, New York, between Long Island and Fishers
Island, measured a 1-min mean wind of 65 kt at an elevation of 18 m at 2035 UTC 29 October.
This observation suggests that sustained hurricane-force winds likely occurred onshore over a
limited area while Sandy was still a hurricane. In addition, a Texas Tech University (TTU)
measurement tower near Long Beach, New Jersey, reported a 1-min mean wind of 53 kt at a
height of 2.25 m at 0000 UTC 30 October. This observation implies 10-m winds of about 68 kt
using standard adjustment factors, as analyzed by TTU, and supports the estimated intensity of
70 kt at landfall. Sustained hurricane-force winds therefore almost certainly occurred in New
Jersey, although these are believed to have occurred exclusively after Sandy’s extratropical
transition. The strongest observed peak wind gust (83 kt) from a reliable station was measured at
Eaton’s Neck by a WeatherFlow site at 24 m elevation along the northern shore of Long Island,
at 2210 UTC 29 October. Several sites at 10-m elevation reported peak wind gusts of 75-78 kt in
northern New Jersey and southern Long Island, and it is notable that gusts of hurricane force
were reported in seven different states. Strong wind gusts primarily associated with the Sandy’s
post-tropical stage penetrated well inland, as far westward as Wisconsin and northward into
Canada (Fig. 16).

5

The overall minimum central pressure of Sandy is estimated to be 940 mb, which
occurred near 1800 UTC 29 October, a few hours before landfall. This value is based on a
dropsonde that measured 941 mb with 15 kt of surface wind at 1917 UTC 29 October. The
minimum central pressure at landfall in Cuba is estimated at 954 mb. This pressure is derived
from an extrapolated central pressure of 955 mb from an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance
report about 20 minutes before landfall. The minimum central pressure at landfall in New Jersey
is estimated at 945 mb, based on National Ocean Service (NOS) station ACYN4 at Atlantic City
that recorded 945.5 mb at 2224 UTC 29 October, along with one other station that reported 945.6
mb. The Atlantic City report has been noted by several agencies as the lowest sea-level pressure
ever recorded north of North Carolina in the United States. The 1938 Great New England
hurricane, however, is analyzed to have made landfall with a slightly lower central pressure (941
mb), although no pressure below 946 mb was recorded. Several sites across the mid-Atlantic
region also recorded their all-time minimum pressures during the passage of Sandy (see Table 4).
Among the lowest were Atlantic City with 948.5 mb and Philadelphia, PA, with 952.2 mb.
Structure
Sandy was an extraordinarily large hurricane, its size growing considerably from the time
it reached the Bahamas until its final landfall as an extratropical cyclone along the mid-Atlantic
coast. Data from a variety of observational platforms indicated that the extent (diameter) of
tropical-storm-force (or gale-force) winds grew to about 870 n mi prior to landfall (e.g., Fig. 17),
with most of the increase in size occurring on 25 and 26 October over the Bahamas. Sandy was
the largest tropical cyclone in the extended best track record7, which began in 1988. The
extreme size of the cyclone was caused by several factors, discussed below.
The inner core of the storm was disrupted by both its passage over Cuba and its proximity
to an upper-level trough over the northwestern Caribbean Sea and the eastern Gulf of Mexico
(Fig. 18a). While baroclinic forcing associated with the trough was occurring, Sandy moved into
modified continental air over the western Atlantic Ocean. This change in environment led to the
initiation of extratropical transition when a warm front formed a few hundred miles northeast of
the center and a weak stationary front formed on the northwest side of the circulation by early on
27 October (e.g. Fig. 8). While these factors contributed to Sandy’s weakening into a tropical
storm, they also caused its wind and pressure fields to grow considerably. In addition, while the
storm moved through the Bahamas, nearly all of the inner-core deep convection briefly
dissipated, with most of the remaining deep convection focused near the warm front.
The extratropical transition was incomplete, however, when Sandy moved north of the
Bahamas and away from the upper trough and drier air on 27 October. The low-level
environment became more moist and unstable, and the system redeveloped relatively deep
convection near the center, allowing Sandy to maintain its status as a tropical cyclone. In
addition, the upper-level trough became negatively tilted (Fig. 18c), which caused a decrease in
wind shear near Sandy while it moved just south of the Gulf Stream, and Sandy became a
hurricane again on that day. Although the cyclone regained hurricane strength, frontal structures
7

Demuth, J., M. DeMaria, and J.A. Knaff, 2006: Improvement of advanced microwave sounder unit tropical
cyclone intensity and size estimation algorithms. J. Appl. Meteor., 45, 1573-1581.

6

remained in the outer circulation, well away from the core. Sandy never lost its large wind field
and large radius of maximum wind, and it retained those hybrid characteristics through landfall.
It’s worth noting that in all tropical cyclones, the storm environment contributes to the
distribution and extent of the wind field. In our best-track analysis of Sandy’s intensity and size,
no attempt has been made to distinguish the relative contributions of Sandy’s tropical core from
its frontal environment.
From late on 28 October through the early afternoon on 29 October, Sandy intensified
while it approached and passed over the warmer waters of the Gulf Stream (Fig. 10). A second
and larger mid-latitude trough dove southeastward from the Great Lakes and took on a negative
tilt (Figs. 19a-c). This configuration contributed to Sandy’s strengthening due to decreased
vertical wind shear and increased upper-level divergence. Interestingly, Sandy’s satellite
presentation and low-level temperature field somewhat resembled the warm seclusion that is
sometimes observed in particularly intense extratropical cyclones.
While Sandy approached the coast of New Jersey, some fundamental changes occurred in
the structure of the cyclone, resulting in its completion of post-tropical transition near 2100 UTC
29 October.
Dropsondes during that day indicated that low-level temperatures within a few
miles of the center of Sandy decreased significantly (Fig. 20), with surface temperatures
dropping from 25°C at 1400 UTC to 17°C at 2100 UTC. This suggests that much cooler lowlevel air was penetrating the center of the cyclone, although it was still warmer than the air mass
surrounding the cyclone. While an eye-like structure was still apparent on radar before 1800
UTC (Fig. 21a), aircraft data show that the center became embedded within the lowertropospheric temperature gradient before 2200 UTC (Fig. 21b), with the warmest air well to the
northeast of the center. In addition, southeasterly shear increased markedly before landfall, and
the organized deep convection near the center ceased around 2100 UTC, leaving an exposed
center with any remaining convection near a warm front (Fig. 21b). This cessation of central
convection coincided with the passage of the cyclone over much colder shelf waters just offshore
of the mid-Atlantic coast.
The NHC surface analyses for 1500 UTC and 2100 UTC 29 October, based on the
available imagery and data, are presented in Figs. 22 and 23. No fronts are analyzed close to the
center of Sandy at 1500 UTC, with an occlusion forming to the north, and a stationary front on
the western side of the circulation. A central dense overcast was still present at 1500 UTC,
however this feature had dissipated 6 h later (Fig. 23). The 2100 UTC analysis shows an
occluded front wrapping into the core of the cyclone, with the temperature gradient increasing
along the now-moving warm front to the west. By that time, Sandy no longer met the definition
of a tropical cyclone8 since it both lacked organized deep convection and had become a frontal
cyclone. Consequently, the NHC best track denotes extratropical transition at 2100 UTC 29
October.

8

NWS Directive 10-604 defines a tropical cyclone as a warm-core non-frontal synoptic-scale cyclone, originating
over tropical or subtropical waters, with organized deep convection and a closed surface wind circulation about a
well-defined center.

7

Storm Surge9
Sandy caused water levels to rise along the entire east coast of the United States from
Florida northward to Maine. The highest storm surges and greatest inundation on land occurred
in the states of New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut, especially in and around the New York
City metropolitan area. In many of these locations, especially along the coast of central and
northern New Jersey, Staten Island, and southward-facing shores of Long Island, the surge was
accompanied by powerful damaging waves. A list of the storm surge, storm tide and inundation
calculations and observations is provided in Table 5. Maps of the inundation along the east coast
of the United States (Fig. 24), and along the New Jersey, New York and Connecticut coasts (Fig.
25) are also provided.
New York
The highest storm surge measured by an NOS tide gauge in New York was 12.65 ft
above normal tide levels at Kings Point on the western end of Long Island Sound. A storm surge
of 9.56 ft above normal tide levels was reported on the northern side of Staten Island at Bergen
Point West Reach, and 9.40 ft was reported at the Battery on the southern tip of Manhattan.
Record storm tides (the combination of the storm surge and astronomical tide) were
measured by the NOS tide gauges in the New York City area. At the Battery (where water level
records go back to 1920), the storm tide reached 14.06 ft above Mean Lower Low Water
(MLLW), which was 4.36 ft higher than the previous record set in December 1992. This storm
tide was also 4.55 ft higher than what occurred when Tropical Storm Irene affected the region in
2011. The storm tides of 14.58 ft above MLLW at Bergen Point West Reach and 14.31 ft above
MLLW at Kings Point were 4.37 ft and 2.00 ft higher, respectively, than their previous highest
levels set in Irene.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
Staten Island and Manhattan
Brooklyn and Queens
The Bronx and Westchester County
Long Island (Nassau and Suffolk Counties)
Hudson River Valley

9

4 – 9 ft
3 – 6 ft
2 – 4 ft
3 – 6 ft
3 – 5 ft

Several terms are used to describe water levels due to a storm. Storm surge is defined as the abnormal rise of
water generated by a storm, over and above the predicted astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height
above normal tide levels. Since storm surge represents the deviation from normal water levels, it is not
referenced to a vertical datum. Storm tide is defined as the water level due to the combination of storm surge and
the astronomical tide, and is expressed in terms of height above a vertical datum, e.g. the North American Vertical
Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) or Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). Inundation is the total water level that occurs on
normally dry ground as a result of the storm tide, and is expressed in terms of height above ground level. At the
coast, normally dry land is roughly defined as areas higher than the normal high tide line, or Mean Higher High
Water (MHHW).

8

Surveyed high-water marks from the United States Geological Survey (USGS) indicate
that the highest water levels in New York occurred on Staten Island. The highest direct
measurement of inundation was 7.9 ft above ground level, obtained from a seed line found on a
door frame of a house in the Oakwood neighborhood of Staten Island. A direct measurement of
4.7 ft above ground level was made at One World Trade Center in the Financial District in
Lower Manhattan. Higher inundation values likely occurred in other parts of Manhattan that are
at lower elevations. For example, several high-water marks around 11 ft above the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) were made in the vicinity of the South Street
Seaport near the Brooklyn Bridge, where ground elevations are as low as 3 ft above NAVD88.
These data imply that as much as 8 ft of inundation could have occurred in that area. In Battery
Park, the lowest portions of the promenade adjacent to New York Harbor sit at about 6 ft above
NAVD88. Several high-water marks between 11 and 11.5 ft above NAVD88 were measured in
the area, suggesting that the water could have been as deep as 5.5 to 6 ft immediately adjacent to
the harbor on the promenade. However, water levels were not that deep in most areas of the
park.
The NOS tide gauges at the Battery (in Manhattan) and at Bergen Point West Reach (on
Staten Island) recorded storm tide values of 9.0 ft and 9.53 ft above Mean Higher High Water
(MHHW), respectively. If a rise of the water level beyond the MHHW line is considered a
proxy for inundation of normally dry land, then some areas bordering New York Harbor that are
not protected by sea walls could have been inundated with as much as 9 ft of water.
In Queens, one measurement of 6.0 ft above ground level in Maspeth and two
measurements of 5.4 ft were made in the Rockaways. The water inundated portions of the
runways and tarmacs at both La Guardia and John F. Kennedy International Airports. The
maximum inundation measurement in Brooklyn was 4.5 ft, and the highest in the Bronx was 3.4
ft in the Throgs Neck area.
In Nassau County on Long Island, a high-water mark of 4.6 ft above ground level was
observed in Freeport in the Town of Hempstead. A high-water mark of 4.3 ft was observed in
Inwood (near John F. Kennedy International Airport), and marks of 3 to 4 ft were measured in
Long Beach, Jones Beach, and across the bay in Massapequa. In Suffolk County, the storm
surge reached 5.89 ft above normal tide levels at a gauge in Montauk on the eastern tip of Long
Island. A high-water mark of 5.6 ft above ground level was measured on Fire Island, and a mark
of 5.5 ft was measured in Oak Beach-Captree. On the north shore adjacent to Long Island
Sound, a high-water mark of 4.5 ft was obtained in Wading River in the Town of Riverhead.
Significant flooding due to storm surge (with some contribution from rainfall) occurred in
parts of the Hudson River Valley as far north as Albany. Inundation as high as 4 to 5 ft above
ground level occurred in many places along the banks of the river in Rockland, Orange, Ulster,
Dutchess, Columbia, and Greene Counties, topped by a 5.1 ft high-water mark in Poughkeepsie
and 4.9 ft in Kingston. Inundation levels of 2 to 4 ft occurred as far north as Columbia and
Greene Counties, over 100 n mi upriver from New York Harbor.

9

New Jersey
The highest storm surge measured by an NOS tide gauge in New Jersey was 8.57 ft
above normal tide levels at the northern end of Sandy Hook in the Gateway National Recreation
Area. Since the station failed and stopped reporting during the storm, it is likely that the actual
storm surge was higher. Farther south, the NOS tide gauges in Atlantic City and Cape May
measured storm surges of 5.82 ft. and 5.16 ft, respectively.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
Monmouth and Middlesex Counties
Union and Hudson Counties
Essex and Bergen Counties
Ocean County
Atlantic, Burlington, and Cape May Counties

4 – 9 ft
3 – 7 ft
2 – 4 ft
3 – 5 ft
2 – 4 ft

The deepest water occurred in areas that border Lower New York Bay, Raritan Bay, and
the Raritan River. The highest high-water mark measured by the USGS was 8.9 ft above ground
level at the U.S. Coast Guard Station on Sandy Hook. This high-water mark agrees well with
data from the nearby NOS tide gauge, which reported 8.01 ft above MHHW before it failed.
Elsewhere, a high-water mark of 7.9 ft above ground level was measured in Keyport on the
southern side of Raritan Bay and a mark of 7.7 ft was measured in Sayreville near the Raritan
River.
As storm surge from Sandy was pushed into New York and Raritan Bays, sea water piled
up within the Hudson River and the coastal waterways and wetlands of northeastern New Jersey,
including Newark Bay, the Passaic and Hackensack Rivers, Kill Van Kull, and Arthur Kill.
Significant inundations occurred along the Hudson River in Weehawken, Hoboken, and Jersey
City, where many high-water marks indicated that inundations were between 4 and 6.5 ft above
ground level. Inundations of 4 to 6 ft were also measured across Newark Bay in Elizabeth and
the area around Newark Liberty International Airport.
Water levels were highest along the northern portion of the Jersey Shore in Monmouth
and Ocean Counties, north of where Sandy made landfall. Barrier islands were almost
completely inundated in some areas, and breached in some cases, due to storm surge and large
waves from the Atlantic Ocean meeting up with rising waters from back bays such as Barnegat
Bay and Little Egg Harbor. The USGS surveyed high-water marks as high as 4 to 5 ft above
ground level in locations such as Sea Bright in Monmouth County and Tuckerton, Seaside Park,
and Long Beach Island in Ocean County. Farther south, measured inundations were as high as 2
to 4 ft in areas near Atlantic City and Cape May.

10

Connecticut
In Connecticut, an NOS gauge measured a storm surge of 9.83 ft above normal tide levels
at Bridgeport while a gauge in New Haven measured a surge of 9.14 ft, which caused record
water levels at those stations.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
Fairfield and New Haven Counties
Middlesex and New London Counties

4 – 6 ft
3 – 5 ft

The highest storm tide and greatest inundation occurred along western sections of the
Connecticut coast. The maximum high-water mark measurement was 5.5 ft above ground level
at Milford in New Haven County. Other inundation measurements of at least 5 ft were made in
other areas near the city of New Haven, and the maximum measurement in Fairfield County was
4.5 ft in Norwalk. The NOS tide gauges in Bridgeport and New Haven reported water levels of
5.82 ft and 5.54 ft above MHHW, respectively, suggesting that inundation values could have
been as high as 6 ft above ground level in parts of Fairfield and New Haven Counties.
Farther east, the highest marks measured by the USGS in Middlesex and New London
Counties were 3.8 ft and 3.2 ft above ground level in Clinton and Old Lyme, respectively. In
addition, the NOS gauge in New London reported a water level of 4.95 ft above MHHW. The
maximum inundation values along the eastern parts of the Connecticut coast are estimated to be
3 to 5 ft above ground level.
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Maine
Significant storm surge occurred up the New England coast into Rhode Island and
Massachusetts, especially south of Cape Cod. The highest storm surges recorded by NOS tide
gauges in each state were 6.20 ft above normal tide levels at Providence, Rhode Island, and 5.50
ft at Fall River, Massachusetts. Even north of Cape Cod, a storm surge of 4.57 ft was recorded at
Boston.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
Rhode Island
Massachusetts
New Hampshire and Maine

3 – 5 ft
2 – 4 ft
1 – 2 ft

The highest measured USGS high-water marks in Rhode Island by county were 4.4 ft
above ground level in Jamestown in Newport County and 3.9 ft in Narragansett in Washington
County. The maximum storm tides measured by NOS gauges were 4.52 ft above MHHW at

11

Providence and 4.48 ft at Conimicut Light. These data suggest that inundations were as high as
5 ft above ground level along some parts of the Rhode Island coast.
Farther to the northeast, the highest measured inundation was 2.0 ft above ground level in
Swansea, which borders the part of Narragansett Bay that juts into Massachusetts. NOS gauges
in Fall River and Woods Hole measured storm tides of 4.18 ft and 3.60 ft above MHHW,
suggesting that inundation was at least 4 ft above ground level along parts of the southern coast
of Massachusetts. Farther north, the NOS gauge in Boston Harbor recorded a storm tide of 2.64
ft above MHHW, suggesting that parts of the Massachusetts coast west and north of Cape Cod
had inundation of at least 3 ft above ground level.
The highest storm surges recorded by NOS tide gauges in New Hampshire and Maine
were 3.32 ft above normal tide levels at Fort Point, New Hampshire, and 3.53 ft at Wells, Maine.
The NOS gauges at Fort Point and Portland, Maine, both measured storm tides at or near 2.0 ft
above MHHW.
Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia
The highest storm surges recorded by NOS gauges in Delaware were 5.99 ft above
normal tide levels at Delaware City and 5.80 ft at Reedy Point. In Lewes, the gauge recorded a
surge of 5.34 ft. On the ocean side of the Maryland coast, the NOS gauge at Ocean City Inlet
measured a storm surge of 4.33 ft. On the Chesapeake Bay side of Maryland, the NOS gauge in
Chesapeake City recorded a storm surge of 4.88 ft. The maximum storm surge measured in
Virginia was 4.95 ft at Wachapreague on the Eastern Shore, although a surge of 4.79 ft was also
recorded at Money Point in the Norfolk area.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
Delaware
Maryland
Virginia

3 – 5 ft
2 – 4 ft
2 – 4 ft

The NOS gauge in Lewes recorded a storm tide of 4.05 ft above MHHW, and data from a
USGS pressure sensor also in Lewes suggested inundation of 4 to 5 ft above ground level. On
the ocean side of Maryland, a storm tide of 3.59 ft above MHHW was recorded at Ocean City.
On the eastern shore of Chesapeake Bay, the highest measured storm tide was 3.06 ft at
Tolchester Beach.
Several measurements of storm tide along the Virginia coast indicated an inundation of as
much as 4 ft above ground level. Two USGS pressure sensors, on Plum Tree Island and at Cape
Charles, measured storm tides that would imply inundation of about 4 ft. In addition, the NOS
gauges at Sewell Point and Money Point in the Hampton Roads area recorded storm tides of just
under 4.1 ft above MHHW. On the Eastern Shore, storm tides of 3.88 and 3.89 ft above MHHW
were measured by the NOS gauges at Wachapreague and Kiptopeke, respectively.

12

The Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida
Although Sandy did not make landfall along the southeastern coast of the United States,
it did cause water levels to rise from Florida to the Carolinas. The highest storm surges recorded
by NOS tide gauges in each state were 4.16 ft above normal tide levels at Duck, North Carolina
(before the sensor failed); 3.55 ft at Clarendon Plantation, South Carolina; 2.89 ft at Fort Pulaski,
Georgia; and 2.95 ft at Fernandina Beach, Florida.
The following inundations, expressed above ground level, were prevalent along the coast
due to the storm tide:
North Carolina
South Carolina and Georgia
Florida

3 – 5 ft
1 – 2 ft
1 – 3 ft

The NOS gauge at the U.S. Coast Guard Station in Hatteras, North Carolina, measured a
storm tide of 4.15 ft above MHHW due to water from Pamlico Sound being blown onto the
western side of the Outer Banks. Storm tides were significantly lower in South Carolina and
Georgia, where 1.57 ft was reported at Charleston and 1.53 ft was reported at Fort Pulaski. In
Florida, a storm tide of 2.72 ft was recorded at Trident Pier on Cape Canaveral, and 2.29 ft was
reported at Lake Worth Pier.
Rainfall
Sandy produced torrential rains across parts of Jamaica, eastern Cuba, and Hispaniola. A
maximum storm total rainfall of 28.09 inches (713 mm) was reported at Mill Bank, Jamaica,
with a few other reports of over 10 inches (~250 mm) of rain on the upslope side of the eastern
part of that island. Widespread 4-8 inch (about 100-200 mm) rain accumulations were recorded
over eastern Cuba, with a maximum storm total at Gran Piedra of 11.12 inches (282 mm). No
rainfall reports are available from Hispaniola or the Bahamas.
In the United States, most of the rain from Sandy fell south and west of the track of the
center (Fig. 26), and selected totals are listed in Table 6. The heaviest rainfall was reported in
extreme eastern Maryland and Virginia, southern Delaware and extreme southern New Jersey,
with a widespread area of 5-7 inches of rain, and a peak amount of 12.83 inches in Bellevue,
Maryland. Although this rain caused rivers in the mid-Atlantic region to rise, only minor
damage was reported due to this flooding. Rainfall did contribute, along with storm surge, to the
flooding in New York and New Jersey adjacent to the Hudson River. Minor rainfall
accumulations occurred in southeastern Florida as Sandy passed, with most stations reporting
less than 3 inches.
Snowfall

13

Widespread heavy snow, exceptionally rare in association with a tropical cyclone or one
having just lost tropical characteristics, was reported in the Appalachian Mountains from western
North Carolina northeastward through southwestern Pennsylvania (Fig. 27 and Table 7), and it
mostly fell after Sandy became extratropical. West Virginia was hardest hit by the blizzard, with
a large area of over a foot of snow reported and a peak storm total of 36 inches near Richwood.
North Carolina also had one report of 36 inches of snow on Wolf Laurel Mountain, but the
overall geographic extent of heavy snow was much smaller than in West Virginia.
Tornadoes
Only one tornado was reported in association with Sandy, an F-0 (winds between 73-112
mph) that struck Somerset, Bermuda on 28 October (early media reports of F-1 were erroneous).

c.

Casualty and Damage Statistics

The number of direct deaths caused by Sandy is estimated at 147; Table 8 records the
deaths by country. In the United States, 72 direct deaths were noted, making Sandy the deadliest
U.S. cyclone outside of the southern states since Agnes (1972). While NHC’s direct death
counts do not typically include fatalities that occur after extratropical transition, the non-tropical
status of Sandy for 2.5 h prior to landfall had no effect on the surge experienced along the coast.
In addition, it is nearly impossible to know exactly when these deaths occurred relative to the
transition. Consequently, all deaths along the coast from the surge have been included in the
final total. Table 9 lists the number of deaths by state, with New York having the most (48) of
any state. The storm surge was responsible for most of the U.S. deaths, with 41 of the 72
fatalities (57%) attributable specifically to that hazard. Falling trees during the storm killed
twenty people, a rather high number that again highlights that hazard in the northeastern and
mid-Atlantic states10, even in locations experiencing winds of less than hurricane force. The rest
of the U.S. fatalities were due to other wind-related causes (5), inland freshwater flooding (2),
unknown causes (2), near-shore waves (1) or drowning within coastal waters (1). One death was
reported in a U.S. territory: a man perished in a rain-swollen river near Juana Diaz, Puerto Rico.
Two offshore deaths occurred about 90 n mi southeast of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, when
the H.M.S. Bounty sank—14 other people were rescued by the Coast Guard.
At least 87 deaths, an even greater number than for direct deaths, were indirectly
associated with Sandy or its remnants in the United States. About 50 of these deaths were the
result of extended power outages during cold weather, which led to deaths from hypothermia,
falls in the dark by senior citizens, or carbon monoxide poisoning from improperly placed
generators or cooking devices. The remaining deaths were mostly from storm cleanup efforts,
including removing falling trees, and car accidents.
Sandy’s impacts in the United States were widespread. At least 650,000 houses were
either damaged or destroyed as a result of the cyclone, with the vast majority of the damage
caused by storm surge and/or waves. About 8.5 million customers lost power as a result of
10

Rappaport, Edward N., 2000: Loss of Life in the United States Associated with Recent Atlantic Tropical
Cyclones. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 81, 2065–2073.

14

Sandy or its remnants, with power out for weeks or even months in some areas. Preliminary
estimates compiled from a variety of sources suggest that Sandy was responsible for at least 50
billion dollars in damage in the United States. This figure is highly uncertain and it will
probably take several more months before a more accurate total is obtained. Sandy is expected
to rank as the second-costliest cyclone on record, after Hurricane Katrina of 2005, and will
probably be the sixth-costliest cyclone when adjusting for inflation, population and wealth
normalization factors11. It is notable, however, that these preliminary estimates likely include
damage from the non-tropical portion of Sandy’s lifecycle, and this complicates the comparison
of Sandy to previous tropical cyclones.
Caribbean, Bahamas and Bermuda
The first country to be significantly affected was Jamaica. The hurricane caused one
death on that island; an elderly man was killed when a boulder crushed his house. The
government of Jamaica estimates that Sandy caused about $100 million (USD) of damage there.
The most severe impacts were in eastern Jamaica near the landfall location, with thousands of
homes damaged.
Damage was especially severe in eastern Cuba (Fig. 28). Eleven people were killed (nine
in Santiago de Cuba province and two in Guantánamo), and at least 1.3 million people were
directly affected by storm damage or restrictions to food or water. More than 226,600 homes
were damaged and at least 17,000 were destroyed by the high winds. The majority of the
destroyed homes were located in Santiago de Cuba, close to the landfall point. Total losses are
estimated at $2 billion (USD), making Sandy one of the costliest hurricanes in Cuba’s history.
Heavy rains caused severe flooding and significant damage in Haiti, with reports of at
least 54 deaths and 21 people missing. The Haitian government reported that agricultural losses
are estimated to be greater than $100 million (USD), with 40% of the corn, beans, rice, banana
and coffee crops lost, and at least 64,000 heads of cattle killed. Over 27,000 homes were
flooded, damaged or destroyed in that country due to river flooding, with road damage also
noted. Cholera outbreaks were significant after the storm, with over 12,000 cases reported, and
at least 44 deaths from this disease have been indirectly linked to Sandy. Overall damage is
estimated by the Haitian government to be over $750 million (USD).
In the Dominican Republic, three people were killed, and about 24,500 homes were
damaged, displacing more than 30,000 people. Agricultural damage from rainfall-induced
flooding was significant, estimated at more than $30 million (USD).
Across the Bahamas, two people were killed. One man died after falling off his roof
while attempting to fix damage during the storm on New Providence, and another man drowned
due to storm surge in the Queen’s Cove area on Grand Bahama Island. Damage was generally

11

NHC uses the methodology detailed in the following reference to normalize tropical cyclone damage: Pielke, Jr.,
R., J. Gratz, C. Landsea, D. Collins, M. Saunders, and R. Musulin, 2008: Normalized Hurricane Damages in the
U.S.: 1900-2005. Natural Hazards Review, 9, 29-42.

15

not as severe as it was in Hurricane Irene of the previous year, with most of the effects confined
to power outages, although five homes were damaged on Exuma Island.
In Bermuda, the only significant effects were caused by a tornado that struck Somerset
early on 28 October and was estimated to be an F-0 by the Bermuda Weather Service. The
tornado damaged the roofs of a few houses, smashed car windows, and capsized several boats in
Mangrove Bay during its lifetime of about 15 minutes. There were no injuries reported.
Southeastern United States
The effects of Sandy across the United States were enhanced by the fall full moon period,
in which some of the highest astronomical tides of the year occurred. Persistent northerly winds
and the slow movement of Sandy caused very large swells along the east-central and
southeastern coasts of Florida. These swells caused moderate to major beach erosion from
central Florida southward to Miami-Dade County, along with flooded coastal roadways. Wave
heights of up to 20 ft likely occurred over the Gulf Stream and near shore waters. Wave action
caused damage to a stretch of Highway A1A in a portion of the Fort Lauderdale Beach area, and
one lane is still closed at the time of this writing. In addition, piers, boat ramps and several
coastal homes were damaged from a combination of waves and the high water levels. In
southeastern Florida along the immediate coast, gusty winds caused fallen trees and led to about
160,000 customers losing power. Minor coastal flooding was reported in the Florida Keys,
northeastern Florida and Georgia. The combined costs of beach erosion and damage to some
structures in Florida are estimated to be between $50 and $75 million.
In the Carolinas, damage was mostly similar to what occurred in southeastern Florida.
Moderate to major beach erosion occurred along a large part of the South Carolina coast. Severe
erosion was reported at the Isle of Palms, with a total loss of the sand dunes and several piers
destroyed. The effects were also severe in the North Carolina Outer Banks, with Dare County
reporting damage to some infrastructure but sparing any residential or commercial structures.
Highway 12 north of Rodanthe was closed due to the road buckling from a 3-5 ft storm surge,
and major beach erosion occurred as a result of the large breaking waves.
Virginia, Maryland, Delaware and Pennsylvania
Across the region, high winds downed trees and power lines, and heavy rains caused
several streams and creeks to rise and either approach or reach flood stage for a brief time,
causing some flooding in localized areas. In Maryland, severe beach erosion occurred and a
large portion of Ocean City’s 100-ft fishing pier was destroyed. The storm surge in that city was
considered the worst seen along the coast since Gloria in 1985, with up to 4 ft of inundation
occurring. Heavy rains produced by the storm exacerbated storm surge flooding along
Chesapeake Bay, and the Delaware River swelled to record levels. Hundreds of roads were
either closed or impassable by fallen debris or flooding during the height of the storm, with many
remaining closed for at least a couple of days. Widespread power outages affected many, with
up to 1.2 million customers without power in Pennsylvania. Preliminary estimates suggest
residential damage of less than $5 million in Maryland, due to several homes having been

16

flooded. Overall damage estimates are about $5.5 million in Delaware and $20 million in
Pennsylvania.

New Jersey and New York
Sandy’s storm surge, in addition to large and battering waves, devastated large portions
of the coasts of New Jersey and New York. In fact, the extent of catastrophic damage along the
New Jersey coast was unprecedented in the state’s history, with the brunt of it occurring in
Monmouth and Ocean Counties. Whole communities were inundated by water and sand, houses
were washed from their foundations, boardwalks were dismantled or destroyed, cars were tossed
about, and boats were pushed well inland from the coast. About 5 million residences lost
electrical power across this region, with power outages commonly lasting for several weeks. The
New Jersey Governor’s office estimates that 346,000 housing units were damaged or destroyed
in that state, with 22,000 of those units uninhabitable. Severe damage to small businesses
occurred in New Jersey, with nearly 19,000 businesses sustaining damage of $250,000 or more,
and total business losses estimated at $8.3 billion. The New Jersey Public Service Electric and
Gas Company estimated that 48,000 trees had to be removed or trimmed in order to restore
power. Breaks in natural gas lines, occurring as a result of the storm, caused fires in some
locations, resulting in the destruction of many residences. Power and gas line repairs are
expected to cost roughly $1 billion and repairs to the waste, water and sewer services are
estimated to cost about $3 billion.
Sandy spared few parts of the central and northern New Jersey coast. The damage in the
community of Mantoloking highlights the severity of the storm surge and waves across this
region. A majority of structures there were flooded, badly damaged, or destroyed. The surge
even carved a path through the barrier island, creating two new inlets (Fig. 29a). In Seaside
Heights, the iconic Casino Pier and Funtown Pier were destroyed; the loss of the latter of caused
the destruction of the local amusement park (Fig. 30a). Long Beach Island, a barrier island
offshore of the central New Jersey coast, suffered catastrophic damage with nearly every house
on the seaside shore extensively damaged. The communities of Union Beach and Sea Bright
witnessed similar devastation. The storm surge also pushed water into New York Bay and up the
Hudson River, causing massive flooding in Jersey City. The surge into Raritan Bay forced water
up the Raritan River that resulted in flooding in nearby Sayreville. Rescue efforts by the
National Guard were required to save residents stranded in the town. About half of the city of
Hoboken was reportedly flooded, and at least 20,000 of its residents were surrounded by water at
the peak of the surge. The community center in Hoboken, its public works garage, three or four
fire houses, and more than 1,700 homes were flooded, with damage in the town estimated to be
well over $100 million. In Salem County, the nuclear power plant automatically shut down
when four of its six pumps failed. The rail operations center of the New Jersey Transit Authority
in Kearny was flooded by up to 7 ft of water, damaging as many as 74 locomotives and 294 rail
cars, and several weeks passed before rail services resumed. Overall damage estimates to the
New Jersey Transit System are around $400 million, with estimates of total damage to the entire
transit, road and bridge system in the state reaching $2.9 billion.

17

In New York, the governor’s office estimates that 305,000 homes were destroyed in the
state, mostly caused by storm surge. The New York City Office of Management and Budget
estimated the total damage to the city to be $19 billion, inclusive of all private, public and
indirect costs. About one quarter of that, $4.5 billion, was damage sustained to city agencies
such as the New York City Housing Administration and the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
The New York City Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) suffered extensive damage estimated
at $5 billion due to storm surge flooding that inundated eight tunnels. The South FerryWhitehall Street station at the southern end of Manhattan was essentially destroyed and subway
service between Manhattan and Brooklyn was unavailable for several weeks after the storm. The
MTA declared that the overall damage caused by the storm created the worst disaster in the 108year history of the subway system (e.g. Fig. 30b, 30d). The remainder of New York’s
transportation infrastructure suffered an estimated $2.5 billion of additional damage. The New
York Stock Exchange experienced an historic two-day closure as a result of the storm, the
longest closure since the Blizzard of 1888. Parts of the Manhattan waterfront (including the
Battery), Red Hook in Brooklyn, and Long Island City in Queens were under several feet of
water. Flood waters reached the corner of Canal and Hudson streets and portions of the East
Village, partly because of overflow along the East River (Fig. 30c), and hundreds of buildings
were flooded in Manhattan. In addition, a fire within the Breezy Point neighborhood, located at
the tip of the Rockaways peninsula in Queens, destroyed at least 100 homes, with that peninsula
also seeing a destructive storm surge (Fig. 29b).
The devastation was widespread in Staten Island, especially along its southern shore
where residences, businesses, cars and other property were heavily damaged. Whole blocks of
houses were swept away by the surge in the communities of Midland, New Dorp, and Oakland
Beach. Significant damage also occurred to the borough’s electrical grid, rail, and ferry
operations. The damage was so severe that media reports referred to it as Ground Zero for
damage in New York City, and at least 21 people died in Staten Island from the storm surge.
On Long Island, damage in the 13 towns and two cities is estimated to be above half a
billion dollars. Around 100,000 homes on Long Island were severely damaged or destroyed,
primarily by storm surge and waves, with more than 2,000 homes deemed uninhabitable. The
loss of Long Beach’s boardwalk is estimated to cost $25 million to replace, and Ocean Beach’s
ferry terminal and boathouse were demolished. The Bay Park Sewage Treatment Plant in
Nassau County was overwhelmed by the storm surge and sustained considerable damage.
Sandy’s extensive storm surge inundated New York’s 32-mile long Fire Island with water
and sand, destroyed or washed away 200 homes, and obliterated protective sand dunes. Atlantic
Ocean water breached the island in three places, but about 4,000 homes survived because of the
protection offered by the dunes.
The fishing industry in the New Jersey and New York areas also suffered heavy losses,
with millions of dollars of damage to the local docks, marinas, restaurants, and fish processing
plants. BoatUS estimated that Sandy destroyed more than 65,000 boats and caused marinerelated damage of about $650 million to New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
New England

18

Sandy’s high winds and storm surge also affected New England, with coastal sections
from Connecticut through Massachusetts experiencing the worst of the conditions there. While
the overall damage there was less than along the New York and New Jersey coasts, significant
impacts occurred.
Storm surge flooding severely affected coastal Connecticut, with
approximately 3,000 homes damaged; preliminary estimates of damage in that state are about
$360 million. Major coastal flooding in Rhode Island rivaled the impact from Hurricane Bob in
1991. The strong winds and rough seas sank a 50-ft barge in Bar Harbor, Maine, with another
three vessels either sinking or being set adrift by the storm along coastal Maine. The most
significant inland effects across the region were widespread power outages and downed trees.
Elsewhere in the United States
Blizzard conditions and heavy wet snow made roads impassable during the storm in West
Virginia and western North Carolina, with the weight of the snow causing a number of structures
to collapse. Strong winds caused many downed trees, and about 271,000 people lost electricity
at some point in those areas. Damage related to the storm extended well inland as far west as the
Ohio Valley and portions of the Midwest, with the main impact being power outages. Strong
winds directly associated with the post-tropical cyclone occurred as far west as Wisconsin (e.g.
Fig. 16), and generated rather large waves on Lake Michigan and some coastal flooding on its
southern shore.
Canada
Sandy’s far-reaching effects extended into Canada where a woman in Toronto died after
a piece of a sign struck her in the head. One indirect death was also recorded due to an
electrocution in Sarnia, Ontario. About 200,000 customers lost power at the height of the storm
in Canada. Property Claim Services Canada estimates that insured property damage to be about
$100 million (Canadian).

d.

Forecast and Warning Critique

The genesis forecasts for Sandy were excellent. The precursor wave was introduced in
the Tropical Weather Outlook (TWO) with a low chance (10%) of genesis 66 h prior to tropical
cyclone formation and the probability was increased to a high chance (60%) 42 h prior to
genesis. In addition to providing above-average lead times on genesis, the TWOs issued within
36 h of tropical cyclone formation indicated the threat of heavy rains that could produce lifethreatening flash floods and mudslides across Jamaica, eastern Cuba and Hispaniola.
A verification of NHC official track forecasts for Sandy is given in Table 10a. Official
forecast (OFCL) track errors were well below the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr
period at all time periods, and about 50% better than the long-term mean from 48 to 96 h. The
OCD5 (CLIPER) errors for this system were larger than the mean, suggesting these forecasts
were more difficult than normal, likely because of Sandy’s sinuous track, and as a consequence
the OFCL forecasts displayed a substantial amount of skill. A homogeneous comparison of the

19

official track errors with selected guidance models is given in Table 10b. The GFS ensemble
mean (AEMI), the Florida State Superensemble (FSSE) and the Atlantic Dynamical Model
Consensus (TVCA) all performed a bit better than the official forecast through 48 h. Although
the performance of the European Center for Medium-range Weather Forecasts (ECWMF) model
(EMXI) was unremarkable through 72 h, its days four and five forecasts were superior by far,
with extremely low errors. Most of the GFS-based guidance (including the HWFI and GHMI)
was less skillful, although the GHMI did outperform the official forecast at day 5. The ECMWF
model was one of the first to show the northwestward turn of Sandy at six and seven days (e.g.
Fig. 31b), even while most of the rest of the guidance showed the cyclone staying offshore of the
East Coast. Five days before landfall, the European ensemble guidance (Fig. 32) had a
significant number of members correctly showing the track of Sandy bending back toward the
United States, while the GFS ensemble members were mostly out to sea.
A verification of NHC official intensity forecasts for Sandy is given in Table 11a.
Official forecast intensity errors were near the mean official errors for the previous 5-yr period at
12 and 24 h, and much below the long-term mean from 36 to 120 h. The OCD5 (DecaySHIFOR) errors for this system were larger than the mean for Sandy except at 48 and 72 h. The
OFCL forecasts were quite skillful, although the forecasts had a bit of a low bias. The higher
OFCL errors in the 12-24 h time frame appear to be mostly due to a significant under-forecast of
the intensity of Sandy at landfall in Cuba. Only a few model forecasts even showed Sandy
reaching category 2 strength, with OFCL forecasts generally calling for a category 1 hurricane at
Cuban landfall. A homogeneous comparison of the official intensity errors with selected
guidance models is given in Table 11b. Overall, the official intensity forecasts were superior to
much of the model guidance throughout the period, with the greatest exception being at 120 h.
The HWRF was generally as good as or better than the official intensity forecasts, which is
perhaps fortuitous since it struggled with the track forecast. It is of note that the EMXI and GFSI
models beat the statistical-dynamical guidance (DSHP, LGEM) at 72-120 h, perhaps being able
to better forecast the wind field of Sandy due to its large size being relatively well resolved and
the importance of baroclinic influences with this cyclone.
The initial NHC storm surge inundation forecast of 4 to 8 ft above ground level for the
New Jersey, New York, and Connecticut coastlines was issued in the 1500 UTC 27 October
NHC public advisory, well over two days prior to landfall of the center of the cyclone. Later, the
forecast values were gradually increased for Long Island Sound, Raritan Bay, and New York
Harbor, to 5 to 10 ft at 0600 UTC 28 October (nearly 42 h before landfall) and to 6 to 11 ft at
1500 UTC 28 October (more than 32 h before landfall). These forecasts were quite good, given
USGS high-water marks and NOS tide gauge data that suggest the highest inundation in areas
bordering New York Harbor and Raritan Bay was about 9 ft. Maximum inundation was about 5
to 6 ft on the Jersey Shore and the Connecticut coastline, which also fell within the forecast
range of 4 to 8 ft.
The NHC storm surge forecasts also verified well for the rest of the U.S. East Coast. For
the New England coast, storm surge inundation forecasts were generally 3 to 6 ft above ground
level for Rhode Island and southern Massachusetts, and the maximum inundation that occurred
was 3 to 5 ft. The surge inundation forecast called for 2 to 4 ft for eastern Massachusetts and
New Hampshire and 1 to 3 ft for Maine, both of which verified well.

20

To the south, the NHC storm surge inundation forecast was 2 to 4 ft above ground level
for southeastern Virginia and parts of the Delmarva Peninsula and 4 to 8 ft north of Ocean City,
Maryland. Actual inundation values were 3 to 5 ft for Delaware and 2 to 4 ft for Maryland and
Virginia. These ranges verified reasonably well since they straddled the forecast ranges. In
North Carolina, the storm surge inundation forecast was 3 to 5 ft, which verified well based on
limited data in the region. The forecasts also verified well in Florida, where an inundation of 1
to 3 ft matched the NHC forecast.
Tropical cyclone watches and warnings associated with Sandy are listed in Table 12. A
tropical storm watch was issued along the southeastern Florida coast at 1200 UTC 24 October
and was extended northward to cover the remainder of the east coast of Florida and Lake
Okeechobee by 2100 UTC that day. The tropical storm watch was modified to a warning for
Sebastian Inlet southward at 2100 UTC 24 October and was extended northward through Flagler
Beach at 0900 UTC 25 October. Tropical storm conditions, mainly confined to the immediate
coast, arrived over extreme southeastern Florida as early as 0000 UTC 26 October and spread
northward that morning, giving most areas a shorter-than-desired lead time of at least 36 h after
the watch was issued and about 30 h after the warning. Tropical-storm-force winds reached the
east-central Florida coast around 1800 UTC 26 October and spread northward along the
northeastern coast of the state through about 0600 UTC 27 October, with the watch and warning
providing about 48 h and 36 h of lead times, respectively.
A tropical storm watch was issued along a portion of the southeastern United States coast
from the Savannah River through Oregon Inlet, North Carolina, including the Pamlico Sound, at
0900 UTC 26 October. The tropical storm watch was changed to a tropical storm warning from
South Santee River, South Carolina, to Duck, North Carolina, including the Pamlico and
Albemarle Sounds, at 2100 UTC that day. Tropical storm conditions began to affect portions of
the south-central and central North Carolina coast about 36 h after the watch was issued and 24 h
after the warning across these areas. The lead time was somewhat longer farther north along the
Outer Banks, where tropical storm conditions did not begin until the early morning hours of 28
October.
In the mid-Atlantic and northeastern United States, Sandy posed unprecedented forecast
and warning challenges. Not only was it a massive hurricane expected to affect a large portion
of those states with a wide variety of hazards, it was also forecast to lose its tropical
characteristics and evolve into a post-tropical cyclone at some point prior to making landfall. The
implications for National Weather Service (NWS) products and warnings, the continuity of
information, and potential options for dealing with the transition were discussed within the
NWS, and between the NWS and emergency managers, beginning five days before landfall.
After considering many approaches, three days before Sandy reached the U.S. coast the NWS
decided to communicate Sandy’s specific impacts in the landfall area with NHC advisories, and
with high wind watches and warnings issued by local NWS Weather Forecast Offices (WFOs).
These high wind watches and warnings for Sandy were issued over 60 h before the center made
landfall. An overarching consideration was the NWS understanding of the preference of the
emergency management (EM) community that the warning type not change once watches and

21

warnings were initiated, because that would cause an unacceptable level of confusion and
disruption during critical periods of preparation that included evacuations.
At the time hurricane watches would have been issued, about two to three days before
landfall, the timing of the expected offshore transition to a post-tropical cyclone was uncertain.
Based on current NWS policy and procedures, had hurricane watches and warnings initially been
used, and had Sandy become post-tropical well offshore, the NWS would have had to choose
from one of three unacceptable options:
One option would have been to follow existing protocol and transfer forecast
responsibility to other NWS offices, cancel the hurricane warning, and switch to local WFO
warnings. NHC advisories would have ceased. This would have caused widespread confusion,
potentially impeded preparations and evacuations, and directly contradicted the desires and
efforts of the EMs.
Another option would have been to continue to call Sandy a hurricane when it really was
not one (potentially for a full day or two) in order to maintain NHC advisories and the hurricane
warning. Intentionally misrepresenting Sandy as a hurricane would have severely damaged the
credibility of the NWS and undermined its ability to serve the public for years to come.
A third option would have been to properly call Sandy post-tropical but continue to issue
NHC advisories and leave up the hurricane warning. However, a procedure for disseminating
post-tropical advisories with tropical warnings had never been developed, tested, or publicized,
and the NWS feared that hurriedly crafting and implementing untested procedures could easily
break automated vendor software and disrupt the flow of information to users at a critical
moment.
To avoid these possible outcomes and comply with EM preferences, the NWS decided to
issue non-tropical warnings, communicating clearly this warning strategy to NWS partners,
while placing special emphasis on Sandy’s hazards, including via numerous interactions with
federal, state, and local EMs and national and local media.
At the conclusion of each hurricane season NOAA conducts a review of operations and
considers options to enhance its products and services. Following the annual post-season NOAA
Hurricane Meeting that took place in November 2012, the NWS is exploring two proposals that,
if adopted, would result in some changes to NWS products and warnings. The first proposal
originates from the unique situation posed by Hurricane Sandy; it would give the NHC the
option to continue issuing formal advisories on post-tropical cyclones as long as those systems
pose a significant threat to life and property, and it would give the NWS the option to keep
hurricane and tropical storm watches and warnings in place for those systems.
With this proposed change, the NWS would eliminate the product and warning dilemmas
faced during Sandy, and have more options to handle any tropical or post-tropical cyclone in a
more seamless fashion. The hurricane warning definition would be broadened to apply to
systems after their tropical cyclone stage has ended, thus allowing hurricane or tropical storm
watches and warnings to remain in effect for post-tropical cyclones. In addition, the NWS would

22

ensure the continuity of service in any situation by allowing the NHC to issue advisories through
the post-tropical cyclone stage as long as the system poses a significant threat to life and
property.
The second proposal would set a target date of 2015 for NOAA to implement explicit
storm surge watches and warnings, a goal NOAA has been working toward for several years.
Tropical cyclones have killed more than 25,000 people in the continental United States, with a
majority of those deaths attributable to storm surge. Except for the 1940s, storm surge has
claimed hundreds or even thousands of lives in at least one storm in each decade from at least as
far back as the 1870s through the 1960s. More than a thousand lives again were lost in the
decade just concluded, with most of these attributable to Katrina’s storm surge. It was the storm
surge hazard that caused numerous fatalities and most of the damage with Sandy, as well as the
extensive evacuations necessary to prevent an even larger loss of life. Despite this history,
multiple studies have shown significant confusion on the part of the public regarding their storm
surge risk, and highlighted the need for improved communication of this hazard. With the
implementation of a storm surge warning, the NWS will warn explicitly for the phenomenon that
presents the greatest weather-related threat for a massive loss of life in a single day.

e.

Acknowledgements

Thanks are extended to NWS WFOs in Eastern, Central and Southern Regions. Most of
the information from the data tables has been extracted from the WFO Post-Storm Reports,
Local Storm Reports and Public Information Statements. The National Data Buoy Center, the
National Ocean Service, and the United States Geological Survey all supplied surface and storm
surge data. The New Jersey Weather and Climate Network, WeatherFlow, WeatherBug, Texas
Tech University and Ham Radio operators all provided important observations for this report.
All of these contributions were useful in constructing the data tables and writing the casualty and
damage section of this report. David Roth of the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center
contributed additional rainfall information, Figs. 26 and 27, and post-analysis surface maps of
Sandy near landfall that contributed to Figs. 22 and 23. Two individuals at NHC are worthy of
mention: William Booth provided helpful GIS guidance on the creation of the storm surge maps,
and Michael Brennan produced several of the figures.

23

Table 1.

Best track for Hurricane Sandy, 22 – 29 October 2012.

Date/Time
(UTC)

Latitude
(N)

Longitude
(W)

Pressure
(mb)

Wind
Speed
(kt)

Stage

21 / 1800
22 / 0000
22 / 0600
22 / 1200
22 / 1800
23 / 0000
23 / 0600
23 / 1200
23 / 1800
24 / 0000
24 / 0600
24 / 1200
24 / 1800
24 / 1900
25 / 0000
25 / 0525
25 / 0600
25 / 0900
25 / 1200
25 / 1800
26 / 0000
26 / 0600
26 / 1200
26 / 1800
27 / 0000
27 / 0600
27 / 1200
27 / 1800
28 / 0000
28 / 0600
28 / 1200
28 / 1800
29 / 0000
29 / 0600
29 / 1200
29 / 1800
29 / 2100
29 / 2330
30 / 0000

14.3
13.9
13.5
13.1
12.7
12.6
12.9
13.4
14.0
14.7
15.6
16.6
17.7
17.9
18.9
20.0
20.1
20.9
21.7
23.3
24.8
25.7
26.4
27.0
27.5
28.1
28.8
29.7
30.5
31.3
32.0
32.8
33.9
35.3
36.9
38.3
38.8
39.4
39.5

77.4
77.8
78.2
78.6
78.7
78.4
78.1
77.9
77.6
77.3
77.1
76.9
76.7
76.6
76.4
76.0
76.0
75.7
75.5
75.3
75.9
76.4
76.9
77.2
77.1
76.9
76.5
75.6
74.7
73.9
73.0
72.0
71.0
70.5
71.0
73.2
74.0
74.4
74.5

1006
1005
1003
1002
1000
998
998
995
993
990
987
981
972
971
964
954
954
960
966
963
965
968
970
971
969
968
956
960
960
959
954
952
950
947
945
940
943
945
946

25
25
25
30
35
40
40
40
45
55
60
65
75
75
85
100
100
95
95
90
75
70
65
65
60
60
70
70
65
65
65
65
70
80
85
80
75
70
70

low
"
"
tropical depression
tropical storm
"
"
"
"
"
"
hurricane
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
tropical storm
"
hurricane
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
"
extratropical
"
"

24

30 / 0600
30 / 1200
30 / 1800
31 / 0000
31 / 0600
31 / 1200
31 / 1800
25 / 0525
29 / 1800
24 / 1900

39.9
40.1
40.4
40.7
41.1
41.5

76.2
77.8
78.9
79.8
80.3
80.7

960
978
986
992
993
995

55
50
40
35
35
30

20.0
38.3
17.9

76.0
73.2
76.6

954
940
971

100
80
75

25 / 0525

20.0

76.0

954

100

29 / 2330

39.4

74.4

945

70

25

"
"
"
"
"
"
dissipated
maximum winds
minimum pressure
landfall near Bull Bay,
Jamaica
landfall about 10 n mi
west of Santiago de
Cuba, Santiago de
Cuba.
landfall near
Brigantine, NJ
(extratropical)

Table 2. Selected ship reports for Hurricane Sandy, 22-29 October 2012. Note that this table
includes some reports from when Sandy was extratropical.
Date/Time
(UTC)
24 / 0000
24 / 0600
25 / 0600
25 / 1000
25 / 1200
25 / 2100
26 / 0100
26 / 0200
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0400
26 / 0600
26 / 0600
26 / 0600
26 / 0700
26 / 1000
26 / 1100
26 / 1200
26 / 1800
26 / 1800
26 / 1800
26 / 2200
27 / 0000
27 / 0300
27 / 0600
27 / 0600
27 / 0900
27 / 0900
27 / 1100
27 / 1100

Ship call sign
MHNN5
A8SF9
H3VU
H3GR
9VMG5
H3VC
C6FZ9
C6PZ8
3ETA7
D5BI3
H3GS
H3VC
C6PZ8
C6PZ8
D5BI3
J8NW
C6PZ8
C6PZ8
C6PZ8
9VMG5
C6ZL6
DGDD
H3VU
C6FM9
WKAW
C6FM8
C6VG7
WJBJ
WJBJ
WKAW
C6VG7
WDC673

Latitude
(N)
11.5
11.5
23.4
24.6
26.1
24.7
28.0
24.9
20.8
24.8
29.2
24.1
25.2
25.5
24.3
24.5
25.7
25.9
25.8
25.5
24.6
32.6
32.5
30.1
28.7
24.3
25.0
28.9
27.9
31.0
25.7
31.6

Longitude
(W)
74.3
75.4
74.7
80.7
74.2
80.0
80.1
79.6
73.9
79.4
80.3
81.0
79.5
79.5
80.3
73.3
79.5
79.6
79.8
79.5
79.4
78.3
79.0
80.1
79.6
81.4
80.1
80.2
80.0
79.2
80.1
80.4

26

Wind
dir/speed (kt)
360 / 42
210 / 36
080 / 35
070 / 40
100 / 37
050 / 37
060 / 45
040 / 60
190 / 51
020 / 45
080 / 41
030 / 37
040 / 62
030 / 60
010 / 36
340 / 64
030 / 60
020 / 43
350 / 47
040 / 37
270 / 45
040 / 45
030 / 40
030 / 52
010 / 60
360 / 43
290 / 51
010 / 47
330 / 38
010 / 56
270 / 35
020 / 44

Pressure
(mb)
1004.3
1004.0
1004.0
1013.0
1004.0
1002.0
1008.0
1007.0
998.0
1001.5
1007.0
1004.0
1004.0
1004.0
1000.9
993.5
1002.0
1000.0
1000.0
996.0
989.0
1008.5
1010.0
1003.0
998.5
1002.0
1002.4
996.1
994.1
994.0
1001.0
999.0

Date/Time
(UTC)
27 / 1200
27 / 1400
27 / 1500
27 / 1500
27 / 1600
27 / 1800
27 / 1800
27 / 1800
27 / 1800
27 / 2100
28 / 0000
28 / 0000
28 / 0000
28 / 0300
28 / 0300
28 / 0300
28 / 0400
28 / 0600
28 / 0600
28 / 0600
28 / 0800
28 / 0900
28 / 0900
28 / 1100
28 / 1500
28 / 1800
28 / 1800
28 / 1800
29 / 0000
29 / 0000
29 / 0300
29 / 0600
29 / 0600
29 / 0800
29 / 1000

Ship call sign
WRAH
C6PZ8
C6PZ8
WKAW
C6PZ8
3EBL5
DGZN
PHCQ
WKAW
WKAW
A8SG4
C6UZ7
WKAW
H3GS
WKAW
H3GS
C6FZ9
WKAW
KIRH
WDD612
C6FM9
WDD612
WKAW
3FPS9
WKAW
DGSE
WKPN
WRYD
DHBN
WKAW
WKAW
WKAU
WKPN
ZCEF6
H3VS

Latitude
(N)
32.0
25.2
25.3
31.8
25.5
22.4
24.4
32.5
32.1
32.4
29.7
26.3
32.5
32.3
32.7
32.3
28.0
35.6
33.3
28.0
29.0
28.7
33.2
36.6
33.6
40.3
38.2
38.4
40.4
34.7
35.1
37.9
39.3
40.4
37.2

Longitude
(W)
79.8
79.5
79.5
78.2
79.6
77.8
80.1
79.3
77.8
77.5
80.3
78.5
77.2
79.6
76.9
79.6
80.2
75.1
66.2
80.0
80.3
80.1
76.6
75.5
75.9
71.2
71.0
69.1
66.2
75.3
75.0
74.3
66.8
68.8
75.1

27

Wind
dir/speed (kt)
020 / 37
280 / 55
280 / 55
020 / 60
280 / 54
320 / 37
320 / 40
360 / 55
020 / 72
020 / 63
350 / 45
290 / 44
010 / 60
360 / 40
010 / 64
360 / 40
300 / 35
320 / 55
100 / 42
320 / 40
330 / 40
310 / 40
020 / 63
010 / 55
010 / 60
060 / 50
080 / 37
100 / 44
050 / 37
300 / 60
360 / 60
360 / 44
100 / 42
060 / 44
340 / 44

Pressure
(mb)
1000.1
1004.0
1004.0
991.4
1004.0
1003.0
1005.0
999.1
988.0
987.0
998.0
999.0
987.0
998.0
988.5
998.0
1003.0
986.0
997.1
1003.0
1002.0
1003.0
987.0
998.0
988.0
1004.0
993.8
996.5
1004.0
988.0
986.8
989.0
995.0
992.2
989.0

Date/Time
(UTC)
29 / 1200
29 / 1200
29 / 1200
29 / 1200
29 / 1800
29 / 2100
29 / 2200
29 / 2300
30 / 0200
30 / 0200
30 / 0300
30 / 0500
30 / 0800
30 / 0900
30 / 1100
30 / 1200
30 / 1200
30 / 1200
30 / 1800

Ship call sign
3FPS9
LAOW5
WKAU
WKPY
WKPY
WKAW
WDB683
WDB683
VGJD
VGMV
WXU343
WCZ970
WZD246
VDFP
WZD246
VDWC
WDD612
WE3806
WCV762

Latitude
(N)
34.0
40.4
35.7
40.4
40.8
36.4
42.6
42.6
42.0
41.9
41.9
42.0
41.9
45.0
41.9
45.8
35.9
45.8
45.7

Longitude
(W)
76.3
69.4
74.9
69.0
67.3
75.1
81.3
81.3
82.6
82.6
82.7
82.0
82.8
83.3
82.8
83.2
75.2
83.1
84.8

28

Wind
dir/speed (kt)
320 / 50
050 / 52
320 / 37
090 / 37
130 / 47
270 / 52
350 / 51
350 / 40
340 / 48
350 / 45
240 / 50
330 / 42
340 / 41
360 / 35
340 / 42
010 / 38
250 / 40
010 / 40
360 / 35

Pressure
(mb)
994.0
986.0
985.0
987.5
992.0
983.5
1004.1
1003.4

1006.4
998.3
998.3
1005.5

996.5
1005.7
1005.7

Table 3. Selected surface observations for Hurricane Sandy, 22-29 October 2012. Note that this
table includes reports from when Sandy was extratropical.
Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

24/0559

996.7

24/0559

49j

64

26/2100

992.0

26/2350

48f

64

Cabo Lucrecia (78365)

25/1000

966.7

25/0910

81*

103*

3.47

Contramaestre (78363)

25/0700

978.4

25/0554

43

69

5.01

25/0555

86

143

11.12

Location

Total
rain
(in)

International
Buoy/CMAN
Buoy 42058
14.92N 74.92W
Height: 5.0 m
Settlement Point C-MAN (SPGF1)
26.70N 78.99W
Height: 9.8 m
Cuba

Gran Piedra (78366)
Elevation: 1130 m
Guantánamo (78368)

25/0700

990.4

25/0730

46

76

4.54

Guaro (78370)

25/0810

960.2

25/0640

65

86

3.56

Holguín (78372)

25/0800

986.1

25/0835

47

78

3.32

25/0710

992.8

25/0235

36

59

3.82

25/0800

988.3

25/0830

40

54

4.22

25/0900

991.2

25/0955

36

59

5.67

25/0925

73

119

7.06

25/0301

43

55

1.26

Jamal (78356)
Elevation: 165 m
La Jíquima (78362)
Palenque de Yateras (78334)
Elevation: 406 m
Pinares de Mayarí (78371)
Elevation: 646 m
Punta de Maisí (78369)

25/0810

993.8

Santiago de Cuba (78364)
Valle de Caujerí (78319)
Elevation: 184.8 m
Velasco (78378)

25/0517

99*

25/0608

988.8

25/0610

43

73

4.56

25/0900

986.2

25/0740

39

53

3.30

El Cobre, Santiago de Cuba

9.39

La Majagua, Santiago de Cuba

9.84

Cruce de los Baños

9.74

Estación Hidrométrica La Virgen

7.55

Hatibonico

7.39

Jiguaní

6.74

29

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

Banes

6.50

Potrerillo

6.42

San Antonio del Sur

6.42

Jamaica
Barton Isles

24/2030

993.3

Belvedere Estates

24/1830

Bunkers Hill

24/2100

994.9

Happy Grove

24/2000

977.6

Fair Prospect
Kingston (78397)

24/1926

972.1

32

59

4.06
24/1500

27

46

9.65

24/2000

38

81

11.57

24/2020

46

59

8.04

Mill Bank
Mitchell Town

16.01

28.09
24/1900

986.3

24/1500

16

32

5.99

Montego Bay (78388)

1.94

Morant Point (78399)

8.28

Negril (78387)

24/2302

Orange River

24/2100

22

51

Passley Gardens

24/2000

27

65

12.17

Penlyne Castle

24/2200

22

51

21.42

Tulloch

24/1900

24

40

5.49

St. Mary Banana Estate

24/2000

32

54

12.72

Siri Mandeville

24/2000

22

49

3.11

Worthy Park

24/2000

22

57

4.06
10.50

Woodford

35

24/1900

975.0

24/1900

22

59

Nassau (MYNN)

26/1000

988.1

26/1000

40

43

Providenciales (MBPV)

25/1900

1000.0

Bahamas/Turks & Caicos

Sans Souci, New Providence

45
25/2047

45

Bermuda
Bermuda Airport (TXKF)

29/0320

994.8

Commissioner’s Point
Elevation: 30 m
Marine Operations Center
Elevation: 78 m

28/0200

32

50

29/0050

35

51

29/0200

30

52

1.20

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/0324

993.9

29/1354

28

38

27/2036

993.2

28/0453

51j

56

28/2039

975.8

28/2311

50j

60

Boca Chica NAS (KNQX)

26/1953

1002.9

25/1935

25

39

Cape Canaveral AF Strip (KXMR)

27/0855

996.6

27/0323

24

35

1.51

Daytona Beach (KDAB)

27/0934

998.9

26/2351

33

43

1.56

Ft. Lauderdale Intl. (KFLL)

26/1753

999.0

26/0547

26

42

0.99

Fort Pierce/St. Lucie (KFPR)

27/0901

996.8

26/0416

23

35

1.33

Homestead Air Reserve (KHST)

26/1755

1000.8

25/2044

35

45

1.92

Jacksonville Naval Air Station (KNIP)

27/0953

1001.7

26/1653

25

34

Location

Total
rain
(in)

Marine Observations
Esso Pier NOS (BEPB6)
32.37N 64.70W
Height: 3.1 m
Buoy 41047
27.47N 71.49W
Height: 10.0 m
Buoy 41048
31.95N 69.50W
Height: 5.0 m
United States
Florida
ICAO Sites

Kendall-Tamiami Executive Airport
(KTMB)
Leesburg Intl. (KLEE)

27/1011

1001.6

26/1744

Marathon Airport (KMTH)

26/1953

1001.6

Mayport Naval Station (KNRB)

27/0952

Melbourne Intl. (KMLB)

27/0905

25/2325

42

1.65

26

36

0.04

25/1839

32

41

0.92

1001.4

26/2052

23

35

996.8

26/1310

36

49

1.66

Miami Intl. (KMIA)

25/2206

35

1.61

Opa-Locka Executive Airport (KOPF)

25/2200

43

2.49

Orlando Executive (KORL)

27/0842

1000.2

26/1954

27

38

0.48

Orlando Intl. (KMCO)

27/0934

999.6

26/2011

32

40

0.30

Orlando/Sanford (KSFB)

27/0937

999.6

26/1646

29

37

0.98

45

1.87

Palm Beach Intl. (KPBI)

26/1838

Patrick AFB/Cocoa (KCOF)

27/0717

997.6

26/1814

33

48

1.35

Pompano Beach Air Park (KPMP)

26/1753

998.8

25/2142

29

45

1.24

Shuttle Landing Facility (KTTS)

26/2155

1001.4

26/1809

31

42

1.02

31

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
St. Augustine Airport (KSGJ)
Titusville Space Coast Regional
(KTIX)
Vero Beach (KVRB)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

27/0958

1000.8

26/2358

26

42

27/1747

25

41

27/0946

996.8

26/2040

30

46

26/1800

998.4

25/2250

46f

58

27/0800

997.2

26/1400

39

49

26/2000

1001.4

26/0000

32f

42

27/1000

1003.2

26/1624

27i

34i

26/2000

999.7

25/1930

42f

59

26/2006

1001.3

26/1654

25*

34*

26/1800

998.6

25/2148

36

46

27/1000

1000.7

26/2340

38f

46

26/0900

1002.1

25/1850

40f

48

27/1948

1000.2

27/1424

25*

35*

6/1954

1002.0

25/1842

33

41

26/1747

999

25/1917

33

49

26/1930

997.4

25/1706

27

43

Marine Observations
Fowey Rocks C-MAN (FWYF1)
25.59N 80.10W
Height: 43.9 m
Lake Worth NOS (LKWF1)
26.61N 80.03W
Height: 6.0 m
Long Key C-MAN (LONF1)
24.84N 80.86W
Height: 7.0 m
Mayport NOS (MYPF1)
30.40N 81.43W
Molasses Reef C-MAN (MLRF1)
25.01N 80.38W
Height: 15.8 m
NW Florida Bay COMPS (NFBF1)
25.08N 81.92W
Height: 5.5 m
Port Everglades ICON (PVGF1)
26.09N 80.11W
Height: 3.5 m
Saint Augustine C-MAN (SAUF1)
29.86N 81.26W
Height: 16.5 m
Sombrero Key C-MAN (SMKF1)
28.42N 81.11W
Height: 48.5 m
Trident Pier NOS (TRDF1)
28.42N 80.59W
Height: 6.4 m
Vaca Key NOS (VCAF1)
24.71N 81.11W
Height: 6.4 m
Virginia Key HANDAR (VIK)
25.73N 80.16W
Height: 22.0 m
Virginia Key NOS (VAKF1)
25.73 80.16W
Height: 10.3 m

32

Total
rain
(in)

1.03

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Buoy 41009
28.52 N 80.18W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41010
28.91N 78.47W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41012
29.99N 80.60W
Height: 5.0 m
South Florida Water Management

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

27/0850

993.3

27/0020

41

51

27/0920

981.4

27/1250

54

68

27/1510

996.1

27/1450

38

47

4 S Intersection U.S. 27 (S30)
25.95N 80.43W
Krome Detention Center (S335)
25.74N 80.49W
Krome Detention Center 5 S (S338)
25.67N 80.48W
Lake Okeechobee Center (LZ40 )
26.09N 80.79W
Height: 8 m
Lake Okeechobee North (L001 )
27.14N 80.79W
Height: 8 m
Lake Okeechobee South (L006 )
26.82N 80.78W
Height: 15 m
WeatherBug

Total
rain
(in)

2.88
2.29
2.18

Boca Raton
26.41N 80.08W
Coconut Grove
25.73N 80.24W
Davie
26.08N 80.31W
Delray Beach
26.46N 80.08W
Deerfield Beach
26.31N 80.11W
Hialeah
25.87N 80.33W
Jupiter
26.94N 80.08W
Kendale Lakes
25.72N 80.45W
Miami Beach
25.81N 80.13W

26/2100

31*

49*

26/2000

29*

44*

26/2115

35*

48*

41*i
34*i
48*i
41*i
35*i
39*i
44*i
40*i
41*i

33

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Miami Beach
25.86N 80.13W
Miramar
25.98N 80.35W
Port Everglades
26.09N 80.12W
Sunny Isles
25.94N 80.12W
West Palm Beach
26.68N 80.06W
WeatherFlow
Biscayne (XBIS)
25.69N 80.17W
Height: 22.0 m
Biscayne Bay Light 20 (XKBS )
25.66N 80.19W
Height: 6 m
Boca Raton (XBOC)
26.37N 80.09W
Height: 21 m
Boynton Beach (XBOY)
26.55N 80.05W
Height: 10 m
Cocoa Beach Pier (XCCO)
28.37N 80.60W
Crandon (XCRN)
25.72N 80.15W
Height: 8 m
Cutler (XCUT )
25.63N 80.30W
Height: 10 m
Dinner Key (XDIN)
25.71N 80.21W
Height: 5 m
Egmont Channel
Height: 14 m
Hobe Sound (XHOB)
27.05N 80.16W
Hollywood (XNHD)
26.02N 80.13W
Height: 14 m
Jacksonville Beach Pier
30.29N 81.38W
Height: 10 m

Gust
(kt)
42*i
49*i
37*i
36*i
44*i

26/1730

26/2040

998.4

996.3

25/1920

31*

44*

25/2205

36

46

25/2220

29*

48*

26/0935

32

49

26/1325

34*i

45*i

26/1745

999.5

25/2250

39

49

26/1720

999.4

25/1925

22

37

26/1735

999.4

25/2235

35

44

27/0230

32

37

26/2040

25*i

43*i

25/2245

23

40

27/0436

35

40

26/1740

996.3

34

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Jensen Beach (XJEN)
27.22N 80.20W
Height: 10 m
Jupiter (XJUP)
26.89N 80.06W
Height: 6 m
Key Biscayne (XKBI)
25.69N 80.17W
Height: 22 m
Key West USCG Sector (WF35504)
24.57N 81.80W
Marathon Key (WF504)
24.74N 80.98W
Mangonia Park (XMGN )
26.76N 80.07W
Height: 21 m
New Smyrna Beach (XNSB)
29.05N 80.90W
Height: 10 m
North Miami (XNMI)
25.91N 80.16W
Height: 17 m
Pompano Beach (XPOM)
26.24N 80.09W
Height: 9 m
Port Everglades (XPEG)
26.09N 80.12W
Height: 41 m
Rocky Point
Height: 7 m
St. Lucie Plant (XSTL)
27.34N 80.24W
Smith Shoal Light (WF76402)
24.72N 81.92W
South Key Largo (WF102)
25.10N 80.43W
Height: 18 m
Summer House
Height: 6 m
Turkey Point (XTKY)
25.43N 80.35W
Height: 20 m
Upper Matecumbe Key (WF999)
24.92N 80.64W
Height: 18 m

Date/
time
(UTC)

27/0000

Press.
(mb)

994.4

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

26/2030

34*

45*

26/2035

41*

58*

25/2305

30*

49*

27/1950

27i

34i

25/2340

24i

38i

26/1500

25

40

27/0330

37*

48*

26/1710

995.4

25/2310

30

47

26/1755

997.3

26/0135

42

51

25/2215

44*

55*

27/0045

33

41

26/0415

39*i

51*i

25/2210

35i

43i

25/2250

22

38

27/0025

31

39

25/2310

37

52

26/2210

28

42

26/0805

998.6

35

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

West Palm Beach (XWPM )
26.65N 80.06W
Height: 13 m
CWOP
Curry Hammock State Park (DW507)
24.74N 80.98W
Cudjoe Key (CW0925)
24.65N 81.48W
Islamorada Fire Rescue Station 20
(DW1872)
24.92N 80.64W
Long Key FKAA Pump Station
(CW0922)
24.84N 80.79W
Height: 15 m
Ramrod Key FKAA Pump Station
(CW0924)
24.66N 81.41W
Ramrod Key 0.7 SE (DW8495)
24.65N 81.41W
Height: 8 m
Georgia

26/1943

1000.7

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

25/2125

21*

37*

25/2323

22i

36i

25/1401

35i

50i

26/1943

999.0

26/2203

24i

35i

26/1931

1000.1

25/1401

35

50

26/1951

1001.4

25/1911

20i

37i

27/1852

24

36

Total
rain
(in)

Marine Observations
Fort Pulaski (FPKG1)
32.03N 80.90W
Elevation: 6.7 m
South Carolina

27/1924

1000.8

30/0206

29

35

30/0753

997.6

28/0453

21

39

27/2030

1001.5

28/0915

28i

34i

ICAO Sites
North Myrtle Beach (KCRE)
Marine Observations
Fort Johnson NERRS (FJXS1)
32.75N 79.90W
Lake Thurmond (CHDS1)
33.66N 82.20W
Height: 2.1 m
Buoy 41004
32.50N 79.10W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41008
31.40N 80.87W
Height: 5.0 m
North Carolina

29/2200

37

27/2000

995.2

27/1400

41

51

27/2050

1000.4

27/1250

31

39

36

0.45

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

Beaufort Airport (KMRH)

28/1856

993.0

28/1256

33

47

3.02

Bogue Air Field (KNJM)

29/2157

994.5

28/1309

20

38

2.20

ICAO Sites

Boone Watauga County Airport
(KTNB)
Elevation: 911 m
First Flight Airport (KFFA)

29/2335
29/1935

986.1

29/2035

52
24

Greensboro (KGSO)

42
40

Hatteras Frisco Airport (KHSE)

29/2151

990.0

29/2251

24*

47*

Jacksonville Airport (KOAJ)

28/2035

997.3

28/0435

22

35

8.09

Jefferson Ashe County Airport (KGEV)
Elevation: 969 m
Manteo/Dare County Airport (KMQI)

29/1855

986.8

28/0935

33

49

New Bern (KEWN)

29/2054

993.2

28/0849

22

38

2.35

New River Air Station (KNCA)

29/2156

995.0

28/1123

25

36

3.09

28/1028

23

37

2.81

30/0615

61

WFO Newport/Morehead City
(KMHX)
Piney Island Bombing Range (KNBT)

28/2056

992.0

29/0156

33

44

2.81

Wilmington (KILM)

29/2053

995.9

28/1153

24

33

2.08

28/1912

991.4

28/1048

33

46

28/1900

992.8

28/1100

39

48

30/2100

993.0

29/1240

47

58

29/0450

49

60

Marine Observations
Beaufort Tide Gauge NOS (BFTN7)
34.72N 76.67W
Height: 7.0 m
Cape Lookout C-MAN (CLKN7)
34.60N 76.52W
Height: 9.8 m
Cedar Island (CITN7)
35.10N 76.30W
Height: 10.0 m
Duck Field Research Facility - USACE
36.20N 75.80W
Height: 19.4m
Duck Tide Gauge NOS (DUKN7)
36.18N 75.75W
Height: 14.4 m
Hatteras Tide Gauge NOS (HCGN7)
35.21N 75.70W
Height: 9.0 m

29/1842

985.1

28/2148

44

53

29/0230

987.7

29/0224

45

56

37

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Ocean Crest Pier CORMP (OCPN7)
33.90N 78.10W
Height: 12.2 m
Oregon Inlet NOS (ORIN7)
35.77N 75.53W
Height: 6.0 m
Swanquarter (SWQN7)
35.39N 76.33W
Height: 10.0 m
Wrightsville Beach Johnny Mercer Pier
NOS (JMPN7)
34.21N 77.79W
Height: 7.0 m
Buoy 41001
34.56N 72.63W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41002
31.86N 74.84W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41013
33.44N 77.74W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41036
34.21N 76.94W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 41038 CORMP
34.10N 77.70W
Height: 3.0 m
RAWS

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

28/0732

994.7

27/1817

25

40

29/1830

986.6

28/1324

37

51

30/2100

990.0

29/0030

33

43

29/2100

994.6

27/2254

32

43

28/2350

969.6*

29/0610

55*

74*

28/0822

969.2

28/1743

53j

60

28/0950

991.6

27/2030

44f

55

28/0920

991.9

27/2250

42f

56

28/1100

994.2

27/2200

35

45

Dare Bomb Range

28/1837

45

Fort Bragg (FBRN7)

36

Duke Forest (DKFN7)

34

Hoffman (MKLN7)

34

Laurel Springs (LRLN7)
Elevation: 914 m
Lexington (LXFN7)

30/0710

Total
rain
(in)

49
38

Low Gap 4 S (RAVN7)
Elevation: 396 m
New Bern (NBRN7)

30/1017

45

28/1117

36

WeatherBug
Kill Devils Hills Dare County Water

55

38

8.16

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

South Nags Head Oregon Inlet Fishing
Center
WeatherFlow
Alligator Bridge
35.00N 76.01W
Height: 13 m
Avon Sound
35.37N 76.33W
Height: 7 m
Avon Pier
35.35N 75.50W
Height: 16 m
Buxton
35.26N 75.52W
Height: 10 m
Fort Macon
34.69N 76.70W
Height: 10 m
Frisco Woods – Frisco
35.24N 75.63W
Height: 6 m
Hatteras High – Frisco
35.26N 75.55W
Height: 20 m
Jennette’s Pier - Nags Head
35.91N 75.59W
Height: 18 m
Kitty Hawk Kites Resort – Salvo
35.78N 75.47W
Height: 18 m
Nag’s Head Jockey’s Ridge
35.95N 75.63W
Height: 6 m
Ocracoke
35.13N 76.00W
Height: 7.0 m
Oregon Inlet
35.79N 75.54W
Height: 10 m
Oregon Inlet Jetty USCG
35.77N 75.53W
Height: 10.0 m
Pamlico Sound
35.42N 75.83W
Height: 14.0 m

Gust
(kt)
54

29/1900

987.7

28/1700

42

52

29/0230

987.7

28/2145

44

53

29/0215

986.7

28/0950

42

56

29/0255

984.9

28/1920

31

51

28/1905

989.4

28/1255

40

52

29/0820

988.2

28/1345

41

50

29/0745

984.6

28/2240

43

57

29/1900

985.8

28/1845

51

63

29/1735

986.7

28/2230

47

56

29/1810

986.7

29/1650

33

45

29/0800

988.3

28/1805

40

49

29/0855

982.7

29/0435

39

53

29/1720

985.8

28/1900

46

59

29/0230

986.4

28/2140

45

55

39

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Waves
35.57N 75.47W
Height: 11 m
Waves - Real Slick
35.56N 75.49W
Height: 6 m
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1800

987.7

28/2230

43

53

29/0310

986.3

28/2220

42

53

Barrett (APRS)
Elevation: 911 m
Baldwin 2 ENE (APRS)
Elevation: 1005 m
Fosco 3 SSE (APRS)
Elevation: 1097 m
Laurel Springs 1 SSW

Total
rain
(in)

40
40
41
29/2010

43i

Blacksburg (KBCB)

30/0355

39

WFO Blacksburg (KRNK)

30/0252

49

Danville Regional (KDAN)

30/0337

37

Dublin (KPSK)

30/0035

41

Fort Belvoir (KDAA)

30/0134

33

55

9.99

29/1840

27

40

6.93

Virginia
ICAO Sites

Fort Eustis (KFAF)

29/2255

982.2

Galax-Hillsville (KHLX)

30/1015

Helfa/Accomack Airport (KMFV)

29/1916

47
39

Hot Springs Airport (KHSP)
Ingalls Field (KHSP)
Elevation: 1156 m
James City/Williamsburg Airport
(KJGG)
Langley AFB (KLFI)

0.34

53
44

30/0015

29/2226

982.2

Marion/Wytheville (KRJK)

47

29/2215

24

40

29/2355

25

44

30/0055

7.30

45

Newport News/Patrick Henry (KPHF)

29/2254

982.0

28/1754

28

41

7.47

Norfolk Intl. (KORF)

29/2151

982.6

29/0125

34

44

6.10

Norfolk NAS (KNGU)

29/2159

983.2

28/2259

35

43

4.97

52

0.10

Roanoke (KROA)

30/0150

Wallops Island (KWAL)

29/2154

969.5

29/2037

37

52

8.48

Wash/Dulles Intl. Airport (KIAD)

30/0305

971.2

30/0154

34

47

5.65

40

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Wash/Reagan National Airport
(KDCA)
West Point Airport (KFJY)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

30/0243

969.2

30/0209

36

53

6.21

30/0335

26

34

30/0035

35

52

Winchester Regional Airport (KOKV)
Marine Observations
Cape Henry NOS (CHYV2)
36.91N 75.78W
Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel NOS
(CBBV2)
36.97N 76.11W
Height: 13.0 m
Chesapeake Light C-MAN (CHLV2)
36.91N 75.71W
Height: 43.3 m
Dominion Terminal NOS (DOMV2)
36.96N 76.42W
Height: 9.1 m
Kiptopeke NOS (KPTV2)
37.17N 75.99W
Lewisetta NOS (LWTV2)
37.995N 76.465W
Height: 10.0 m
Money Point NOS (MNPV2)
36.78N 76.30W
Height: 7.6 m
Rappahannock Light Tower NOS
(RPLV2)
37.54N 76.02W
South Craney Island NOS (CRYV2)
36.89N 76.34W
Wachapreague NOS (WAHV2)
37.61N 75.69W
Willoughby Degaussing Station NOS
(WDSV2)
36.98N 76.32W
York River East NOS (YKRV2)
37.25N 76.33W
Yorktown USCG NOS (YKTV2)
37.23N 76.48W
Height: 9.6 m
Buoy 44041 CBIBS
37.20N 76.78W
Height: 3.0 m

29/2154

980.1

28/2012

46i

56i

29/2136

980.7

29/0100

43

52

29/2300

979.0

29/2100

49

59

29/2230

982.0

29/1930

35

44

30/0130

42i

52i

35

46

30/0012

974.4

29/2000

29/2154

983.4

29/2154

29/2224

975.0

28/1912

47i

57i

29/2154

983.0

29/0224

32i

42i

29/2200

974.9

27/2348

27*i

38*i

29/2230

979.6

29/2106

42i

50i

29/2212

978.4

28/2336

44i

53i

29/2230

980.0

29/0100

35

42

29/1910

30

40

41

40

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Buoy 44058 CBIBS
37.55N 76.26W
Height: 3.0 m
Virginia DOT Mesonet

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0110

978.3

30/0220

33

42

Afton Mountain (VA005)
38.03N 78.86W
Danville Airport 1 W
Elevation: 165 m
Dublin 1 NNE
Elevation: 645 m
Marion-Wytheville 2 E
Elevation: 796 m
Millboro 6 SSE
Elevation: 583 m
near Roanoke Airport
Elevation: 354 m
West Springfield (VA046)
38.74N 77.19W
WeatherBug
Dale City Nova Woodbridge Campus
38.62N 77.29W
Gainesville School for the Arts &
Sciences
38.78N 77.60W
Manassas Pennington School
38.75N 77.48W
Oakton Providence ES
38.86N 77.32W
Reston National Wildlife Federation
38.95N 77.35w
Rollins Fork King George ES
38.25N 77.16W
Round Hill ES
39.13N 77.77W
Sterling Nova Loudon Campus
39.02N 77.38W
Strasburg Sandy Hook ES
38.98N 78.37W
Warrenton Highland School
38.73N 77.80W
Warrenton P. B. Smith ES
38.73N 77.74W
Sperryyille Rappahannock Co. HS
38.68N 78.19W

42

30/0419

45

30/0648

35

30/0820

42

30/0744

45

30/0029

39

30/0402

36

30/0200

45

30/0204

50i

30/0150

46i

30/0125

43i

30/0219

53i

30/0025

52i

29/1944

50i

30/2255

49i

30/0039

49i

30/0404

49i

29/2215

50i

30/0030

44i

29/2035

45i

Total
rain
(in)

8.06

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Wintergreen Mountain
37.92N 78.95W Elevation: 1113 m
WeatherFlow
Baber Point
Height: 8 m
Cape Henry
Height: 25 m
Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel 3rd
Island
37.03N 76.08W
Height: 22 m
Cuckold Creek
Height: 8 m
Deltaville
37.56N 76.30W
Height: 7 m
Great Wicomico Light
37.80N 76.27W
Height: 11 m
Hampton Flats/Hampton
36.98N 76.35W
Height: 7 m
Lynnhaven Pier/Virginia Beach
36.92N 76.08W
Height: 12 m
Lafayette River/Norfolk
36.89N 76.32W
Mason Neck
Height: 11 m
Messick Point
Height: 11 m
Monroe Creek
Height: 8 m
New Point Comfort
37.33N 76.27W
Height: 15 m
Onancock
37.66N 75.87W
Height: 16 m
Plantation Flats/Cape Charles
37.26N 76.03W
Height: 7 m
Potomac Light 33
Height: 10 m
Pylons Dah
Height: 7 m

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

30/0130

29/2120

979.0

Gust
(kt)
63

30/0015

39

52

28/2315

46

55

29/1655

49

58

29/1935

40

45

29/2316

979.0

29/1815

34

41

30/0100

975.0

29/1925

34

45

29/2050

983.0

30/0035

36

46

29/2205

981.0

28/2330

37

49

29/0125

24*i

39*i

29/1940

32

42

28/2315

41

49

29/2225

34

45

29/2350

977.0

28/2045

42

50

29/2156

974.0

29/1820

45

55

29/2229

980.0

30/0045

39

48

29/2210

37

49

29/2105

40

52

43

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Rudee Inlet
Height: 10 m
Sandbridge
36.70N 75.93W
Height: 5 m
Silver Beach
Height: 13 m
South Norfolk Jordan Bridge
Height: 50 m
Thimble Shoals/Chesapeake Bay
37.05N 76.26W
Height: 7 m
Tower 70
Height: 8 m
CWOP

Date/
time
(UTC)

29/1830

30/0110

Press.
(mb)

984.0

983.0

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

28/2040

40

48

29/0005

36

43

30/0150

37

44

29/0204

36

42

28/2245

38

48

29/2330

34

42

Bent Mountain 3 NNW (APRS)

30/0352

49

Blacksburg (APRS)

30/0608

43

30/0144

36

30/1110

38

30/0408

36

30/0148

52

30/0046

48

30/0325

36

30/0655

47

30/0809

37

29/2328

43

Blacksburg 2 N (APRS)
Elevation: 637 m
Fincastle 6 W (APRS)
Elevation: 440 m
Lithia 2 E (APRS)
Elevation: 414 m
Lovettsville (AU044)
39.28N 77.60W
Maurertown (C5286)
38.93N 78.52W
Merrimac 2 SW (APRS)
Elevation: 628 m
Mount Solon (D6906)
38.30N 79.13W
Walton 2 SSE (APRS)
Elevation: 611 m
Winchester (C5255)
39.22N 78.25W
Public/Other
Chester Gap 3 NNE

69i

Hacksheck 1 NW

52i

Leesburg

46i

Stewartsville 3 SSW
Elevation: 283 m
Wallops Island

30/0826

37
59i

44

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Wintergreen 4 NNW

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

63i

West Virginia
ICAO Sites
Bluefield Mercer County Airport
(KBLF)
Elevation: 875 m
Martinsburg Airport (KMRB)

30/1032

36

0.48

52

4.00

RAWS
Upper Tract (UPTW2)
38.81N 79.28W
WeatherBug
Bunker Hill Musselman Middle School
39.33N 78.05W
CWOP
Alvon 2 NW (APRS)
Elevation: 650 m
Harpers Ferry (C5204)
39.33N 77.79W
Public/Other

30/0917

43i

30/0229

45i

30/0937

48

30/0024

46i

Keyser 2 SSW

56i

Ranson 1 NNW

56i

Delaware
ICAO Sites
Georgetown (KGED)

29/2354

962.5

29/2222

25

43

Wilmington (KILG)

30/0151

954.6

30/0451

39

50

29/1200

988.5*

29/1012

44*i

54*i

30/0130

954.2

29/2024

31i

45i

29/2206

959.0

29/2112

46

58

30/0130

954.5

29/2358

959.5

30/0337

31

40

Marine Observations
Brandywind Shoal Light NOS
(BRND1)
38.99N 75.11W
Delaware City NOS (DELD1)
39.58N 75.59W
Lewes NOS (LWSD1)
38.78N 75.12W
Height: 12.2m
Reedy Point NOS (RDYD1)
39.55N 75.57W
Texas Tech
Station 106A
38.833 N 75.383 W

45

5.01

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Station 108A
38.781N 75.127 W
Station 112A
39.115N 75.448W
WeatherBug

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/2153

960.0

29/2038

43

52

30/0101

954.8

29/2050

31

40

Lewes University of Delaware

53i

Rehoboth Beach Boardwalk Plaza
Hotel
WeatherFlow

53i

Lewes
Elevation: 16 m
Public/Other

29/1320

46

Total
rain
(in)

6.10

58

Reeves Crossing 1 SSE

29/1914

51

Stones Throw

29/2203

58

Washington, D.C.
Marine
Washington, D.C. NOS (WASD2)
38.870N 77.020W
Maryland

30/0230

968.8

30/0118

32i

53i

ICAO Sites
Annapolis Lee Airport (KANP)
38.94N 76.57W
Baltimore/Washington Intl. Airport
(KBWI)
Easton (KESN)

51i

30/0055
30/0054

30

52

29/1850

32

42

29/2245

33

51

29/2206

31

50

7.20

Patuxent River NAS (KNHK)

29/2238

30

50

8.20

St. Inigoes (KNUI)

29/2047

32

56

7.59
7.53

Martin State Airport /Middle River
(KMTN)
Ocean City (KOXB)

Salisbury (KSBY)

30/0242

29/2053

964.4

963.4

29/2154

967.2

29/2033

30

47

30/0300

962.8

29/1654

25i

47i

30/0006

970.8

29/2318

48i

59i

30/0106

967.6

29/1818

33

48

Marine Observations
Baltimore NOS (BLTM2)
39.267N 76.578W
Bishops Head NOS (BISM2)
38.220N 76.038W
Cambridge NOS (CAMM2)
38.573N 76.068W
Height: 6.1 m

46

6.63

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Chesapeake City NOS (CHCM2)
39.53N 75.81W
Cove Point LNG Pier NOS (COVM2)
38.404N 76.386W
Francis Scott Key Bridge NOS
(FSKM2)
39.219N 76.528W
Ocean City NOS (OCIM2)
38.33N 75.09W
Piney Point NOS (PPTM2)
38.133N 76.533W
Thomas Point C-MAN (TPLM2)
38.898N 76.437W
Height: 18.0 m
Tolchester Beach NOS (TCBM2)
39.213N 76.245W
Height: 10.0 m
Buoy 44042 CBIBS
38.033N 76.336W
Height: 3.0 m
Buoy 44043 CBIBS
39.152N 76.391W
Height: 3.0 m
Buoy 44057 CBIBS
39.544N 76.075W
Height: 3.0 m
Buoy 44061 CBIBS
38.785N 77.036W
Height: 3.0 m
Buoy 44062 CBIBS
38.556N 76.415W
Height: 3.0 m
Buoy 44063 CBIBS
38.963N 76.448W
Height: 3.0 m
Texas Tech
Station 104A
38.153N 75.259W
Maryland DOT Mesonet

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0200

956.3

29/2148

26i

41i

30/0100

969.5

29/1306

40i

47i

30/0242

961.5

29/2336

40i

50i

29/2106

962.7

30/0300

37i

51i

29/1954

50i

65i

30/0100

963.5

30/0100

52f

69

30/0218

960.9

29/2324

41

52

29/2230

41

53

51

30/1520

989.9

29/2320

39

30/0310

957.7

29/2150

34

30/0240

969.6

30/0210

25

39

30/0130

969.1

29/2130

37

49

30/0120

37

47

29/2116

30

44

29/2102

967.6

Anne Arundel Co - I-97 at Route 100
(MD027)
39.15N 76.64W
Frederick County – U.S. Route 340 at
Route 180 (MD016)
39.35N 77.58W

47

30/0212

55i

30/0457

53i

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Harford County - Route 136 at Route
646 (MD042)
WeatherBug
Baltimore Oriole Park at Camden Yards
39.28N 76.62W
Baltimore Robert W Coleman ES
39.31N 76.66W
Baltimore Tide Point

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1959

50i

29/2100

51i

29/2320

58i

Total
rain
(in)

55i

Beltsville High Point HS
39.04N 76.94W
Chesapeake Beach Resort
38.69N 76.53W
Clarksburg Area HS
39.22N 77.26W
Clear Spring HS
39.65N 77.93W
Crisfield

30/0325

48i

29/2130

47i

30/0419

50i

30/0039

48i
58i

Cumberland Allegany HS
39.65N 78.78W
Edgewood Deerfield ES
39.42N 76.29W
Ellicott City Our Lady of Perpetual
Help School
39.23N 76.77W
Frederick Ballenger Creek ES
39.37N 77.43W
Frederick Earth and Space Science
Laboratory
39.40N 77.42W
Frederick Gov. Thomas Johnson MS
39.43N 77.40W
Frostburg Beall ES
39.65N 78.93W
Gaithersburg National Institute of
Standards and Technology
39.13N 77.22W
Galena Volunteer Fire Dept.

30/0149

46i

29/2205

52i

30/0305

54i

30/0209

57i

30/0339

49i

30/0229

54i

29/2109

47i

30/0235

57i
52i

Havre de Grace MS
39.54N 76.11W
Helen Mother Catherine Spalding
School
38.37N 76.77W
Ijamsville Oakdale HS
39.39N 77.31W

48

29/2120

45i

29/2059

41i

29/2325

53i

8.32

8.78

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Manchester Valley HS
39.65N 76.88W
Mount Airy Christian Academy
39.34N 77.10W
Ocean City At the Beach Enterprises

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

30/0010

49i

30/0120

53i
65i

Ocean City Emergency Management
Planner
Ocean City Phillips Beach Plaza Hotel

59i
55i

Reisterstown MEMA
39.49N 76.83W
Waldorf North Point HS
38.64N 76.94W
WeatherFlow
Assateague
Height: 12 m
Bishop’s Head
38.22 N 76.04 W
Height: 15 m
Blackwalnut Harbor
Height: 8 m
Point Lookout
Height: 11 m
Greenbury Point
Height: 9 m
Gunpowder
Height: 8 m
Herring Bay
Height: 9 m
Kent Island
Height: 5 m
Ocean City
Height: 15 m
Ocean City
Height: 15 m
Raccoon Point
Height: 6 m
Tolly Point
Height: 9 m
CWOP

Gust
(kt)

29/2041

971.0

Crofton (C7344)
39.69N 76.30W
Ellicott City (C3900)
39.29N 76.84W

49

30/0040

49i

30/0135

43i

29/2039

36

47

29/1845

54

66

29/1755

34

47

29/2220

49

64

29/2254

36

47

29/2350

34

50

29/2140

33

48

29/2020

35

47

28/2150

41

48

28/2150

41

48

29/1722

33

43

29/2301

37

48

30/0725

50i

29/2200

55i

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Falling Waters (D3148)
39.60N 77.88W
Halethorpe (C1550)
39.23N 76.70W
Laytonsville (C2463)
39.20N 77.13W
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0113

45i

30/0110

59i

30/0113

66i

Annapolis

60i

Arbutus

59i

Colesville 1 SSE

61i

Crisfield

20/2029

44i

Total
rain
(in)

63i

Crocheron 2 SSE

61i

Ocean City

64i

Saint Inigoes 2 W

56i

New Jersey
ICAO Sites
Andover (K12N)

29/2254

968.4

29/1854

21

49

0.85

Atlantic City (KACY)

29/2154

951.9

29/2107

34

56

6.00

29/2115

34

49

Belmar (KBLM)
Caldwell (KCDW)

29/2233

966.8*

29/2253

36*

61*

Millville (KMIV)

29/2354

952.5

29/2054

25

38

29/1251

21

38

Morristown (KMMU)

5.77

Mount Holly (KVAY)

29/2254

954.9

29/2054

33

48

2.75

Newark (KEWR)

29/2233

965.3

30/0151

45

68

1.39

Somerville (KSMQ)

29/2253

963.5

29/2205

28

48

Sussex (KFWN)

29/2253

970.5

29/2053

33

65

0.86

Teterboro (KTEB)

29/2151

966.5

29/2359

39

63

0.87

Trenton (KTTN)

29/2253

958.1

29/2253

33

55

1.75

29/0655

24

35

29/2055

37

60

30/0112

36i

50i

Wildwood (KWWD)
Wrightstown/McGuire AFB (KWRI)

29/2355

953.4

29/2224

945.5

30/0030

953.7

Marine Observations
Atlantic City NOS (ACYN4)
39.36N 74.42W
Burlington NOS (BDRN4)
40.08N 74.87W

50

2.57

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Cape May NOS (CMAN4)
38.96N 74.96W
Height: 12.2 m
Jacques Cousteau NERRS (JCRN4)
39.54N 74.46W
Robbins Reef NOS (ROBN4)
40.65N 74.06W
Height: 22.0 m
Sandy Hook NOS (SDHN4)
40.46N 74.01W
Ship John Shoal NOS (SJSN4)
39.30 N 75.38 W
Buoy 44009
38.46N 74.70W
Height: 5.0 m
HADS/USGS
Atlantic City Marina (ATLN4)
39.38N 74.42W
Barnegat Light (BGLN4)
39.76N 74.11W
Texas Tech
Station 101A
40.073N 74.042 W
Station 103A
40.312 N 73.978 W
Station 107A
39.821 N 74.2012 W
Station 109A
39.941 N 74.135 W
Station 110A
40.545N 74.125 W
Station 111A
39.379N 74.455 W
New Jersey Weather/Climate Net
Atlantic City Marina (KQ25)
39.38N 74.42W
Harvey Cedars (KQ11)
39.7N 74.1W
High Point Monument (KQ61)
41.32N 74.66W
Pittstown (KQ53)
40.56N 74.96W
Point Pleasant (KQ37)
40.07N 74.06W

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/2218

953.8

30/0000

52

65

30/0000

946.0

29/2218

962.2

30/0112

55

78

29/2212

961.0

29/2218

39*i

60*i

29/2330

953.0

30/0418

51i

58i

29/2050

956.4

29/2050

46

66

30/0015

946.6

29/2045

36i

58i

8.15

30/0030

950.0

29/2030

49i

69i

6.55

52

62

29/2243

955.4

30/0000

53

66

29/2346

952.0

30/0108

30

47

30/0030

41

53

29/2227

959.4

30/0048

47

60

29/2226

945.6

29/2012

45

58

29/2325

947.5

29/2015

43i

67i

29/1920
29/2335

29/2215

7.17

64*i
69i

969.9
961.1

30/0200

64i

956.0

29/2055

64i

51

Total
rain
(in)

2.47

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Sea Girt (KQ52)
40.12N 74.03W
WeatherBug

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

29/2225

956.0

30/0050

60i

69i

2.56

Englishtown Wemrock Brook School

57i

Fair Lawn Radburn ES

57i

Flanders Mt. Olive HS

60i

Jersey City Ollie Culbreth ES

57i

Neptune Midtown Community ES

62i

Wayne Passaic County Technical
Institute
WeatherFlow

58i

Bayonne (XBYO)
40.67N 74.09W
Height: 10 m
Brick
Height: 10 m
Cape May
Height: 10 m
Kite Island
Height: 7 m
Monmouth
Height: 10 m
Ocean City South Beach
Height: 10 m
Perth Amboy (XPER)
40.50N 74.28W
Height: 10 m
Sandy Hook
Height: 19 m
Tuckerton
Height: 10 m
CWOP
Fairfield (C2504)
40.88N 74.29W
Height: 53.6 m
Teaneck 1 SSE (D2034)
40.88N 74.00W
Height: 11.0 m
Upper Montclair (D9739)
40.84N 74.21W
Elevation: 82 m
Public/Other

30/0110

44

67

29/2355

51

68

29/2030

48

63

29/1930

51

62

29/2345

42

65

30/0305

47

61

30/0210

46

63

30/0035

59

76

29/1955

55

77

29/2232

967.4

29/2342

29/2201

966.8

30/0201

29/2145

966.4

29/2225

52

63*i
59i

66i
76i

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Brigantine (Wx Underground)
39.40N 74.37W
Dennisville
Galloway (Wx Underground)
39.46N 74.50W
Harrison

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

29/2330

946.2

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

70i
30/0000

946.5
59i

29/2320

Newport

76i

North Arlington

55i

29/2347

Surf City

77i

Tompkinsville 2N

78i

30/0024

Tuckerton

76i

Wildwood Crest
Elevation: 4.5 m
Pennsylvania

29/2200

35

61

30/0051

39

61

1.25

ICAO Sites
Allentown (KABE)

29/2351

964.8

Altoona (KAOO)

29/2255

50

3.25

Clearfield Lawrence Airport (KFIG)

30/0115

52

2.79

44

1.34

Doylestown (KDYL)

29/2254

961.1

Fort Indiantown Gap - Muir Army
Airfield (KMUI)
Harrisburg Capital City Airport
(KCXY)
Harrisburg Intl. Airport (KMDT)

29/2304

27

29/2245

49

30/0022

46

3.46

30/0044

45

3.60

Lancaster (KLNS)

30/0353

960.1

29/2353

29

45

Mount Pocono (KMPO)

29/2353

969.8

29/2353

32

57

Northeast Philadelphia (KPNE)

30/0054

955.8

29/2340

41

57

Penn Valley Airport (KSEG)
Philadelphia Intl. Airport (KPHL)

30/0031
30/0132

952.6

Philadelphia Wings Field (KLOM)
Pottstown (KPTW)

30/0154

959.0

Quakertown (KUKT)
Reading (KRDG)

30/0054

962.8

University Park Airport – State College
(KSCE)

53

47

30/0044

44

59

29/2355

20

36

30/0208

31

51

29/2055

28

45

29/2054

26

40

29/1953

1.25

35

3.06

3.05

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Intl. Airport
(KAVP)
York Airport (KTHV)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

30/0258

38

2.31

29/2309

46

Sustained
(kt)b

Marine Observations
Marcus Hook NOS (MRCP1)
9.81N 75.41W
Newbold NOS (NBLP1)
40.14N 74.75W
Philadelphia NOS (PHBP1)
39.93N 75.14W
WeatherFlow

30/0148

951.9

30/0018

955.3

30/0124

952.0

Lake Nockamixon
Elevation: 8 m
Marsh Creek
Elevation: 8 m
Public/Other

30/0230

34i

51i

30/0045

38

54

29/2230

27

41

Allentown

70i

Bear Creek 5 ENE
42.68N 75.50W
Bensalem

30/0053

52i
66i

Bushkill Center

61i

Cashtown

54i

Dimock

29/2200

36i

Gouldsboro

30/0218

42i

Jermyn

29/2200

37i

29/2300

53i

29/2200

50i

29/2244

43i

Lakeview 1 ENE
41.87N 75.60W
Lehman
Loch Lomond
Mount Aetna

56i

Penobscot
41.17N 75.88W
Elevation: 650 m
Quicktown
Springbrook Corner

29/2220

58i

30/0400

38i

30/0245

37i

Wind Gap

54i

Wrightsville

29/2145

54

43i

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1951

984.1

29/1652

26

37

Total
rain
(in)

New York
ICAO Sites
Albany Intl. Airport (KALY)
Binghamton Regional Airport (KBHM)

30/0604

43

0.91

Buffalo Intl. Airport (KBUF)

30/0200

37

2.66

Dansville Municipal Airport (KDSV)

30/0600

37

2.26

Dunkirk Municipal Airport (KDKK)

30/0000

41

2.59

East Hampton (KHTO)

29/1955

57

Elmira (KELM)

29/2108

53

1.68

69

0.84

45

0.56

Farmingdale (KFRG)

29/2126

966.0

Fulton Oswego County Airport (KFZY)

29/2217

45

30/0049

Glens Falls Airport (KGFL)

29/2053

988.1

29/1533

29

37

Islip (KISP)

29/2120

967.1

29/2226

49

78

0.71
2.60

Jamestown Airport (KJHW)

30/0200

40

Massena Airport (KMSS)

30/0127

42

Montauk Airport (KMTP)

29/1854

977.3*

29/1854

25*

49*

Montgomery (KMGJ)

29/2229

973.4

29/2129

36

50

0.69

New York-Central Park (KNYC)

29/2203

965.7

29/1938

33

54

0.94

New York-Kennedy (KJFK)

29/2215

965.1

30/0003

49

74

0.55

New York-Laguardia (KLGA)

29/2151

966.3

29/2255

56

64

0.58

Newburgh (KSWF)

29/2145

975.3*

29/2345

37*

53*

Ogdensburg Airport (KOGS)

30/0134

37

Penn Yan Regional Airport (KPEO)

29/2236

44

Plattsburgh Intl. Aiport (KPBG)

30/1038

34

Potsdam Airport (KPTD)

29/2336

36

Rome Griffiss Airfield (KRME)

30/0207

39

Saranac Lake (KSLK)

29/2235

38

Shirley/Brookhaven (KHWV)

29/2056

969.4*

30/0356

26*

52*

Syracuse Hancock Airport (KSYR)

29/2054

35

Watertown Airport (KART)

30/0139

50

Wellsville Airport 1 W (KELZ)

30/0200

41

Westhampton Beach (KFOK)

29/1702

980.3*

55

29/1553

33*

51*

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
White Plains (KHPN)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

29/2156

969.7

29/2200

41

63

0.71

29/2154

963.8

29/1906

32

48

30/0824

984.8

30/0254

27i

39i

30/0800

980.2

30/0740

44f

52

29/2200

965.7

29/2106

25

41

30/0840

985.4

29/2330

34

46

30/0400

985.7

29/2242

39i

50i

30/0720

985.4

30/0040

42

52

29/1445

988.4*

29/1845

35*

50*

29/2150

958.2

29/1830

49

64

29/1830

37*

47*

29/1845

37*

49*

30/0010

48

64

Marine Observations
Bergen Point NOS (BGNN4)
40.64N 74.15W
Height: 9.1 m
Buffalo NOS (BUFN6)
42.88N 78.89W
Dunkirk Light C-MAN (DBLN6)
42.49 N 79.35 W
Height: 20 m
Kings Point NOS (KPTN6)
40.81N 73.77W
Height: 10.0 m
Niagara CG (YGNN6)
43.26N 79.06W
Height: 10.0 m
Oswego NOS (OSGN6)
43.46N 76.51W
Rochester (RPRN6)
43.26N 77.59W
Height: 10.0 m
Buoy 44022 UCONN
40.88N 73.73W
Height: 3.5 m
Buoy 44025
40.25N 73.17W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44039 UCONN
41.13N 72.66W
Height: 3.5 m
Buoy 44040 UCONN
40.95N 73.58W
Height: 3.5 m
Buoy 44065
40.36N 73.70W
Height: 5.0 m
WeatherBug

29/2150

958.1

Averne Goldie Maple Academy

64i

Brentwood Suffolk CC

59i

Bronx Cardinal Spellman HS

62i

Bronx In-Tech Academy M/HS

59i

Bronx St. Barnabas ES

57i

56

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Bronx St. Raymond HS for Boys

58i

Brooklyn College Academy

57i

Brooklyn Edward R. Murrow HS

67i

Brooklyn IS 187 Christa McAuliffe

59i

Brooklyn PS/IS 192 Magnet School for
Math and Science
Brooklyn St. Bernadette School

61i

Corona IS 61 Leonardo da Vinci

57i

Jamaica HS

60i

Long Beach HS

72i

Mamaronek Beach Point Club

63i

Mount Vernon Graham ES Magnet

61i

New York City St. Elizabeth School

57i

Orangeburg Rockland County Sewer
District
Peekskill HS

57i

Selden Suffolk County CC

62i

Slate Hill Minisink Valley HS

57i

Staten Island P.S. 32 Gifford

64i

Staten Island P.S. 53 Bay Terrace

59i

61i

64i

WeatherFlow
Bayville (XBAY)
40.90N 73.63W
Height: 14 m
Blue Point (XBLU)
40.73N 73.04W
Height: 11 m
Breezy Point - Queens (XBRZ)
40.56N 73.93W
Height: 10 m
Durand Beach
Height: 10 m
East Moriches USCG (XMOR)
40.79N 72.75W
Height: 10 m
Eaton’s Neck (XEAT)
40.95N 73.40W
Height: 24 m

57

29/2020

57

67

29/2110

52

65

29/2340

53

68

29/2310

40

54

29/2220

54

71

29/2210

61

83

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Fire Island USCG (XFIR)
40.63N 73.26W
Great Gull Island (XGUL)
41.20N 72.12W
Height: 18 m
Great South Bay (XHCK)
40.66N 73.40W
Height: 12 m
Jones Beach USCG (XJON)
40.59N 73.56W
Height: 10 m
Larchmont Harbor (XLAR)
40.92N 73.73W
Height: 13 m
Kingston
Height: 8 m
Mecox Bay (XMCX)
40.91N 73.32W
Height: 10 m
Point of Woods Yacht Club (XPOW)
40.65N 73.14W
Height: 7 m
Tappan Zee Light 14 (XTAP)
41.14N 73.88W
Height 13 m
CWOP
Middlefield (D3254)
41.52N 72.66W
Height 65.2 m
Jacksons Heights 1 E (D9152)
40.75N 73.87W
Height: 28.0 m
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0100

48

65

29/2035

65

74

29/2055

41

55

29/2215

48

70

29/2304

51

64

29/2120

31

42

29/1850

38

66

29/2035

48

63

29/1800

34

56

29/2108

975.9

29/2248

29/2202

966.1*

29/2232

50
39*i

67*i

Albany WFO

30/0254

44i

Arkport 1 SE

29/2141

38i

Bayville

29/2121

67i

Berlin

29/2252

41i

Breezy Point

29/2340

Canajoharie

30/0000

35i

Cold Brook

29/2306

38i

Coney Island

29/2242

60i

58

53i

68i

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Dover Plains

29/2302

41i

East Springfield

29/1535

38i

Erin 2 SSE

29/1906

37i

Flatbush

30/0105

50i

Herkimer

29/1403

48i

Hudson

29/2100

39i

Hunter

29/2000

43i

Johnson City

30/0654

36i

Lake Luzerne

29/1920

35i

Latham

29/2151

37i

Long Lake

29/1850

41i

Mount Holly

29/2357

34i

Patchogue

29/2301

67i

Ogdensburg

30/0100

41i

Orange Lake

29/2345

53i

Oyster Bay

29/1938

58i

Pleasant Valley

30/0031

43i

Port Byron

29/2200

36i

Saratoga Springs

29/1948

40i

30/0300

51i

30/0140

52i

Stottsville

29/2055

39i

Syosset

29/2303

71i

29/1750

69

29/1512

37i

Sherburne
42.68N 75.50W
Stone Ridge

Upton Brookhaven National Lab
Height: 85 m
Wyantskill

Total
rain
(in)

Connecticut
Bridgeport/Sikorski (KBDR)

29/2152

972.2

29/2104

51

66

Chester (KSNC)

29/2015

976.9

29/2055

29

45

Danbury (KDXR)

29/2153

974.7

30/0056

35

59

0.73

Groton (KGON)

29/2029

976.8

29/1935

44

65

0.43

Hartford (KHFD)

29/2053

980.1

29/2034

47

0.49

59

0.43

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

New Haven (KHVN)

29/2051

974.2

29/1735

30*

43*

Willimantic (KIJD)

29/2052

980.6

29/2215

33

46

1.44

Windsor Locks – Bradley Intl. (KBDL)

29/2151

981.5

29/2308

35

54

0.80

29/2054

972.5

29/2106

37i

52i

29/2036

973.9

29/2136

30

51

29/1900

976.1*

29/1900

46*

66*

29/2012

976.9

29/2042

33

48

Location

Marine Observations
Bridgeport NOS (BRHC3)
41.17N 73.18W
New Haven NOS (NWHC3)
41.28N 72.91W
Height: 6.4 m
New London Ledge (LDLC3)
41.31N 72.08W
Height: 20 m
New London NOS (NLNC3)
41.36N 72.09W
Height: 8.5 m
WeatherBug
Bridgeport Discovery Interdistrict
Magnet School
Danbury Western Connecticut State
University
Hamden Hall Country Day School

59i

New Haven Cold Spring School

57i

60i

62i

WeatherFlow
Norwalk Light (XNOR )
41.08N 73.38W
Height: 10 m
Fishers Island (XFSH)
41.25N 72.03W
Height: 10 m
Public/Other

29/2243

52

64

29/2230

49

68

Bristol

29/2153

61i

Burlington

29/2022

58i

Greenwich

29/2120

61i

Groton 2 S

29/1900

66i

Madison

29/2120

74i

Middletown 3 SW

29/2243

50i

New Hartford

29/2354

41i

Norwalk

30/0030

60i

60

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Stonington

29/1900

61i

Torrington

29/2037

50i

Torrington 3 SW

29/1825

40i

Torrington 2 SE

29/2026

38i

Trumbull

29/2240

59i

51

Total
rain
(in)

Rhode Island
ICAO Sites
Newport (KUUU)

29/1953

982.3

29/1713

Providence-Warwick (KPVD)

29/1951

984.2

29/2050

Smithfield (KSFZ)
Westerly (KWST)

36

51

1.45

29/2015

39

2.72

60

29/1953

979.2

29/1921

29/2012

982.0

29/2042

46

61

29/2112

983.1

29/2030

34i

47i

29/1948

982.2

29/1812

38i

54i

29/2006

981.8

29/2048

43

55

Marine Observations
Conimicut Light NOS (CPTR1)
41.72N 71.34W
Heights: 4.3 m
Fox Point/Providence NOS (FOXR1)
41.81N 71.40W
Potter Cover NOS (PTCR1)
41.64N 71.34W
Quonset Point NOS (QPTR1)
41.59N 71.41W
Height: 6.4 m
RAWS
Ninigret (NINR1)
41.38N 71.58W
WeatherBug

65i

29/1925

Providence Harborside

62i

WeatherFlow
Beavertail
Height: 13 m
Block Island Jetty
Height: 12 m
Fogland
Height: 28 m
Halfway Rock
Height: 9 m
Point Judith
Height: 18 m

61

29/1830

34

50

29/1419

37

47

29/1640

30

46

29/1905

44

58

29/1835

56

70

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Rose Island
Height: 12 m
Sabin Point
Height: 9 m
Sakonnet Vineyards
Height: 10 m
University of Rhode Island
Height: 10 m
CWOP
Westerly (D5262)
41.32N 71.81W
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1915

38

59

29/2107

31

49

29/1910

34

55

29/1915

40

57

29/1844

56i

75i

Barrington

29/1639

53i

Burrillville

29/1836

42i

Jamestown – Beavertail Park

29/1830

34i

Warren

29/2010

63i

Total
rain
(in)

Massachusetts
ICAO Sites
Bedford Hanscom Field (KBED)

29/2155

39

58

Beverly (KBVY)

30/0142

35

51

1.72

Blue Hill - Milton (KMQE)

29/2122

42

64

3.39

Boston (KBOS)

30/0014

40

54

1.65

Chatham (KCQX)

29/1905

33

45

0.34

Chicopee (KCEF)

29/2047

46

Falmouth (KFMH)

29/2015

54

Hyannis (KHYA)

29/1939

53

Lawrence (KLWM)

29/1826

53

Nantucket (KACK)

29/2017

37

52

2.06

New Bedford (KEWB)

20/2021

37

53

1.44

Norwood (KOWD)

29/2130

47

2.63

Orange (KORE)

29/2143

37

1.49

Pittsfield (KPSF)

29/2053

29/1542

30

50

Plymouth (KPYM)

29/2111

34

49

1.78

Taunton (KTAN)

29/1950

41

2.54

59

0.98

Vineyard Haven (KMVY)

29/1900

984.0

29/1853

981.4

983.3

62

29/1709

39

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Westfield (KBAF)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

29/2053

983.7

29/1855

Worcester (KORH)

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)
44

29/2231

35

53

Marine Observations
Buzzards Bay C-MAN (BUZM3)
41.40N 71.03W
Height: 80 m
Nantucket NOS (NTKM3)
41.29N 70.10W
Height: 8.5 m
Buoy 44008
40.50N 69.25W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44013
42.35N 70.65W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44020
41.44N 70.19W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44029 NERACOOS
42.52N 70.67W
Height: 4.0 m
WeatherBug

29/1900

981.7

29/1740

57f

72

29/1906

984.0

29/1936

40

52

29/1750

981.2

29/1640

43f

58

30/0050

988.2

29/1920

40

50

29/1950

983.3

29/1950

41

52

30/0050

990.1

29/1940

38i

50i

Blue Hill Observatory & Science
Center
Boston Seaport Hotel

64i

Brookline Dexter and Southfield
Schools
Marion The Kittansett Club

60i

Spencer Wire Village School

58i

61i

58i

WeatherFlow
Amelia Dam
Height: 17 m
Carson Beach
Height: 15 m
Chapin
Height: 10 m
Chatham
Height: 10 m
Children’s Island
Height: 10 m
Courageous Sailing Center
Height: 24 m

63

Total
rain
(in)

29/1820

37

57

29/1940

44

57

29/1835

36

51

29/1820

39

54

29/1900

47

59

29/1835

35

51

1.98

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Deer Island
Height: 20 m
Dog Bar Breakwater
Height: 16 m
Dread Ledge
Height: 10 m
Duxbury
Height: 13 m
Duxbury Bay
Height: 15 m
Harvard Bridge
Height: 8 m
Hatch Beach
Height: 10 m
Hatch Beach
Height: 10 m
Kalmus-Hyannis
Height: 11 m
Lewis Wharf
Height: 12 m
Longfellow Bridge
Height: 18 m
Millennium Park
Height: 7 m
North Alston
Height: 11 m
Pleasure Bay
Height: 10 m
Plum Island
Height: 16 m
Revere Beach
Height: 10 m
Sagamore Beach
Height: 9 m
Scituate
Height: 10 m
Squantum
Height: 13 m
Vineyard Haven
Height: 10 m
West Dennis
Height: 14 m
West Falmouth
Height: 11 m
West Island
Height: 10 m

64

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1745

47

57

30/0120

38

49

29/1755

44

54

29/2120

44

54

29/2010

39

49

29/1835

37

52

29/1915

38

53

29/1915

38

53

29/1925

46

63

29/1740

30

44

29/1830

32

49

29/1835

31

47

29/1745

31

55

29/1835

51

64

29/1940

35

48

29/1945

47

58

29/1825

43

52

29/2025

43

56

29/1930

43

57

29/1910

39

57

29/1940

33

53

29/1914

30

47

29/1935

51

70

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

29/1915

33i

67i

Total
rain
(in)

CWOP
Wrentham (AT213)
42.04N 71.41W
Public/Other
Bridgewater

29/1734

48i

Brookline

29/1954

60i

Cuttyhunk

72i

East Falmouth

29/1800

Hyannis 2 NE
41.67N 70.27W
Milford

42i

63i
50i
58i

29/1748

Milton 3 SSW
42.21N 71.11W
Otis 3 SSE
42.16 N 73.05 W
Pepperell

51i
53i

29/2023

52i

Pleasure Bay

29/1900

Plymouth

29/1314

63i
39i

Randolph

52i

Southbridge

47i

29/1915

Wellfleet

70i

Ham Radio
Barnstable

69i

29/1701

Duxbury
Height: 30.5 m
Fairhaven

29/1726

54i

Harwich

29/1410

49i

New Bedford (KD1CY)

29/2000

54i

Marstons Mills

29/2047

79i

84

Mattapoisett

66i

Wakefield

54i

29/1941

New Hampshire
ICAO Sites
Berlin (KBML)
Concord (KCON)

30/0043

992.2

65

30/0228

19

41

29/2102

28*

48*

1.92

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Jaffrey (KAFN)
Laconia (KLCI)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

29/2055
30/0215

993.6

Manchester (KMHT)
Mount Washington (KMWN)
Elevation: 1910 m
Nashua (KASH)

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

46

4.82

30/0138

25

42

2.10

30/0122

33

48

2.17

30/0053

92

121

5.29

41

3.54

29/2251

Portsmouth (KPSM)

30/0155

993.2

29/1955

28

52

1.54

Rochester (KDAW)

30/0130

994.2

29/2000

26

47

2.05

Whitefield (KHIE)

30/0152

996.3

29/2100

20

34

30/0100

990.0

29/2000

52

66

Marine Observations
Isle of Shoals C-MAN (IOSN3)
43.97N 70.62W
Height: 19 m
Public/Other
Clarksville

30/0206

42i

Derry

29/2224

46i

Dover

29/1937

34i

Fremont

29/2206

43i

Gilford

29/2027

35i

Goshen

61i

Hampstead

29/2120

40i

Jackson

29/2114

37i

Kensington

29/2341

36i

Londonberry

54i

Meredith

29/2103

45i

Meredith 4 ENE

29/1919

52i

Newington

30/0055

45i

Newton

29/1944

36i

30/1200

30

Vermont
ICAO Sites
Barre Knapp State Airport (KMPV)
Bennington (KDDH)

29/1954

985.4

Burlington (KBTV)

30/1046
30/0324

66

27

38
37

2.64

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Morrisville Airport (KMVL)

30/0419

48

Newport Airport (KEFK)

29/1955

30

29/2255

46

29/1954

36

Amsden 2 ESE

29/2200

33i

Bolton

29/1849

30i

Corinth Center 2 NNW

30/0415

37i

Danby

30/0156

37i

Derby Center 1 NNE

29/2016

30i

Danby Four Corners 2 SSW

29/2314

35i

Fair Haven 1 WSW

29/2110

32i

Fairfax 2 NNE

30/0504

30i

Jericho

29/1013

42i

Jonesville 1 E

29/2100

30i

Lyndon Center 1 WSW

29/2115

53i

Lyndon State College

30/0459

35i

Ludlow 3 NNE

30/0358

41i

Mendon

29/2140

42i

Mendon 3 ENE

30/1015

34i

Nashville 1 E

29/2303

37i

North Fairfax 1 WNW

29/2245

30i

Richford 1 NW

30/0415

45i

Shrewsbury

30/0057

32i

Shrewsbury 3 ESE

29/2323

38i

Rutland Airport (KRUT) – North
Clarendon
Springfield Airport (KVSF)
Public/Other

Stowe 8 NW

63i

Swanton 5 SSE

29/2356

30i

Thetford Center

29/1831

33i

Underhill

52i

Underhill Center 1 NE

30/1039

44i

Walden 4 N

30/0411

36i

67

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Weatherford

30/1756

36i

West Bolton 1 W

30/0013

42i

Westmore 1 SW

30/0924

31i

Wilder

29/2101

30i

Williston

29/2305

34i

Woodford

29/2041

50i

Wilmington

29/2141

37i

Total
rain
(in)

Maine
ICAO Sites
Augusta (KAUG)
Bangor Intl. Airport (KBGR)

30/0553

1003.7

Bar Harbor Airport (KBHB)
Greenville Airport (KGNR)

30/0756

1004.4

Lewiston (KLEW)
Portland Jetport (KPWM)

30/0251

997.3

Rockland (KRKD)
Sanford (KSFM)

30/0215

995.3

Wiscasset (KIWI)

30/0353

20

38

1.66

30/0453

22

37

1.41

30/0415

23

38

2.06

30/0256

24

38

4.43

30/0335

24

38

29/2351

32

55

30/0255

28

43

29/2018

35

46

29/2253

22

39

30/0718

38

48

29/2030

29

39

Marine Observations
Bar Harbor NOS (ATGM1)
44.90N 66.99W
Height: 7.8 m
Eastport NOS (PSBM1)
44.90N 66.99W
Height: 7.3 m
Matinicus Rock C-MAN (MISM1)
43.78N 68.87W
Height: 23 m
Mount Desert Rock C-MAN (MDRM1)
43.97N 68.13W
Height: 22.6 m
Wells NOS (WELM1)
43.32N 70.56W
Buoy 44005
43.20N 69.13W
Height: 5.0 m

30/0600

998.8

30/0600

48

58

30/0600

1001.6

30/0610

43

53

30/0224

994.0

29/2130

34i

47i

30/0058

996.3

29/1950

35

45

68

1.11

1.55

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Buoy 44007
43.53N 70.14W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44027
442.7N 67.31W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 44021 NERACOOS
43.76N 69.98W
Height: 4.0 m
Buoy 44030 NERACOOS
43.18N 70.42W
Height: 4.0 m
Buoy 44032 NERACOOS
43.72N 69.36W
Height: 4.0 m
Buoy 44033 NERACOOS
44.06N 69.00W
Height: 4.0 m
Buoy 44034 NERACOOS
44.11N 68.11W
Height: 4.0 m
Buoy 44037 NERACOOS
43.48N 67.88W
Height: 4.0 m
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0100

995.8

29/2100

35

47

30/0550

1004.3

29/1650

29

35

29/2300

44

30/0210

993.2

29/2040

36

44

30/0350

998.4

30/0400

33

43

30/0320

30

42

29/1804

29

40

30/0220

35

45

31/2004

998.9

Bath

66i

Bristol

29/2210

46i

Freeport

29/2305

35i

WFO Gray

29/2300

48i

Georgetown

29/2039

42i

Harpswell 3 S

29/2300

44i

Kennebunk 2 NE

54i

Lewiston 2 E

30/0214

41i

Rangeley

30/0024

38i

Saco

29/2009

51i

South Bristol

29/2320

50i

Springvale

29/2128

41i

Thomaston

29/1957

36i

Wells

29/1900

40i

69

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Total
rain
(in)

Ohio
ICAO Sites
Akron-Canton (KCAK)

30/0434

43

Akron-Fulton (KAKR)

30/0840

43

Ashtabula Co. (KHZY)

30/0103

42

Bolton Field Airport (KTZR)

30/0735

35

Burke Lakefront (KBKL)

30/0125

58

30/0554

39

30/0551

35

30/0553

35

Butler County Regional Airport
(KHAO)
Chillicothe Ross County Airport
(KRZT)
Cincinnati – Lunken Field (KLUK)
Cleveland Hopkins (KCLE)

30/0325

Columbus OSU Airport (KOSU)

30/0727

40

Cox Dayton Intl. (KDAY)

30/0356

40

Darke County Airport (KVES)

30/0355

34

Defiance Memorial Airport (KDFI)

29/2254

35

30/0303

39

30/0817

39

Erie Intl. Airport (KERI)

30/1009

45

Fairfield County Airport (KLHQ)

30/0241

36

Findlay Airport (KFDY)

30/0149

41

Lebanon Warren County (KI68)

30/0414

36

Lima Allen County Airport (KAOH)

30/0537

40

Lorain Co. Airport (KLPR)

30/0545

55

Mansfield-Lahm (KMFD)

30/0640

40

Marion Airport (KMNN)

30/1453

36

30/0657

34

30/0846

37

Port Columbus Intl. Airport (KCMH)

30/1051

38

Port Meadville (KGKJ)

30/0318

40

Rickenbacker Intl. Airport (KLCK)

30/0515

36

Dayton-Weight Brothers Airport
(KMGV)
Delaware Municipal Airport (KDPZ)

Middletown Hook Field Municipal
Airport (KMWO)
Newark-Heath Airport (KVTA)

70

53

59

5.08

5.63

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Sidney Municipal Airport (KI12)
Springfield-Beckley Municipal Airport
(KSGH)
Toledo Executive (KTDZ)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0459

35

30/0441

38

30/0248

40

Toledo Express (KTDL)

30/0340

43

Union County Airport (KMRT)

30/0834

35

30/0334

37

30/0758

43

30/0759

34

30/0146

41

30/0157

36

30/0626

40

Wapakoneta Neil Armstrong Airport
(KAXV)
Wayne Co. Airport (KBJJ)
Washington Courthouse Airport –
Fayette County (KI23)
Wilmington Air Park (KILN)
Wright-Patternson Air Force Base
(KFFO)
Youngstown-Warren Airport (KYNG)
Marine Observations
Cleveland NOS (CNDO1)
41.54N 81.64W
Height: 7.8 m
Conneaut Breakwater Light (CBLO1)
41.98N 80.56W
Height: 11.8 m
South Bass Island C-MAN (SBIO1)
41.63 N 82.84 W
Height: 22 m
Huron Light (HHLO1)
41.40 N 82.55 W
Height: 9.7 m
Fairport NOS (FAIO1)
41.76N 81.28W
Marblehead NOS (MRHO1)
41.55N 82.73W
Geneva on the Lake (GELO1)
41.86 N 80.97 W
Height: 8 m
Toledo NOS (THRO1)
41.69N 83.47W
Toledo Light #2 NOAA/GLERL
(THLO1)
41.83N 83.19W
Height: 14.9 m
Public/Other

30/1218

990.0

30/0206

48

59

30/0921

983.4

30/0340

43

53

30/1400

993.3

30/0800

47f

59

30/0300

54

30/1154

988.4

30/0518

49i

58i

30/1436

994.1

30/0230

39i

51i
50i

30/0520
30/1730

996.6

71

30/0830

24i

38i

30/0030

39

48

Total
rain
(in)

3.62

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

Arctic 3 SSE

30/0630

36i

Assumption 1 S

30/0400

39i

Bellefontaine 1 NE

30/1032

34i

Belmore 1 N

29/0320

35i

Bowersville 1 ESE

30/0503

36i

Centerville 2 ENE

29/2322

36i

Delaware 3 NNW

30/0900

36i

Dublin 2 N

30/0603

34i

Five Points 4 SSW

30/0517

34i

Fort Thomas 2 SE

30/0431

36i

Georgetown 1 ESE

30/0601

35i

Grove City 2 ENE

30/0450

35i

Huber Ridge 3 E

30/0721

36i

Kenton 1 SSW

30/0132

36i

Kettering

30/0340

35i

Liberty Center 4 SW

30/0400

37i

Morenci 3 SSW

30/1050

36i

New Bavaria 3 SE

30/0410

35i

New Paris 2 SW

30/0341

36i

Ney 2 W

30/0603

36i

Park Layne 2 SW

30/0441

37i

Pioneer 3 SSW

30/0440

38i

Potsdam 3 WSW

30/0303

35i

Springboro 2 N

29/2202

35i

Vandalia 1 SSE

30/0522

35i

Wauseon 2 SW

30/2103

50i

Withamsville 2 NE

30/0530

46i

Worthington 2 ENE

30/0940

42i

30/1451

37

Illinois
ICAO Sites
Chicago Midway Airport (KMDW)
Marine Observations

72

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Calumet NOS (CMTI2)
41.74N 87.54W
Height: 9.1 m
Chicago, IL NOAA/GRERL (CHII2)
42.00N 87.50W
Height: 25.9 m
Waukegan Harbor, IL (WHRI2)
42.36N 87.81W
Height: 9.0 m
Chicago Harrison-Dever Crib
Height: 26 m
4 NE East Chicago
(unknown ship)
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/1630

27

37

30/1700

40

49

30/1432

36

30/1230

50

30/0900

47

Burnham 2 WNW

30/0500

41

Chicago 2 W

30/1618

37

Lakemoor 2 E

30/1135

38

Lockport

30/1500

38

South Chicago 1 SE

29/0312

36

South Holland

30/1700

35

Fort Wayne Intl. Airport (KFWA)

30/0754

35

Fulton County Airport (KRCR)

30/1015

37

Galveston Airport (K5I6)

29/0327

38

Gary Regional Airport (KGYY)

30/1645

52

Goshen Municipal Airport (KGSH)

29/2204

35

La Porte Municipal Airport (KPPO)

30/1115

45

Michigan City-Philips Airport (KMGC)

30/1135

43

Richmond Municipal Airport (KRID)

30/0648

37

South Bend Regional Airport (KSBN)

30/1103

46

Starke County Airport (KOXI)

30/1135

43

30/1207

43

30/1250

45i

Indiana
ICAO Sites

Valparaiso Porter County Municipal
Airport (KVPZ)
Marine Observations
Burns Harbor (BHRI13)
41.65N 87.1W

73

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Michigan City NOAA/GRERL
(MCYI3)
41.73N 86.91W
Height: 21.3m
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/1500

1008.1

30/1500

47

59

Argos 3 NW

30/0818

36i

East Chicago

30/0542

39i

East Chicago 1 WSW

30/0625

36i

Hobart 2 SE

30/1216

38i

Huntington 4 SSW

30/0901

35i

Mentone 2 W

30/0838

35i

Michigan City 1 W

30/0741

38i

New Carlisle 3 S

30/1037

37i

New Chicago 1 WNW

30/0643

44i

Town of Pines 2 NNE

60i

Upland 3 NW
Elevation: 271 m
Valparaiso 2 SW

30/0832

35i

30/1132

43i

30/1143

42i

Adrian (KADG)

30/0232

42

Ann Arbor (KARB)

30/0748

40

Bad Axe (KBAX)

30/0353

42

Caro (KCFS)

30/0254

38

Detroit City Airport (KDET)

30/1218

42

Detroit Metropolitan Airport (KDTW)

30/0205

40

Flint (KFNT)

30/0216

38

Waterford 2 WSW
Michigan
ICAO Sites

Grand Rapids Airport (KGRR)

35

Gross Ille (KONZ)

30/0214

41

Hillsdale Municipal Airport (KJYM)

29/0254

36

Howell (KOZW)

30/0354

44

Kalamazoo Battle Creek Airport
(KAZO)

31

74

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Lansing/Capital City Airport (KLAN)

Gust
(kt)
34

Ludington Mason County Airport
(KLDM)
Mackinac Island (KMCD)

30/0413

40

Monroe (KTTF)

30/0233

40

40

Muskegon Airport (KMKG)

40

Phelps Collins Field (KAPX)

30/1054

41

Pontiac (KPTK)

30/0036

41

30/0229

49

30/0600

41

Saginaw (KMBS)

30/0312

34

Southwest Michigan Airport (KBEH)

30/0400

39

Port Hope (KP58)
Elevation: 180 m
Port Huron (KPHN)

Marine Observations
Big Bay (BIGM4)
46.83N 87.73W
Height: 10.0 m
Big Sable Point (BSBM4)
44.06N 86.51W
Height: 10.0 m
DeTour Village NOS (DTLM4)
45.99N 83.90W
Height: 11.7 m
Fairport (FPTM4)
45.62N 86.66W
Height: 10.1 m
Ft. Gratoit NOS (FTGM4)
43.01N 82.42W
Height: 27.4 m
Grand Marais (GRMM4)
46.68N 85.97W
Height: 9.1 m
Grand Traverse Light (GTLM4)
45.21N 85.55W
Height: 16.0 m
Gravelly Shoals Light (GSLM4)
44.02N 83.54W
Height: 24.7 m
Harbor Beach NOS (HRBM4)
43.85N 82.64W
Height: 9.1 m

30/1603

28

36

30/1240

34

45

30/1236

32

38

30/1730

30/1830

995.3

34

30/0636

56

65

30/0910

37

44

30/1000

36

46

30/1840

1000.0

30/0638

38

47

30/1854

997.6

30/0824

43

52

75

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location
Holland NOS (HLNM4)
42.77N 86.21W
Height: 10.0 m
Ludington NOS (LDTM4)
43.95N 86.44W
Mackinaw City NOS (MACM4)
45.78N 84.73W
Height: 10.4 m
Manistee Harbor (MEEM4)
44.25N 86.35W
Height: 10.0 m
Menominee NOS (MNMM4)
45.10N 87.59W
Height: 6.6 m
Muskegon NOAA/GLERL (MKGM4)
43.23N 86.34W
Height: 24.4 m
Naubinway (NABM4)
46.09N 85.44W
Height: 10.1 m
Port Inland NOS (PNLM4)
45.97N 85.87W
Height:10.2 m
Port Sanilac (PSCM4)
43.42N 82.54W
Height: 10.0 m
Presque Isle Light (PRIM4)
45.36N 83.49W
Height: 33.5 m
Rock of Ages C-MAN (ROAM4)
47.87N 89.31W
Height: 46.9 m
Saginaw Bay Light #1 (SBLM4)
43.81N 83.72W
Height: 12.5 m
St. Clair Shores (CLSM4)
42.47N 82.88W
South Haven C-MAN (SVNM4)
42.40N 86.29W
Height: 16.8 m
Stannard Rock C-MAN (STDM4)
47.18N 87.23W
Height: 35.2 m
Sturgeon Point Light (SPTM4)
44.71N 83.73W
Height: 22.5 m

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0712

36

42
38i

30/1748
30/0724

26

37

30/1120

39

50

30/1454

33

41

30/1400

27

38

30/1515

30/2010

995.3

41

30/1512

27

38

30/0910

48

58

30/1306

51

30/1530

31f

35

31/0530

995.3

30/0620

40

47

30/1710

995.6

30/1230

29i

42i
57

30/2100

30/0408

76

39

46

52

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Thunder Bay Island NOAA/GLERL
(TBIM4)
45.04N 83.19W
Public/Other

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30.0900

29

44i

Bayshore 4 W

30/1201

47i

Benzonia 2 S

30/1935

44i

Berrien Springs

30/1500

34i

Cadillac 2 E

30/0750

39i

Lakeport 3 WSW

30/0400

43i

Mount Clemens

30/0355

45i

Rochester Hills

30/0439

43i

Rudyard 4 SE

30/1150

43i

30/1100

50

St. Joseph
Elevation: 183 m
Toledo Harbor

57i

West Branch 2 SSE

30/1230

44i

Ypsilanti

29/2325

43i

Wisconsin
ICAO Sites
Door County-Cherryland Airport
(KSUE)
Green Bay (KGRB)

30/1055

40

30/1453

34

Manitowac County Airport (KMTW)

30/0415

35

30/1811

41

Marine Observations
Algona City (AGMW3)
44.61N 87.43W
Height: 9.1 m
Chambers Island, WI (CBRW3)
45.20N 87.36W
Height: 10.0 m
Death’s Door, WI (NPDW3)
45.29N 86.98W
Height: 10.0 m
Kenosha, WI (KNSW3)
42.59N 87.81W
Height: 19.5 m
Kewaunee NOS (KWNW3)
44.47N 87.50W

30/2100

34

42

30/2330

37

44

30/1350

30

38

30/1818

77

37i

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Sheboygan, WI (SGNW3)
43.75N 87.69W
Sister Bay, WI (SYWW3)
45.20N 87.12W
Height: 3.0 m
APRS/Public/Other
Sister Bay 2 NNW (APRS)
Elevation: 180 m
Great Lakes Buoys
Buoy 45002
45.34 N 86.41 W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45003
45.35 N 82.84 W
Height: 3.2 m
Buoy 45004
47.58N 86.59W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45005
41.68 N 82.40 W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45007
42.67 N 87.03 W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45008
44.28 N 82.42 W
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45012
43.62 N 77.42 W
Height: 5.0 m
Kentucky

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/1400

35i

46i

30/2244

42

52

48i

30/2144

31/1950

1005.5

30/1100

34e

43

30/1850

999.8

30/1130

36e

45

31/0250

29

36

30/1150

990.6

30/0720

39f

52e

31/0750

1006.2

30/1040

38e

48e

30/1950

997.1

30/0700

39f

49e

30/0450

985.6

30/0240

37f

48

ICAO Sites
Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky Intl.
Airport (KCVG)
Falmouth Gene Snyder Airport (KK62)
Wilder 1 SSE (KYMN)

30/0653

39

30/0104

42

30/0330

36i

30/0640

36i

Public/Other
Park Hills 1 NNE
Canada
Quebec
ICAO Sites

78

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Beauport (CXBO)

Gust
(kt)
43i

Cap Rouge (CWQM)

30/0656

42i

Quebec St. Francois (Orléans) (CWER)

30/0608

51i

WeatherFlow
La Baie
Elevation: 10 m
St. Laurent d’Orléans
Elevation: 12 m
St. Mathias
Elevation: 52 m
Vaudreuil
Elevation: 11 m
Quebec St. Francois (Orléans)

30/0615

32i

40i

29/2335

35i

45i

30/0145

43i

42i

30/0435

32i

40i
51i

30/0608

Bois–Francis (St. Germaine)

43i

Montréal (Laval)

47i

Ontario
ICAO Sites
Burlington Pier (CWWB)
Kitchener Waterloo-Wellington
(CYKF)
London Airport (CXYU)

30/0355

51i

30/0100

47i

30/0100

43i

Oshawa (CYOO)

43i

Point Petre (CWQP)

30/0416

50i

Port Weller (CWWZ)

30/0615

44i

Ridgetown (CXRG)

43i

Sarnia (CZYR)

30/1118

Toronto Island (CYTZ)

30/0616

49i

Toronto Pearson Intl. (CYYZ)

30/0426

43i

Western Island (CWMZ)

30/0729

58i

42i

55i

WeatherFlow
Belle River
Elevation: 12 m
Hamilton Harbor
Elevation: 10 m
Rondeau Bay
Elevation: 15 m

79

30/0725

47

57

30/0000

33

48

30/0715

40

56

Total
rain
(in)

Minimum Sea
Level Pressure

Location

Date/
time
(UTC)

Press.
(mb)

Sunset Point
Elevation: 8 m
Public/Other
Stoney Creek

Maximum Surface
Wind Speed
Date/
time
(UTC)a

Sustained
(kt)b

Gust
(kt)

30/0145

33

38

30/0415

Total
rain
(in)

52i

Buoys
Buoy 44150 (Atlantic)
42.51N 64.02W
29/2120 1007.0* 30/2220
29*
36*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45132 (Lake Erie)
42.47N 81.22W
30/0431
35*
41*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45135 (Lake Ontario)
43.79N 76.87W
30/0030
39*
49*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45136 (Lake Superior)
48.53N 89.95W
30/1335
28*
34*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45137 (Georgian Bay)
45.55N 81.02W
30/0632
39*
49*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45139 (Lake Ontario)
43.26N 79.54W
30/0250
33
44
Height 5.0 m
Buoy 45142 (Lake Erie)
42.74N 79.20W
30/0639
41*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45153 (Georgian Bay)
44.95N 80.63W
30/0351
38*
47*
Height: 5.0 m
Buoy 45149 (Lake Huron)
43.54N 82.08W
30/0402
37*
45*
Height: 5.0 m
a
Date/time is for sustained wind when both sustained and gust are listed.
b
Except as noted, sustained wind averaging periods for C-MAN and land-based ASOS reports are 2 min; buoy
averaging period is 8 min.
c
Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level.
d
Storm tide is referenced above Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW). Bold numbers indicate that the maximum
recorded water level exceeded historical maximum values.
e
Anemometer height 5 m.
f
Wind averaging period 10 min.
g
Sensor reached physical limit on measurements and did not record a maximum value.
h
Maximum storm tide/storm surge likely includes effects from freshwater runoff.
i
station has unknown elevation
j
Wind averaging period 1 min.
*
incomplete record

80

Table 4. All-time minimum surface pressures listed by station set during Sandy.
Location
Atlantic City, NJ (ACY)
Philadelphia, PA (PHL)
Trenton, NJ (TTN)
Harrisburg, PA (MDT)
Baltimore, MD (BWI)
Scranton, PA (AVP)

Minimum pressure in mb and (inches)
948.5 (28.01)
952.2 (28.12)
958.7 (28.31)
963.8 (28.46)
964.8 (28.49)
971.6 (28.69)

Table 5. National Ocean Service (NOS) Tide Gauges, and United State Geological Survey
(USGS) High-Water Marks and Storm Tide Pressure Sensors during Sandy.

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Eastport (PSBM1 - 8410140) (44.90N 66.98W)

2.21

10.71

1.38

Cutler Farris Wharf (CFWM1 - 8411060) (44.66N 67.21W)

2.50

1.67

Bar Harbor (ATGM1 - 8413320) (44.39N 68.21W)

2.26

1.37

Portland (CASM1 - 8418150) (43.66N 70.25W)

3.27

Wells (WELM1 - 8419317) (43.32N 70.56W)

3.53

Location

National Ocean Service (NOS) Tide Gauges

Maine

6.65

1.99
1.88

New Hampshire
Fort Point (8423898) (43.07N 70.71W)

3.32

6.41

2.00

Boston (BHBM3 - 8443970) (42.35N 71.05W)

4.57

7.42

2.64

Fall River (FRVM3 - 8447386) (41.70N 71.16W)

5.50

Chatham (8447435) (41.69N 69.95W)

4.20

5.87

2.85

Woods Hole (BZBM3 - 8447930) (41.52N 70.67W)

5.07

4.44

3.60

Nantucket Island (NTKM3 - 8449130) (41.29N 70.10W)

3.90

Massachusetts
4.18R

2.40

Rhode Island
Newport (NWPR1 - 8452660) (41.51N 71.33W)

5.34

Conimicut Light (CPTR1 - 8452944) (41.72N 71.34W)

5.89

Providence (FOXR1 - 8454000) (41.81N 71.40W)

6.20

81

6.13

4.32
4.48R

6.89

4.52

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Quonset PointI (QPTR1 - 8454049) (41.59N 71.41W)

Storm
tide
(ft)b

5.16

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

2.61

Connecticut
New London (NLNC3 - 8461490) (41.36N 72.09W)

6.50

6.16

4.95

New Haven (NWHC3 - 8465705) (41.28N 72.91W)

9.14

Bridgeport (BRHC3 - 8467150) (41.17N 73.18W)

9.83

9.30

5.82R

Montauk (MTKN6 - 8510560) (41.05N 71.96W)

5.89

5.55

4.59

Kings Point (KPTN6 - 8516945) (40.81N 73.76W)

12.65

The Battery (BATN6 - 8518750) (40.70N 74.01W)

9.40

Bergen Point West Reach (BGNN4 - 8519483) (40.64N 74.14W)

9.56

5.54R

New York
6.51R
11.28

9.00R
9.53R

New Jersey
Sandy HookI (SDHN4 - 8531680) (40.47N 74.01W)

8.57

10.42

8.01R

Atlantic City (ACYN4 - 8534720) (39.36N 74.42W)

5.82

6.28

4.29

Cape May (CMAN4 - 8536110) (38.97N 74.96W)

5.16

5.89

3.46R

Ship John Shoal (SJSN4 - 8537121) (39.31N 75.38W)

5.30

Tacony-Palmyra Bridge (TPBN4 - 8538886) (40.01N 75.04W)

6.11

3.76

Burlington, Delaware River (BDRN4 - 8539094) (40.08N 74.87W)

6.29

3.84

Marcus Hook (MRCP1 - 8540433) (39.81N 75.41W)

6.26

4.03R

Philadelphia (PHBP1 - 8545240) (39.93N 75.14W)

5.83

Newbold (NBLP1 – 8548989) (40.14N 74.75W)

6.42

3.88

Delaware City (DELD1 - 8551762) (39.58N 75.59W)

5.99

3.74R

Reedy Point (RDYD1 - 8551910) (39.56N 75.57W)

5.80

Pennsylvania

7.52

3.93R

Delaware

I

6.13

3.26

Brandywine Shoal Light (BRND1 - 8555889) (38.99N 75.11W)

4.22

Lewes (LWSD1 - 8557380) (38.78N 75.12W)

5.34

6.08

4.05

Ocean City Inlet (OCIM2 - 8570283) (38.33N 75.09W)

4.33

4.42

3.59

Bishops Head (BISM2 - 8571421) (38.22N 76.04W)

3.10

3.05

2.25R

Cambridge (CAMM2 - 8571892) (38.57N 76.07W)

3.24

3.44

2.51

Tolchester Beach (TCBM2 - 8573364) (39.21N 76.25W)

3.54

3.06

Chesapeake City (CHCM2 - 8573927) (39.53N 75.81W)

4.88

2.72

Maryland

82

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Baltimore (BLTM2 - 8574680) (39.27N 76.58W)

3.69

3.83

3.00

Annapolis (APAM2 - 8575512) (38.98N 76.48W)

3.35

3.11

2.45

Solomons IslandI (SLIM2 - 8577330) (38.32N 76.45W)

2.57

2.08

1.45

4.03

4.72

2.94

Location

District of Colombia
Washington (WASD2 - 8594900) (38.87N 77.02W)
Virginia
Wachapreague (WAHV2 - 8631044) (37.61N 75.69W)

4.95

Kiptopeke (KPTV2 - 8632200) (37.17N 75.99W)

3.76

4.92

3.89

Lewisetta (LWTV2 - 8635750) (38.00N 76.46W)

2.46

2.92

2.25

Windmill Point (8636580) (37.62N 76.29W)
Yorktown USCG Training Center (YKTV2 - 8637689)

2.77

2.99

3.86

3.44

(37.23N 76.48W)

Sewells Point (SWPV2 - 8638610) (36.95N 76.33W)

4.57

Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel (CBBV2 - 8638863) (36.97N 76.11W)

4.36

Money Point (MNPV2 - 8639348) (36.78N 76.30W)

4.79

3.88

5.17

4.05

4.08

North Carolina
DuckI (DUKN7 - 8651370) (36.18N 75.75W)

4.16

4.79

3.29

Oregon Inlet Marina (ORIN7 - 8652587) (35.80N 75.55W)

3.62

3.59

3.11

USCG Station Hatteras (HCGN7 - 8654467) (35.21N 75.70W)

4.00

4.15R

Beaufort (BFTN7 - 8656483) (34.72N 76.67W)

1.90

1.82

Wilmington (8658120) (34.23N 77.95W)

1.84

1.23

Wrightsville Beach (JMPN7 - 8658163) (34.21N 77.79W)

2.25

3.85

2.09

Springmaid Pier (MROS1 - 8661070) (33.66N 78.92W)

2.02

3.95

1.51

Oyster Landing (N. Inlet Estuary) (8662245) (33.35N 79.19W)

2.91

3.92

1.51

Charleston (8665530) (32.78N 79.93W)

2.39

4.20

1.57

Clarendon Plantation (8667633) (32.50N 80.78W)

3.55

South Carolina

1.40

Georgia
Fort Pulaski (FPKG1 - 8670870) (32.03N 80.90W)

2.89

4.98

1.53

Fernandina Beach (FRDF1 - 8720030) (30.67N 81.47W)

2.95

4.24

1.50

Mayport (Bar Pilots Dock) (8720218) (30.40N 81.43W)

2.53

3.59

1.64

Florida

83

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

I-295 Bridge, St. Johns River (8720357) (30.19N 81.69W)

1.86

2.19

1.64

Trident Pier (TRDF1 - 8721604) (28.42N 80.59W)

2.49

3.77

2.72

Lake Worth Pier (LKWF1 - 8722670) (26.61N 80.03W)

2.29

2.84

2.29R

Virginia Key (VAKF1 - 8723214) (25.73N 80.16W)

1.61

2.17

1.96

Vaca Key (VCAF1 - 8723970) (24.71N 81.11W)

1.70

1.38

1.73

Key West (KYWF1 - 8724580) (24.56N 81.81W)

0.93

1.29

1.24

Parksley (VA-ACC-054) (37.79N 75.71W)

6.2

2.3

Wachapreague (VA-ACC-002) (37.61N 75.69W)

5.8

2.0

Sanford (VA-ACC-051) (37.93N 75.66W)

6.0

1.7

Sanford (VA-ACC-052) (37.93N 75.66W)

5.9

1.7

Chincoteague Island (VA-ACC-001) (37.94N 75.35W)

4.0

1.5

Harborton (VA-ACC-057) (37.67N 75.83W)

5.0

1.2

Onanock (VA-ACC-055) (37.72N 75.79W)

5.1

0.8

Hayes (VA-GLO-001) (37.28N 76.40W)

4.5

1.2

Hayes (VA-GLO-002) (37.28N 76.40W)

4.6

1.0

Port Haywood (VA-MAT-003) (37.32N 76.27W)

4.6

1.8

Port Haywood (VA-MAT-004) (37.32N 76.27W)

4.7

0.8

Moon (VA-MAT-002) (37.45N 76.28W)

3.5

0.8

Moon (VA-MAT-001) (37.45N 76.28W)

3.5

0.5

4.3

3.0

Virginia Beach (VA-VAB-001) (36.70N 75.93W)

7.9

1.0

Virginia Beach (VA-VAB-002) (36.74N 75.94W)

8.7

1.0

Location

US Geological Survey (USGS) High-Water Marks
Virginia
Accomack County

Gloucester County

Mathews County

Northampton County
Franktown (VA-NOR-002) (37.48N 75.93W)
Virginia Beach County

New Jersey

84

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Avalon (NJ-CPM-008) (39.10N 74.72W)

6.9

2.9

Cape May Court House (NJ-CPM-004) (39.08N 74.80W)

6.9

2.0

Sea Isle City (NJ-CPM-006) (39.06N 74.66W)

6.8

1.4

Avalon (NJ-CPM-007) (39.08N 74.74W)

7.8

1.2

Cape May Court House (NJ-CPM-234) (39.12N 74.89W)

6.7

0.9

Stone Harbor (NJ-CPM-005) (39.06N 74.77W)

6.7

0.3

Atlantic City (NJ-ATL-103) (39.37N 74.42W)

7.7

3.8

Absecon (NJ-ATL-102) (39.40N 74.49W)

7.5

3.0

Absecon (NJ-ATL-100) (39.43N 74.52W)

7.6

2.4

Brigantine (NJ-ATL-107) (39.42N 74.36W)

8.0

2.4

Hammonton (NJ-ATL-232) (39.62N 74.62W)

7.4

2.4

Atlantic City (NJ-ATL-302) (39.35N 74.46W)

7.7

2.3

Brigantine (NJ-ATL-108) (39.41N 74.37W)

7.8

2.1

Atlantic City (NJ-ATL-300) (39.36N 74.45W)

7.3

2.0

Brigantine (NJ-ATL-105) (39.39N 74.40W)

7.6

1.9

Brigantine (NJ-ATL-106) (39.38N 74.41W)

7.8

1.9

Longport (NJ-ATL-305) (39.30N 74.54W)

8.4

1.8

Ventnor City (NJ-ATL-303) (40.33N 74.03)

6.9

1.7

Longport (NJ-ATL-304) (39.30N 74.54W)

8.3

1.3

Ocean City (NJ-ATL-306) (39.28N 74.57W)

8.5

0.7

7.5

4.0

Tuckerton (NJ-OCE-386) (39.60N 74.34W)

8.0

4.9

Tuckerton (NJ-OCE-390) (39.58N 74.33W)

7.8

4.8

Seaside Park (NJ-OCE-330) (39.92N 74.08W)

6.2

4.4

Long Beach (NJ-OCE-375) (39.58N 74.23W)

7.4

4.3

Little Egg Harbor Township (NJ-OCE-394) (39.55N 74.37W)

8.5

4.2

Manahawkin (NJ-OCE-382) (39.67N 74.22W)

7.5

4.1

Seaside Park (NJ-OCE-328) (39.91N 74.08W)

6.3

3.9

Location

Cape May County

Atlantic County

Burlington County
Hammonton (NJ-BUR-233) (39.64N 74.65W)
Ocean County

85

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Bay Head (NJ-OCE-228) (40.07N 74.04W)

6.8

3.5

Little Egg Harbor Township (NJ-OCE-392) (39.59N 74.35W)

7.9

3.2

Ocean Gate (NJ-OCE-323) (39.93N 74.14W)

6.5

3.1

Lavallette (NJ-OCE-332) (39.99N 74.07W)

6.9

2.8

Seaside Heights (NJ-OCE-334) (39.96N 74.07W)

8.7

2.8

Bayville (NJ-OCE-314) (39.91N 74.13W)

5.3

2.4

Mantoloking (NJ-OCE-336) (40.04N 74.05W)

7.0

2.3

Harvey Cedars (NJ-OCE-373) (39.61N 74.21W)

7.7

2.3

Brick (NJ-OCE-347) (40.06N 74.09W)

7.1

2.0

Borough of Point Pleasant (NJ-OCE-229) (40.07N 74.06W)

6.4

1.9

Long Beach (NJ-OCE-377) (39.54N 74.26W)

7.9

1.9

Harvey Cedars (NJ-OCE-319) (39.71N 74.14W)

5.2

1.8

Ship Bottom (NJ-OCE-371) (39.64N 74.19W)

5.5

1.7

West Creek (NJ-OCE-384) (39.64N 74.30W)

4.9

1.3

Surf City (NJ-OCE-379) (39.67N 74.16W)

5.6

1.2

Barnegat Light (NJ-OCE-321) (39.76N 74.11W)

5.3

0.8

Barnegat Township (NJ-OCE-303) (39.77N 74.20W)

4.4

0.7

Forked River (NJ-OCE-309) (39.83N 74.18W)

5.8

0.6

Waretown (NJ-OCE-306) (39.79N 74.18W)

7.3

0.2

Monmouth County
USCG Station, Gateway National Recreation Area, Sandy Hook

11.6

8.9

Keyport (NJ-MON-220) (40.45N 74.22W)

13.4

6.0

Keyport (NJ-MON-218) (40.45N 74.21W)

14.5

5.7

Union Beach (NJ-MON-217) (40.45N 74.16W)

13.0

5.6

Highlands (NJ-MON-205) (40.40N 73.98W)

11.0

5.5

Keyport (NJ-MON-219) (40.45N 74.21W)

14.5

5.5

Brielle (NJ-MON-363) (40.11N 74.05W)

9.3

5.5

Rumson (NJ-MON-119) (40.38N 74.01W)

10.9

5.2

Highlands (NJ-MON-204) (40.40N 73.98W)

11.1

5.2

Sea Bright (NJ-MON-122) (40.37N 73.97W)

10.6

5.1

Union Beach (NJ-MON-116) (40.45N 74.17W)

12.5

5.0

Location

(NJ-MON-124) (40.47N 74.01W)

86

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Highlands (NJ-MON-202) (40.40N 73.99W)

11.0

4.8

Highlands (NJ-MON-206) (40.40N 73.98W)

10.6

4.8

Sea Bright (NJ-MON-207) (40.36N 73.97W)

10.0

4.7

Sea Bright (NJ-MON-208) (40.36N 73.97W)

10.2

4.5

Highlands (NJ-MON-203) (40.40N 73.98W)

10.9

4.3

Sea Bright (NJ-MON-209) (40.36N 73.97W)

10.1

4.1

Monmouth Beach (NJ-MON-314) (40.34N 73.98W)

9.5

4.1

Sea Bright (NJ-MON-123) (40.40N 73.98W)

10.9

4.0

Union Beach (NJ-MON-216) (40.44N 74.16W)

12.0

3.9

Little Silver (NJ-MON-316) (40.33N 74.03W)

9.7

3.3

Keansburg (NJ-MON-214) (40.44N 74.14W)

5.2

2.6

Keansburg (NJ-MON-215) (40.45N 74.15W)

5.1

2.5

Atlantic Highlands (NJ-MON-210) (40.42N 74.04W)

11.7

2.2

Port Monmouth (NJ-MON-211) (40.42N 74.10W)

9.6

2.2

Port Monmouth (NJ-MON-213) (40.43N 74.11W)

11.7

2.0

Long Branch (NJ-MON-315) (40.31N 74.00W)

9.6

2.0

Little Silver (NJ-MON-317) (40.33N 74.03W)

9.7

1.8

Keyport (NJ-MON-223) (40.44N 74.23W)

13.0

1.7

Point Pleasant Beach (NJ-MON-365) (40.10N 74.05W)

8.7

1.4

Oceanport (NJ-MON-121) (40.31N 74.01W)

9.6

1.3

Keansburg (NJ-MON-117) (40.45N 74.14W)

5.1

0.9

Leonardo (NJ-MON-212) (40.42N 74.06W)

11.7

0.4

Laurence Harbor (NJ-MID-408) (40.44N 74.23W)

12.8

7.9

Sayreville (NJ-MID-402) (40.48N 74.35W)

13.3

7.7

Perth Amboy (NJ-MID-404) (40.50N 74.28W)

13.6

4.4

South Amboy (NJ-MID-405) (40.49N 74.28W)

13.3

3.8

Perth Amboy (NJ-MID-205) (40.51N 74.26W)

12.7

3.7

Perth Amboy (NJ-MID-206) (40.54N 74.26W)

12.5

1.6

Carteret (NJ-MID-210) (40.57N 74.22W)

12.3

1.4

Perth Amboy (NJ-MID-204) (40.51N 74.29W)

12.9

1.1

Carteret (NJ-MID-150) (40.60N 74.24W)

12.2

0.7

Location

Middlesex County

87

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Linden (NJ-UNI-209) (40.60N 74.21W)

12.1

5.7

Elizabeth (NJ-UNI-208) (40.66N 74.21W)

11.9

5.0

Elizabeth (NJ-UNI-207) (40.64N 74.20W)

11.7

2.8

11.6

3.5

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-001) (40.76N 74.03W)

9.4

6.5

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-002) (40.76N 74.03W)

9.4

6.5

Weekawken (NJ-HUD-003) (40.76N 74.03W)

9.4

6.5

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-004) (40.76N 74.03W)

12.0

6.0

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-005) (40.76N 74.03W)

12.0

6.0

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-006) (40.76N 74.03W)

12.0

6.0

Hoboken (NJ-HUD-110) (40.74N 74.03W)

10.6

5.6

Jersey City (NJ-HUD-109) (40.72N 74.03W)

10.4

4.1

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-008) (40.76N 74.02W)

10.1

2.5

Hoboken (NJ-HUD-009) (40.74N 74.02W)

10.7

2.5

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-007) (40.76N 74.02W)

10.3

2.4

West New York (NJ-HUD-421) (40.78N 74.00W)

10.1

2.3

Bayonne (NJ-HUD-104) (40.65N 74.13W)

11.6

2.2

Jersey City (NJ-HUD-103) (40.73N 74.09W)

11.0

1.9

Weehawken (NJ-HUD-420) (40.76N 74.02W)

10.3

1.1

North Bergen (NJ-HUD-422) (40.80N 73.99W)

9.8

1.1

Hoboken (NJ-HUD-010) (40.74N 74.03W)

10.5

0.8

Edgewater (NJ-BER-415) (40.84N 73.97W)

9.4

3.8

Hackensack (NJ-BER-413) (40.88N 74.04W)

8.2

3.5

Moonachie (NJ-BER-416) (40.84N 74.04W)

7.4

2.5

Kearny (NJ-BER-417) (40.79N 74.15W)

11.8

1.5

Edgewater (NJ-BER-423) (40.82N 73.98W)

9.5

0.3

Location

Union County

Essex County
Newark (NJ-ESS-102) (40.71N 74.13W)
Hudson County

Bergen County

New York

88

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Oakwood (NY-RIC-718) (40.56N 74.12W)

12.5

7.9

Tottenville (NY-RIC-703) (40.50N 74.24W)

13.2

5.5

Dongan Hills (NY-RIC-701) (40.58N 74.10W)

12.5

4.7

Arrochar (NY-RIC-719) (40.59N 74.07W)

12.7

2.5

Prince’s Bay (NY-RIC-716) (40.51N 74.21W)

13.1

1.0

11.4

5.5

9.7

4.7

Financial District (Pier 11 Wall St.) (NY-NEW-104) (40.70N 74.01W)

11.3

4.5

Battery Park City (NY-NEW-126) (40.72N 74.01W)

9.8

4.3

Randall’s Island (NY-NEW-981) (40.80N 73.93W)

10.3

3.8

Financial District (NY-NEW-107) (40.71N 74.01W)

11.2

3.5

Financial District (NY-NEW-105) (40.71N 74.01W)

11.1

3.5

Financial District (NY-NEW-106) (40.71N 74.01W)

11.2

3.5

Financial District (NY-NEW-109) (40.71N 74.00W)

11.0

3.5

Randall’s Island (NY-NEW-806) (40.80N 73.92W)

11.1

3.1

Two Bridges (NY-NEW-112) (40.71N 74.00W)

11.2

3

Financial District (Battery Park) (NY-NEW-100) (40.70N 74.02W)

11.6

2.5

Financial District (Battery Park) (NY-NEW-102) (40.70N 74.02W)

10.0

2.5

Inwood (NY-NEW-803) (40.87N 73.91W)

9.0

2.1

Financial District (Battery Park) (NY-NEW-103) (40.70N 74.02W)

11.0

2

Tribeca (NY-NEW-125) (40.72N 74.01W)

10.6

1.5

Tribeca (NY-NEW-124) (40.72N 74.01W)

10.9

1.0

Tribeca (NY-NEW-128) (40.72N 74.01W)

10.8

1.0

Financial District (NY-NEW-110) (40.71N 74.00W)

11.1

1

Financial District (NY-NEW-111) (40.71N 74.00W)

11.1

1

Brooklyn (NY-KIN-902) (40.66N 74.02W)

11.5

4.5

Dumbo, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-504) (40.70N 73.99W)

11.3

4.4

Red Hook, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-511) (40.67N 74.01W)

11.2

4.1

Location

Richmond County (Staten Island)

New York County (Manhattan)
Financial District (Battery Park) (NY-NEW-101) (40.70N 74.02W)
One World Trade Center, Financial District
(NY-NEW-127) (40.71N 74.01W)

Kings County (Brooklyn)

89

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Canarsie, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-003) (40.64N 73.89W)

11.0

4.1

Gerritsen Beach, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-906) (40.59N 73.93W)

10.9

4.0

Brooklyn (NY-KIN-908) (40.61N 73.90W)

11.2

3.6

Red Hook, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-724) (40.67N 74.01W)

11.3

3.6

Gowanus, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-725) (40.68N 73.99W)

9.8

3.2

Greenwood, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-901) (40.66N 74.01W)

11.2

3.0

South Side, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-510) (40.72N 73.97W)

9.72

2.6

East Williamsburg, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-002) (40.72N 73.92W)

10.9

2.2

Dumbo, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-604) (40.70N 73.99W)

11.0

1.6

Brooklyn (NY-KIN-904) (40.60N 74.00W)

9.2

1.1

Brooklyn (NY-KIN-909) (40.66N 73.86W)

10.0

1.1

Throgs Neck, The Bronx (NY-BRO-809) (40.82N 73.84W)

10.7

3.4

Highbridge, The Bronx (NY-BRO-804) (40.84N 73.93W)

9.7

2.1

Hunts Point, The Bronx (NY-BRO-807) (40.80N 73.90W)

10.6

1.0

Maspeth, Queens (NY-QUE-001) (40.72N 73.92W)

10.9

6.0

Breezy Point, Queens (NY-QUE-729) (40.56N 73.93W)

12.7

5.4

Belle Harbor, Queens (NY-QUE-730) (40.58N 73.86W)

11.2

5.4

Long Island City, Queens (NY-QUE-505) (40.74N 73.96W)

11.3

5.0

Springfield Gardens, Queens (NY-QUE-210) (40.64N 73.75W)

10.6

4.6

Breezy Point, Queens (NY-KIN-907) (40.57N 73.88W)

11.0

4.2

Astoria, Queens (NY-QUE-506) (40.77N 73.94W)

10.9

4.0

Breezy Point, Queens (NY-QUE-728) (40.56N 73.91W)

9.7

3.6

Little Neck, Queens (NY-QUE-501) (40.78N 73.75W)

10.3

3.5

Howard Beach, Queens (NY-QUE-508) (40.65N 73.84W)

10.8

2.7

Howard Beach, Queens (NY-QUE-507) (40.66N 73.84W)

10.9

2.5

Little Neck, Queens (NY-QUE-502) (40.78N 73.75W)

10.3

2.1

Malba, Queens (NY-QUE-520) (40.80N 73.83W)

10.8

0.3

Hempstead (Freeport) (NY-NAS-921) (40.63N 73.58W)

9.0

4.6

Hempstead (Inwood) (NY-NAS-911) (40.62N 73.76W)

10.2

4.3

Location

Bronx County

Queens County

Nassau County

90

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

9.7

3.7

8.0

3.6

Oyster Bay (Massapequa) (NY-NAS-416) (40.65N 73.46W)

7.9

3.5

East Massapequa (NY-NAS-901) (40.66N 73.43W)

7.5

3.5

Oyster Bay (Massapequa) (NY-NAS-903) (40.65N 73.46W)

8.0

3.3

Hempstead (Freeport) (NY-NAS-920) (40.64N 73.60W)

9.2

3.3

Oyster Bay (Mill Neck) (NY-NAS-929) (40.88N 73.55W)

9.6

3.1

Hempstead (Atlantic Beach) (NY-NAS-220) (40.59N 73.73W)

12.7

3.0

Hempstead (Lawrence) (NY-SUF-912) (40.61N 73.73W)

9.8

2.8

Hempstead (Merrick) (NY-NAS-922) (40.65N 73.55W)

8.4

2.8

Hempstead (Port Washington) (NY-SUF-517) (40.82N 73.70W)

10.0

2.5

Hempstead (Baldwin Harbor) (NY-NAS-919) (40.63N 73.61W)

9.3

2.5

Oyster Bay (Centre Island) (NY-NAS-933) (40.89N 73.53W)

10.0

2.3

Oyster Bay (Laurel Hollow) (NY-NAS-927) (40.88N 73.49W)

9.5

2.0

Oyster Bay (Oyster Bay Cove) (NY-NAS-925) (40.87N 73.50W)

9.3

1.9

Hempstead (Cedarhurst) (NY-NAS-910) (40.63N 73.73W)

10.4

1.8

Glen Cove (NY-NAS-938) (40.89N 73.64W)

10.0

1.8

Long Beach (NY-QUE-710) (40.59N 73.67W)

11.6

1.7

Oyster Bay (Bayville) (NY-NAS-935) (40.91N 73.56W)
Hemptead (Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh)

11.1

1.7

8.7

1.5

Oyster Bay (Bayville) (NY-NAS-936) (40.91N 73.58W)

10.4

1.3

Tobay Beach Park (NY-NAS-954) (40.61N 73.43W)

7.1

1.3

Oyster Bay (Oyster Bay Cove) (NY-NAS-928) (40.87N 73.52W)

10.0

1.2

Long Beach (NY-NAS-707) (40.58N 73.64W)

10.7

1.1

Oyster Bay (Centre Island) (NY-NAS-932) (40.90N 73.51W)

9.7

1.1

Long Beach (NY-NAS-708) (40.59N 73.64W)

8.7

1.1

Hempstead (Seaford) (NY-NAS-905) (40.66N 73.50W)

5.0

1.0

Hempstead (Valley Stream) (NY-NAS-909) (40.65N 73.73W)

8.8

1.0

North Hempstead (Roslyn) (NY-NAS-940) (40.80N 73.65W)

10.2

0.9

Hempstead (Lido Beach) (NY-NAS-222) (40.59N 73.61W)

10.2

0.8

Oyster Bay (Oyster Bay) (NY-NAS-502) (40.88N 73.54W)

10.1

0.8

Location

Oyster Bay (Laurel Hollow) (NY-NAS-923) (40.86N 73.46W)
Hempstead (Jones Beach State Park, Wantagh)
(NY-NAS-224) (40.60N 73.50W)

(NY-NAS-225) (40.59N 73.55W)

91

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Oyster Bay (Massapequa) (NY-NAS-904) (40.66N 73.47W)

8.4

0.8

Glen Cove (NY-NAS-939) (40.90N 73.63W)

9.9

0.8

Long Beach (NY-NAS-709) (40.59N 73.67W)
North Hempstead (Glenwood Landing)

9.3

0.8

10.2

0.8

Oyster Bay (Bayville) (NY-NAS-934) (40.91N 73.54W)

8.1

0.7

Hempstead (East Atlantic Beach) (NY-NAS-221) (40.59N 73.71W)

10.6

0.6

Hempstead (Point Lookout) (NY-NAS-223) (40.59N 73.58W)

9.3

0.6

Location

(NY-NAS-941) (40.82N 73.65W)

Suffolk County
Brookhaven (Fire Island) (NY-SUF-418) (40.63N 73.22W)

5.6*

Babylon (Oak Beach-Captree) (NY-SUF-950) (40.64N 73.29W)

5.5*

Riverhead (Wading River) (NY-SUF-506) (40.96N 72.86W)

8.3

4.5

Southold (East Marion) (NY-SUF-957) (41.12N 72.34W)

4.5*

Babylon (Gilgo) (NY-SUF-952) (40.62N 73.39W)

4.3*

Brookhaven (Mastic Beach) (NY-SUF-401) (40.75N 72.85W)

5.7

3.9

Babylon (Amityville) (NY-SUF-417) (40.66N 73.41W)

3.8*

Brookhaven (Mastic Beach) (NY-SUF-415) (40.77N 72.82W)

3.7*

Islip (Ocean Beach) (NY-SUF-419) (40.64N 73.16W)

3.7*

Southampton (Shinnecock Hills) (NY-SUF-421) (40.88N 72.45W)

3.7*

Brookhaven (Mt. Sinai) (NY-SUF-611) (40.96N 73.02W)

3.4*

Islip (Brightwaters) (NY-SUF-624) (40.70N 73.25W)

3.4*

Huntington (Huntington Bay) (NY-SUF-604) (40.91N 73.40W)

3.4*

Islip (Bayshore) (NY-SUF-625) (40.71N 73.24W)

3.2*

Brookhaven (Mastic Beach) (NY-SUF-618) (40.76N 72.83W)

3.1*

Brookhaven (Blue Point) (NY-SUF-631) (40.73N 73.04W)

3.1*

Southold (Laurel) (NY-SUF-961) (40.96N 72.55W)

3.1*

Islip (West Islip) (NY-SUF-405) (40.69N 73.28W)

2.9*

Riverhead (Wading River) (NY-SUF-507) (40.96N 72.86W)

8.5

2.8

Brookhaven (Mt. Sinai) (NY-SUF-510) (40.95N 73.03W)

8.6

2.8

Babylon (Lindenhurst) (NY-SUF-621) (40.67N 73.37W)

2.8*

Smithtown (Head of the Harbor) (NY-SUF-944) (40.88N 73.19W)

2.8*

Southampton (Quiogue) (NY-SUF-412) (40.82N 72.62W)

6.4

92

2.7

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Southampton (Bridgehampton) (NY-SUF-423) (40.90N 72.32W)

2.7*

Brookhaven (Center Moriches) (NY-SUF-414) (40.79N 72.80W)

2.6*

Brookhaven (Hamlet of Brookhaven) (NY-SUF-636) (40.76N 72.91W)

2.6*

Riverhead (South Jamesport) (NY-SUF-962) (40.94N 72.58W)

2.6*

East Hampton (Montauk) (NY-SUF-426) (41.05N 71.96W)

6.0

2.5

Huntington (Asharoken) (NY-SUF-606) (40.93N 73.36W)

9.8

2.5

Southold (Peconic) (NY-SUF-614) (41.05N 72.47W)

2.5*

Southampton (Noyack) (NY-SUF-432) (40.99N 72.36W)

6.5

2.4

Huntington (Lloyd Harbor) (NY-SUF-602) (40.91N 73.48W)

2.4*

Babylon (Oak Beach-Captree) (NY-SUF-945) (40.65N 73.26W)

2.4*

Southampton (Remsenburg-Speonk) (NY-SUF-633) (40.80N 72.70W)

2.4*

Islip (Fire Island) (NY-SUF-420) (40.63N 73.20W)

2.3*

Brookhaven (Mastic) (NY-SUF-617) (40.80N 72.83W)

2.3*

Brookhaven (Shirley) (NY-SUF-619) (40.74N 72.88W)

2.3*

Southampton (Hampton Bays) (NY-SUF-515) (40.91N 72.56W)

2.3*

Southampton (Hampton Bays) (NY-SUF-516) (40.91N 72.56W)

7.4

2.2

Southampton (North Haven) (NY-SUF-429) (41.01N 72.30W)

6.4

2.1

Southampton (North Sea) (NY-SUF-434) (40.92N 72.44W)

6.7

2.1

Southampton (Shinnecock Hills) (NY-SUF-435) (40.90N 72.47W)

2.1*

Islip (Oakdale) (NY-SUF-628) (40.73N 73.14W)

2.1*

Southold (Orient) (NY-SUF-302) (41.13N 72.26W)

2.0*

East Hampton (Napeague) (NY-SUF-424) (41.01N 72.04W)

5.2

1.9

Islip (West Sayville) (NY-SUF-629) (40.72N 73.09W)

1.9*

Smithtown (Kings Park) (NY-SUF-609) (40.90N 73.22W)

1.9*

Southampton (North Haven) (NY-SUF-430) (41.04N 72.32W)

6.5

1.9

Southampton (Noyack) (NY-SUF-431) (40.99N 72.32W)

6.3

1.8

Brookhaven (Port Jefferson) (NY-SUF-508) (40.95N 73.07W)

8.8

1.8

Brookhaven (Port Jefferson) (NY-SUF-509) (40.95N 73.07W)

8.8

1.8

Huntington (Asharoken) (NY-SUF-607) (40.95N 73.40W)

10.0

1.8

Islip (Brightwaters) (NY-SUF-406) (40.71N 73.25W)

1.8*

Babylon (Village of Babylon) (NY-SUF-622) (40.68N 73.33W)

1.8*

Southampton (East Quogue) (NY-SUF-411) (40.84N 72.57W)

1.7*

93

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Brookhaven (Stony Brook) (NY-SUF-610) (40.92N 73.15W)

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

1.7*

Brookhaven (Patchogue) (NY-SUF-402) (40.75N 73.01W)

5.8

1.6

Riverhead (Hamlet of Riverhead) (NY-SUF-513) (40.92N 72.66W)

8.2

1.6

Southold (East Marion) (NY-SUF-306) (41.13N 72.33W)

1.6*

Southampton (Hampton Bays) (NY-SUF-410) (40.85N 72.50W)

1.5*

Brookhaven (Bellport) (NY-SUF-620) (40.75N 72.93W)

1.5*

East Hampton (Northwest Harbor) (NY-SUF-427) (41.00N 72.19W)

6.1

1.4

Southold (Mattituck) (NY-SUF-613) (40.99N 72.54W)

1.4*

Huntington (Centerport) (NY-SUF-605) (40.89N 73.37W)

1.4*

Babylon (Fire Island) (NY-SUF-948) (40.63N 73.27W)

1.4*

Brookhaven (East Patchogue) (NY-SUF-632) (40.75N 72.98W)

1.4*

Southampton (Westhampton Beach) (NY-SUF-637) (40.79N 72.66W)

1.4*

Brookhaven (Hamlet of Brookhaven) (NY-SUF-635) (40.77N 72.90W)

1.4*

Brookhaven (East Moriches) (NY-SUF-413) (40.79N 72.75W)

6.3

1.3

Riverhead (Hamlet of Riverrhead) (NY-SUF-612) (40.99N 72.62W)

1.3*

Babylon (Gilgo) (NY-SUF-951) (40.64N 73.34W)

1.3*

Southold (New Suffolk) (NY-SUF-307) (40.99N 72.47W)

1.3*

Southold (East Marion) (NY-SUF-305) (41.13N 72.33W)

1.2*

Islip (Bayport) (NY-SUF-630) (40.73N 73.06W)

1.2*

Southold (Greenport) (NY-SUF-301) (41.10N 72.36W)

1.2*

Riverhead (Hamlet of Riverhead) (NY-SUF-512) (40.92N 72.66W)

8.1

1.1

Brookhaven (Center Moriches) (NY-SUF-616) (40.79N 72.80W)

6.5

1.1

Islip (Bay Shore) (NY-SUF-407) (40.71N 73.24W)

1.1*

Babylon (Oak Beach-Captree) (NY-SUF-946) (40.64N 73.25W)

1.1*

Southold (Hamlet of Southold) (NY-SUF-960) (41.04N 72.43W)

1.1*

Southold (Mattituck) (NY-SUF-511) (41.01N 72.56W)

7.8

1.0

Southold (Greenport West) (NY-SUF-958) (41.08N 72.39W)

1.0*

Babylon (Gilgo) (NY-SUF-953) (40.62N 73.42W)

1.0*

Southampton (Westhampton Beach) (NY-SUF-638) (40.80N 72.63W)

1.0*

Huntington (Northport) (NY-SUF-608) (40.92N 73.30W)

0.8*

Southampton (Riverside) (NY-SUF-408) (40.92N 72.66W)

0.8*

Southold (Hamlet of Southold) (NY-SUF-959) (41.04N 72.39W)

0.8*

94

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Babylon (Fire Island) (NY-SUF-947) (40.62N 73.28W)

0.6*

Smithtown (Hamlet of Smithtown) (NY-SUF-943) (40.86N 73.21W)

0.6*

Riverhead (Flanders) (NY-SUF-409) (40.90N 72.62W)
Southampton (Village of Southampton)
(NY-SUF-422) (40.87N 72.39W)

East Hampton (Sag Harbor) (NY-SUF-428) (41.00N 72.29W)

7.7

0.5

7.9

0.5

6.3

0.5

Southampton (Quogue) (NY-SUF-639) (40.82N 72.57W)

0.5*

Riverhead (Hamlet of Riverhead) (NY-SUF-514) (40.92N 72.66W)

7.9

0.3

New Rochelle (NY-WES-801) (40.89N 73.78W)

10.2

3.1

Rye (NY-WES-815) (40.98N 73.67W)

9.8

3.0

Mamaroneck (NY-WES-800) (40.94N 73.72W)

10.5

2.7

Rye (NY-WES-814) (40.96N 73.69W)

10.2

2.5

Ossining (NY-WES-002) (41.16N 73.87W)

9.0

2.4

Hastings-on-Hudson (NY-WES-003) (41.00N 73.88W)

8.9

1.9

Southwest Yonkers (NY-WES-006) (40.94N 73.90W)

9.2

1.1

Piermont (NY-ROC-006) (41.04N 73.90W)

9.7

4.1

Stony Point (NY-ROC-002) (41.23N 73.98W)

9.4

2.0

Stony Point (NY-ROC-003) (41.23N 79.98W)

8.6

1.5

West Point (NY-ORA-004) (41.38N 73.96W)

8.6

4.2

Newburgh (NY-ORA-002) (41.50N 74.00W)

8.9

3.0

Newburgh (NY-ORA-001) (41.50N 74.01W)

8.9

1.9

Kingston (NY-ULS-004) (41.93N 73.97W)

9.3

4.9

Saugerties (NY-ULS-002) (42.07N 73.94W)

9.4

4.3

Kingston (NY-ULS-005) (41.93N 73.97W)

9.3

4.0

Saugerties (NY-ULS-003) (42.07N 73.94W)

9.4

3.8

Kingston (NY-ULS-006) (41.93N 73.97W)

9.2

3.1

Saugerties (NY-ULS-001) (42.07N 73.94W)

9.4

3.0

Kingston (NY-ULS-007) (41.93N 73.97W)

9.2

1.5

Westchester County

Rockland County

Orange County

Ulster County

95

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-007) (41.65N 73.94W)

9.1

5.1

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-006) (41.65N 73.94W)

9.1

4.1

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-001) (41.71N 73.94W)

9.0

4.0

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-003) (41.71N 73.94W)

9.1

2.9

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-005) (41.71N 73.94W)

9.0

2.7

Poughkeepsie (NY-DUT-004) (41.71N 73.94W)

9.1

2.4

Castle-on-Hudson (NY-COL-001) (42.53N 73.76W)

10.0

2.6

Castle-on-Hudson (NY-COL-003) (42.53N 73.76W)

10.1

2.2

Coxsackie (NY-GRE-002) (42.35N 73.79W)

9.7

4.0

Catskill (NY-GRE-009) (42.21N 73.85W)

9.6

3.9

Catskill (NY-GRE-012) (42.21N 73.85W)

9.6

3.5

Catskill (NY-GRE-011) (42.21N 73.85W)

9.6

3.4

Catskill (NY-GRE-010) (42.21N 73.85W)

9.5

3.1

Catskill (NY-GRE-008) (42.21N 73.85W)

8.5

3.1

Coxsackie (NY-GRE-001) (42.35N 73.79W)

9.6

1.9

Location

Dutchess County

Columbia County

Greene County

Connecticut
Fairfield County
Norwalk (Marvin Beach) (CT-FFD-422) (41.09N 73.39W)

4.5*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-632) (41.12N 73.26W)

4.3*

Westport (CT-FFD-513) (41.14N 73.36W)

10.2

Southport (CT-FFD-628) (41.13N 73.30W)

4.1
4.0*

Norwalk (CT-FFD-412) (41.10N 73.42W)

10.6

3.6

Bridgeport (South End) (CT-FFD-724) (41.17N 73.18W)

3.5*

Greenwich (CT-FFD-121) (41.02N 73.62W)

3.4*

Norwalk (CT-FFD-411) (41.10N 73.42W)

10.5

3.3

Bridgeport (South End) (CT-FFD-723) (41.17N 73.19W)

3.2*

Bridgeport (Enterprise Zone) (CT-FFD-722) (41.19W 73.19W)

3.1*

Bridgeport (South End) (CT-FFD-726) (41.15N 73.21W)

3.0*

96

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Westport (Green Farms) (CT-FFD-522) (41.11N 73.33W)

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

2.9*

Westport (CT-FFD-515) (41.15N 73.36W)

10.2

Stamford (CT-FFD-223) (41.04N 73.52W)

2.8
2.8*

Stratford (Lordship) (CT-FFD-811) (41.16N 73.11W)

8.6

Old Greenwich (CT-FFD-123) (41.00N 73.58W)

2.8
2.6*

Greenwich (CT-FFD-111) (41.00N 73.66W)

11.7

2.4

Fairfield (CT-FFD-624) (41.14N 73.25W)

2.4*

Riverside (CT-FFD-122) (41.02N 73.59W)

2.3*

Darien (CT-FFD-321) (41.05N 73.49W)

2.2*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-621) (41.14N 73.24W)

2.2*

Stamford (Waterside) (CT-FFD-221) (41.03N 73.54W)

2.1*

Westport (Green Farms) (CT-FFD-521) (41.11N 73.33W)

2.1*

Westport (CT-FFD-523) (41.10N 73.35W)

2.0*

Stratford (Lordship) (CT-FFD-822) (41.15N 73.13W)

2.0*

Stamford (Shippan Point) (CT-FFD-222) (41.03N 73.52W)

1.8*

Greenwich (CT-FFD-112) (41.00N 73.66W)

11.7

1.7

Fairfield (CT-FFD-625) (41.14N 73.25W)

1.7*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-623) (41.14N 73.24W)

1.6*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-622) (41.14N 73.24W)

1.4*

Stratford (CT-FFD-821) (41.17N 73.12W)

1.4*

Norwalk (South Norwalk) (CT-FFD-421) (41.10N 73.42W)

1.3*

Bridgeport (Black Rock) (CT-FFD-729) (41.15N 73.24W)

1.3*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-631) (41.13N 73.25W)

1.2*

Stratford (Lordship) (CT-FFD-812) (41.16N 73.11W)

8.3

1.2

Bridgeport (Enterprise Zone) (CT-FFD-721) (41.19N 73.19W)

0.7*

Fairfield (CT-FFD-626) (41.12N 73.27W)

0.5*

Westport (CT-FFD-514) (41.14N 73.36W)

10.3

0.2

New Haven County
Milford (CT-NHV-128) (41.21N 73.06W)

5.5*

West Haven (CT-NHV-222) (41.27N 72.94W)

5.2*

East Haven (CT-NHV-521) (41.25N 72.88W)

5.1*

Milford (CT-NHV-123) (41.21N 73.02W)

5.0*

97

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Guilford (CT-NHV-711) (41.27N 72.67W)

4.9*

Branford (CT-NHV-628) (41.27N 72.77W)

4.7*

Madison (Madison Center) (CT-NHV-832) (41.27N 72.61W)

4.4*

Madison (Madison Center) (CT-NHV-833) (41.27N 72.59W)

4.1*

Milford (CT-NHV-112) (41.21N 73.05W)

9.5

3.8

West Haven (CT-NHV-223) (41.27N 72.94W)

3.6*

Milford (CT-NHV-127) (41.21N 73.06W)

3.2*

Guilford (CT-NHV-713) (41.27N 72.67W)

8.4

3.0

New Haven (CT-NHV-329) (41.25N 72.90W)

2.5*

Branford (CT-NHV-629) (41.26N 72.75W)

2.5*

Milford (CT-NHV-125) (41.19N 73.09W)

2.3*

Guilford (CT-NHV-712) (41.27N 72.67W)

2.1*

New Haven (Fair Haven) (CT-NHV-321) (41.31N 72.89W)

1.5*

East Haven (CT-NHV-524) (41.25N 72.86W)

1.4*

Branford (CT-NHV-627) (41.26N 72.80W)

1.4*

New Haven (City Point) (CT-NHV-324) (41.28N 72.93W)

1.3*

East Haven (CT-NHV-522) (41.27N 72.87W)

1.3*

East Haven (CT-NHV-523) (41.26N 72.85W)

1.3*

Madison (Madison Center) (CT-NHV-834) (41.28N 72.59W)

1.3*

Branford (CT-NHV-611) (41.26N 72.82W)

9.7

1.2

Branford (Branford Center) (CT-NHV-625) (41.29N 72.80W)

1.2*

Branford (CT-NHV-624) (41.27N 72.81W)

1.1*

Milford (CT-NHV-113) (41.21N 73.06W)

1.0*

Milford (CT-NHV-121) (41.21N 73.03W)

1.0*

West Haven (CT-NHV-224) (41.26N 72.96W)

1.0*

New Haven (CT-NHV-318) (41.27N 72.90W)

1.0*

Branford (CT-NHV-626) (41.26N 72.80W)

0.9*

West Haven (CT-NHV-221) (41.27N 72.93W)

0.8*

Branford (CT-NHV-613) (41.27N 72.82W)

9.4

0.7

Madison (Madison Center) (CT-NHV-831) (41.27N 72.62W)

0.6*

Milford (CT-NHV-122) (41.21N 73.03W)

0.5*

New Haven (Hill) (CT-NHV-325) (41.30N 72.95W)

0.5*

98

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

New Haven (Mill River) (CT-NHV-323) (41.30N 72.91W)

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

0.3*

Middlesex County
Clinton (CT-MSX-111) (41.27N 72.53W)

8.0

Westbrook (CT-MSX-223) (41.27N 72.47W)

3.8
2.7*

Clinton (CT-MSX-113) (41.28N 72.52W)

6.8

Old Saybrook (Saybrook Manor) (CT-MSX-330) (41.28N 72.41W)
Clinton (CT-MSX-112) (41.29N 72.53W)

2.6
2.5*

7.1

Clinton (CT-MSX-131) (41.27N 72.50W)

1.4
1.4*

New London County
Old Lyme (CT-NLD-112) (41.28N 72.28W)

3.2*

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-123) (41.29N 72.31W)

3.1*

Groton (Groton Long Point) (CT-NLD-523) (41.31N 72.01W)

2.9*

Mystic (CT-NLD-524) (41.34N 71.98W)

2.6*

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-124) (41.29N 72.32W)

2.4*

Waterford (CT-NLD-330) (41.33N 72.17W)

2.3*

Niantic (CT-NLD-222) (41.30N 72.24W)

2.0*

Pawcatuck (CT-NLD-622) (41.33N 71.84W)

2.0*

Stonington (CT-NLD-627) (41.34N 71.92W)

2.0*

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-125) (41.31N 72.34W)

1.9*

New London (CT-NLD-421) (41.31N 72.10W)

1.9*

Mystic (CT-NLD-632) (41.35N 71.96W)

1.8*

Stonington (CT-NLD-629) (41.34N 71.93W)

1.7*

Mystic (CT-NLD-631) (41.34N 71.96W)

1.6*

Mystic (CT-NLD-634) (41.36N 71.96W)

1.5*

Mystic (CT-NLD-522) (41.36N 71.97W)

1.4*

Mystic (CT-NLD-612) (41.35N 71.97W)

6.0

1.2

Stonington (CT-NLD-628) (41.33N 71.93W)

1.2*

Mystic (CT-NLD-635) (41.35N 71.96W)

1.1*

Groton (CT-NLD-515) (41.33N 71.99W)

6.7

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-111) (41.31N 72.35W)

1.0
1.0*

Groton (CT-NLD-517) (41.32N 72.06W)

5.7

Pawcatuck (CT_NLD-623) (41.34N 71.88W)

0.9
0.8*

99

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Stonington (CT-NLD-611) (41.34N 71.91W)

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

6.0

0.7

Mystic (CT-NLD-633) (41.36N 71.97W)

0.6*

Stonington (CT-NLD-626) (41.33N 71.91W)

0.5*

Rhode Island
Washington County
Narragansett (RI-WAS-227) (41.46N 71.45W)

3.9*

Westerly (Misquamicut) (RI-WAS-234) (41.32N 71.82W)

3.4*

Westerly (Watch Hill) (RI-WAS-232) (41.31N 71.86W)

5.8

3.1

Westerly (RI-WAS-235) (41.33N 71.79W)

3.1*

Westerly (Misquamicut) (RI-WAS-233) (41.32N 71.82W)

2.9*

Wakefield (RI-WAS-247) (41.37N 71.56W)

2.7*

Narragansett (Narragansett Pier) (RI-WAS-228) (41.45N 71.45W)

2.5*

Charlestown (Quonochontaug) (RI-WAS-238) (41.33N 71.72W)

2.5*

Wakefield (RI-WAS-245) (41.37N 71.61W)

2.5*

Wakefield (RI-WAS-246) (41.37N 71.57W)

2.3*

Charlestown (RI-WAS-240) (41.36N 71.68W)

2.0*

Narragansett (RI-WAS-226) (41.47N 71.42W)

1.8*

Westerly (Weekapaug) (RI-WAS-236) (41.33N 71.77W)

1.8*

Wakefield (RI-WAS-650) (41.43N 71.50W)

1.8*

Westerly (RI-WAS-230) (41.38N 71.83W)

1.5*

Narragansett (Narragansett Pier) (RI-WAS-229) (41.43N 71.46W)

1.2*

Charlestown (RI-WAS-243) (41.36N 71.63W)

1.1*

Wakefield (RI-WAS-653) (41.38N 71.52W)

1.1*

Westerly (RI-WAS-231) (41.35N 71.83W)

1.0*

Saunderstown (RI-WAS-224) (41.53N 71.42W)

8.4

0.7

Charlestown (Quonochontaug) (RI-WAS-239) (41.34N 71.70W)

0.7*

Charlestown (RI-WAS-241) (41.38N 71.64W)

0.4*

Westerly (RI-WAS-237) (41.34N 71.73W)

0.3*

Charlestown (RI-WAS-242) (41.36N 71.64W)

0.3*

Narragansett (Point Judith) (RI-WAS-648) (41.37N 71.49W)

0.2*

Newport County

100

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Jamestown (RI-NEW-223) (41.51N 71.37W)

4.4*

Newport (RI-NEW-219) (41.46N 71.33W)

4.3*

Jamestown (RI-NEW-222) (41.49N 71.40W)

4.2*

Middletown (RI-NEW-215) (41.49N 71.25W)

3.1*

Jamestown (RI-NEW-220) (41.50N 71.37W)

3.0*

Newport (RI-NEW-218A) (41.46N 71.31W)

2.9*

Tiverton (RI-NEW-209) (41.56N 71.21W)

1.9*

Tiverton (RI-NEW-210 ) (41.58N 71.21W)

1.3*

Little Compton (RI-NEW-207) (41.47N 71.19W)

0.9*

Little Compton (RI-NEW-208) (41.47N 71.19W)

0.4*

Portsmouth (RI-NEW-214) (41.55N 71.24W)

0.4*

Kent County
Warwick (RI-KEN-645) (41.65N 71.44W)

2.3*

Bristol County
Warren (RI-BRI-637) (41.73N 71.26W)

1.0*

Warren (RI-BRI-640) (41.72N 71.29W)

6.2

0.7

Bristol (RI-BRI-639) (41.67N 71.28W)

0.4*

Barrington (RI-BRI-641) (41.75N 71.35W)

0.3*

Providence County
East Providence (RI-PRO-644) (41.80N 71.38W)

3.0*

Massachusetts
Bristol County
Swansea (Ocean Grove) (MA-BRI-631) (41.73N 71.22W)

2.0*

South Dartmouth (MA-BRI-202) (41.54N 70.97W)

1.4*

Westport (MA-BRI-204) (41.50N 71.04W)

1.1*

Westport (MA-BRI-205) (41.51N 71.10W)

0.9*

Plymouth County
Wareham (Wareham Center) (MA-PLY-626) (41.76N 70.71W)

US Geological Survey (USGS) Storm Tide Pressure Sensors
Virginia

101

0.3*

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Chincoteague (VA-ACC-001) (37.90N 75.41W)

5.00

3.5

Parksley (Metompkin Bay) (VA-ACC-002) (37.73N 75.59W)

5.98

2.5

Onancock (Holly Cove) (VA-ACC-003) (37.72N 75.79W)

5.38

1.5

5.08

4

5.49

2

5.30

3

3.54

0.5

Cape Charles (Wise Point) (VA-NOR-004) (37.13N 75.95W)

5.71

4

Cape Charles (Cape Charles Marina) (VA-NOR-003) (37.26N 76.02W)

5.02

2

Marionville (Red Bank) (VA-NOR-001) (37.45N 75.84W)

5.46

1.5

Annapolis (MD-ANN-003) (38.97N 76.48W)

3.41

1.5

Annapolis (MD-ANN-001) (38.98N 76.49W)

3.61

1.5

6.70

2.5

Lewes (Roosevelt) (DE-SUS-008) (38.79N 75.16W)

8.20

4.5

Bethany Beach (DE-SUS-014) (38.51N 75.06W)

4.74

2.5

Lewes (Old Mill Creek) (DE-SUS-057) (38.77N 75.20W)
Fenwick Island (Little Assawoman Bay)

5.47

2.5

4.06

2

6.17

2

Location

Accomack County

City of Poquoson
Plumb Tree Island (VA-YOR-003) (37.11N 76.32W)
City of Virginia Beach
Lynnhaven Inlet (VA-VAB-001) (36.91N 76.09W)
Hampton County
Hampton (Buckroe Beach) (VA-HAM-002) (37.02N 76.32W)
Mathews County
Hudgins (Gwynns Island) (VA-MAT-001) (37.49N 76.31W)
Northampton County

Maryland
Anne Arundel County

Baltimore County
Baltimore (Pier 5) (MD-BAL-001) (39.28N 76.61W)

Delaware
Sussex County

(DE-SUS-015) (38.45N 75.06W)

Millsboro (Indian Creek) (DE-SUS-033) (38.59N 75.21W)

102

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Rehoboth Beach (Dewey Bridge) (DE-SUS-010) (38.69N 75.08W)

4.84

2

Millsboro (Massey Landing) (DE-SUS-032) (38.63N 75.10W)

2.93

1.5

Lewes (Love Creek @ Hwy 24) (DE-SUS-030) (38.70N 75.16W)

3.86

1

Smyrna (Woodland Beach) (DE-KEN-051) (39.33N 75.47W)

5.63

4

Dover (Little Creek) (DE-KEN-053) (39.16N 75.45W)

5.38

1

7.09

1

6.97

3.5

Millville (Maurice River) (NJ-CUM-020) (39.40N 75.04W)

6.31

2.5

Bridgeton (Cohansey River) (NJ-CUM-025) (39.43N 75.24W)

5.50

1

Port Republic (Mullica River) (NJ-ATL-005) (39.55N 74.46W)

7.62

4.5

Middlesex County
South Amboy (Old Bridge Waterfront Park)

11.71

6

Location

Kent County

New Castle County
Smyrna (Duck Creek) (DE-NEW-001) (39.31N 75.61W)

New Jersey
Cape May County
Marmora (Great Egg Harbor Bay) (NJ-CPM-010) (39.29N 74.63W)
Cumberland County

Atlantic County

(NJ-MID-001) (40.46N 74.25W)

Union County
Rahway (Rahway River) (NJ-UNI-002) (40.60N 74.27W)

12.06

Elizabeth (Elizabeth River) (NJ-UNI-208) (40.66N 74.21W)

12.20

Hudson County
East Rutherford (Hackensack River) (NJ-HUD-001) (40.76N 74.03W)

8.80

New York
Richmond County
Tottenville, Staten Island (NY-RIC-003) (40.50N 74.23W)

16.00

Great Kills, Staten Island (NY-NEW-101) (40.54N 74.13W)

13.33

Arrochar, Staten Island (NY-RIC-001) (40.59N 74.06W)

15.02

New York County

103

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Uptown, Manhatten (Harlem River, Inwood Hill Park)

Storm
tide
(ft)b

9.50

(NY-NEW-124) (40.72N 74.01W)

Kings County
Brooklyn (East River @ Manhatten Bridge)

7.48

(NY-KIN-001) (40.70N 73.99W)

Gowanus, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-003) (40.68N 73.99W)

11.08

Sea Gate, Brooklyn (NY-KIN-001) (40.58N 74.01W)

13.32

Queens County
Broad Channel, Far Rockaway, Queens

10.38

(NY-QUE-005) (40.61N 73.82W)

Howard Beach, Queens (NY-QUE-002) (40.65N 73.84W)

11.16

Astoria, Queens (Flushing Bay) (NY-QUE-001) (40.76N 73.86W)

10.35

Whitestone, Queens (NY-QUE-004) (40.80N 73.83W)

10.57

Nassau County
Long Beach (NY-NAS-006) (40.58N 73.64W)

17.48

Oyster Bay (Hamlet of Oyster Bay) (NY-NAS-003) (40.88N 73.53W)

10.12

Suffolk County
Islip (Ocean Beach) (NY-SUF-014) (40.64N 73.16W)

13.41

Huntington (Northport) (NY-SUF-003) (40.90N 73.35W)

9.48

Brookhaven (Port Jefferson) (NY-SUF-009) (40.95N 73.07W)

8.81

Riverhead (Wading River) (NY-SUF-010) (40.96N 72.86W)

8.19

Southampton (Flanders) (NY-SUF-008) (40.92N 72.64W)

7.86

Southold (Mattituck) (NY-SUF-011) (41.01N 72.56W)

7.86

Islip (West Islip) (NY-SUF-001) (40.69N 73.28W)

7.35

Southampton (Hampton Bays) (NY-SUF-018) (40.85N 72.50W)

7.32

Brookhaven (East Moriches) (NY-SUF-017) (40.79N 72.75W)

6.83

Southampton (Hampton Bays) (NY-SUF-019) (40.89N 72.50W)

6.53

Brookhaven (Patchogue) (NY-SUF-016) (40.75N 73.01W)

6.39

Southampton (Sag Harbor) (NY-SUF-021) (41.00N 72.29W)

6.33

East Hampton (Montauk) (NY-SUF-026) (41.07N 71.93W)

6.08

Brookhaven (Mastic Beach) (NY-SUF-028) (40.75N 72.86W)

5.68

Babylon (Oak Beach-Captree) (NY-SUF-002) (40.66N 73.26W)

5.57

Islip (Fire Island) (NY-SUF-013) (40.63N 73.20W)

4.09

Westchester County

104

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Mamaroneck (NY-WES-001) (40.94N 73.72W)

10.92

New Rochelle (NY-WES-003) (40.89N 73.78W)

10.44

Connecticut
Fairfield County
Westport (CT-FFD-005) (41.15N 73.36W)

10.31

Byram (CT-FFD-001) (41.00N 73.66W)

10.27

Westport (CT-FFD-006) (41.12N 73.37W)

10.15

South Norwalk (CT-FFD-003) (41.10N 73.42W)

9.92

Stratford (CT-FFD-009) (41.25N 73.09W)

9.65

New Haven County
Milford (CT-NHV-020) (41.21N 73.05W)

9.84

New Haven (CT-NHV-013) (41.27N 72.90W)

9.50

New Haven (CT-NHV-019) (41.27N 72.90W)

9.23

Guilford (CT-NHV-015) (41.27N 72.66W)

8.56

Branford Center (CT-NHV-018) (41.26N 72.82W)

8.77

North Haven (CT-NHV-014) (41.37N 72.88W)

7.20

Middlesex County
Old Saybrook Center (CT-MSX-020) (41.28N 72.35W)

7.86

Old Saybrook Center (CT-MSX-019) (41.28N 72.35W)

7.73

Clinton (CT-MSX-018) (41.27N 72.53W)

7.63

New London County
Niantic (CT-NLD-018) (41.32N 72.20W)

11.72

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-023) (41.28N 72.28W)

8.41

Old Lyme (CT-NLD-019) (41.28N 72.28W)

8.26

Groton (CT-NLD-025) (41.32N 72.06W)

6.55

Noank (CT-NLD-016) (41.33N 71.98W)

6.42

Noank (CT-NLD-015) (41.33N 71.98W)

6.35

Mystic (CT-NLD-027) (41.38N 71.97W)

6.16

Groton (CT-NLD-026) (41.33N 72.04W)

5.98

Mystic (CT-NLD-029) (41.35N 71.97W)

5.96

Stonington (CT-NLD-030) (41.34N 71.91W)

5.83

105

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Storm
surge
(ft)a

Location

Storm
tide
(ft)b

Estimated
Inundation
(ft)c

Rhode Island
Washington County
Wakefield (RI-WAS-003) (41.36N 71.61W)

8.43

Wakefield (RI-WAS-008) (41.38N 71.51W)

6.59

Westerly (RI-WAS-005) (41.33N 71.77W)

6.39

Saunderstown (RI-WAS-012) (41.53N 71.42W)

6.35

Westerly (RI-WAS-001) (41.31N 71.86W)

5.86

Charlestown (RI-WAS-007) (41.38N 71.64W)

3.97

Bristol County
Warren (RI-BRI-013) (41.73N 71.29W)

6.27

Newport County
Portsmouth (RI-NEW-014) (41.62N 71.24W)

6.42

Little Compton (RI-NEW-015) (41.46N 71.19W)

6.36

a

Storm surge is water height above normal astronomical tide level.
Storm tide is water height above the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
c
Estimated inundation is the maximum depth of water on land. For some USGS storm tide pressure sensors,
inundation is estimated by subtracting the elevation of the sensor from the recorded storm tide. For other USGS
storm tide sensors and USGS high water marks, inundation is estimated by subtracting the elevation of the land
derived from a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) from the recorded and measured storm tide. For NOS tide gauges,
the height of the water above Mean Higher High Water (MHHW) is used as a proxy for inundation.
I
Incomplete
R
Exceeded historical maximum value.
* preliminary
b

106

Table 6. Selected precipitation totals in the United States associated with Sandy.
Precipitation (inches)

Florida
Daytona Beach Intl. 1 NE (DIAF1)
29.19N 81.06W
Scottsmoor 2 NNW (SCMF1)
28.78N 80.88W
Suntree 2 W (FL-BV-2)
28.20N 80.70W
North Miami Beach Coop (NMBF1)
25.93N 80.16W
Chuluota 1 N (FL-SM-8)
28.65N 81.12W
Suntree 1 WSW (FL-BV-1)
28.21N 80.70W
Rockledge 1 WSW (FL-B-1)
28.31 N 80.75 W
Edgewater 3 NE (FL-VL-2)
28.99N 80.87W
Lake Mary Jane 2 NE (WELF1)
28.40N 81.16W
Mims 1 WNW (FL-BV-4 )
28.66N 80.86W
Rockledge 1 NE (FL-BV-3 )
28.33N 80.72W
Hialeah Coop (HIAF1)
25.82N -80.28W
North Carolina
Avon 0.7 NE
35.34 N 75.49 W
Salvo 0.9 NNE
35.55 N 75.47 W
Corolla 3.2 SSE
Duck 0.3 SE
36.16 N 75.75 W
Kill Devil Hills 2.5 NNW
36.04 N 75.69 W
Kill Devil Hills 0.9 WNW
36.02 N 75.68 W
1.1 SSE Duck
36.15 N 75.75 W
Ocracoke
35.10 N 75.98 W
Kitty Hawk 4.0 NNW
36.12 N 75.75 W
Trent Woods 1.3 SSE
Jamesville 6.1 SW
Jacksonville 2.0 E
Holly Ridge 4.8 ENE
Elizabeth City 10.5 NNW
Merry Hill 3.8 E
Elizabeth City (KECG)
Virginia
Reedville
Virginia Beach

4.30
3.58
3.27
3.17
2.52
2.51
2.45
2.43
2.42
2.25
2.20
2.19

8.20
8.18
7.66
7.54
6.98
6.96
6.57
6.50
6.35
4.11
3.84
3.75
3.63
3.56
3.51
3.44
9.90
9.58

107

Pungo
Oceana/Soucek
Cashville 0.1S
Oceana (KNTU)
City of Hampton Emergency Management (WB)
White Stone 8.0 SSW
Greenbackville 0.4 WNW
Port Haywood 1.00 SE
Onley 0.6 SE
Onancock 3.90 SW
Virginia Beach 1.70 NE
Chantilly HS (WB)
Purcellville (LO036)
39.13 N 77.71 W
Centreville ES (WB)
Isle of Wright Smithfield HS (WB)
Maysville 5 S
Yorkstown 0.8 SE
Alexandria Franconia ES (WB)
Newport News 5.80 NE
Sterling Park 1 NW (LOE41)
39.00 N 77.42 W
Fairfax Providence ES (WB)
Hampton 8.10W
Lottsburg 2.30 NNE
Newport News 2.70 ESE
Smithfield 2.0 SE
Fairfax 1 ENE (FCC05)
38.85 N 77.29 W
Urbanna 6.20 NNE
Williamsburg 1.40 ENE
Manassas 1 ESE (MSS02)
38.74 N 77.47 W
Franconia 1 SSE (VA-FX-3)
38.74 N 77.14 W
Centreville 1 SE (FXW106)
38.83 N 77.43 W
Lovettsville 2 ENE (LOE84)
39.28 N 77.60 W
Lorton 1 NE (VA-FX-5)
38.71 N 77.23 W
City of Norfolk 30 S
Dulles International Airport 1 NNE (X390077)
38.96 N 77.45 W
Hampton 1.90 NW
Suffolk 13 NE
Middleburg 2 NW (LOC14)
38.99 N 77.77 W
Rose Hill (AX066)
38.79 N 77.10 W
Manassas (X387077)
38.74 N 77.48 W
Williamsburg 1.30 SSW

9.58
9.57
9.38
9.38
9.37
8.96
8.64
8.59
8.47
8.39
7.99
7.95
7.89
7.82
7.79
7.75
7.73
7.64
7.63
7.50
7.01
6.91
6.77
6.74
6.25
6.25
6.20
6.12
6.06
6.03
6.02
5.98
5.70
5.64
5.62
5.59
5.54
5.50
5.42
5.40
5.33

108

Woolsey 3 NNW (PWN18)
38.90 N 77.67 W
Burke (X388077)
38.78 N 77.27 W
Stanley (X386078)
38.57 N 78.50 W
Lydia 2 SE (GRC24)
38.31 N 78.47 W
Frostburg (ALW63)
39.64 N 78.92 W
Honeyville 1 ESE (PES02)
38.57 N 78.54 W
Sterling (KLWX)
Wakefield (KAKQ)
Hanover (KOFP)
West Virginia
Maysville (GN003) 5 S
39.04 N 79.17 W
Shenandoah Junction
Falling Waters 2.4 NW
Slanesville 2.1 SE
Morgantown/Hart Field (KMGW)
McMechen 6.0 E
Charles Town 2.5 NE
Bunker Hill 0.8 WNW
Springfield 2.3 ESE
Huntington/Tri-State Airport (KHTS)
Boothsville 1.4 SE
Delaware
Indian Rivert Inlet DEOS
38.63N 75.97W
Rehoboth Beach DEOS
38.71 N 75.08 W
Georgetown
38.69 N 75.39 W
Viola DEOS
39.04 N 75.57 W
Dover 6.4 NNW
Milford
38.91 N 75.43 W
Indian River Acres
Dover DEOS
39.15 N 75.52 W
Milford DEOS
38.88N 75.44W
Ellendale DEOS
38.80 N 75.42 W
Selbyville DEOS
38.45 N 75.22 W
Greenwood DEOS
38.80 N 75.59 W
Seaford DEOS
38.64 N 75.62 W

5.30
5.15
5.15
5.11
5.10
5.10
5.03
3.18
3.13
7.75
4.46
4.36
3.99
3.97
3.56
3.15
3.06
3.04
2.94
2.83
10.98
10.60
10.20
9.69
9.62
9.55
9.49
9.38
9.38
9.33
9.28
9.07
8.80

109

Harrington DEOS
38.92 N 75.57 W
Harbison DEOS
38.68N 75.25W
Clayton 6.6 W
Bridgeville DEOS
38.74 N 75.60 W
Dover AFB (KDOV)
39.13 N 75.47 W
Seaford 2.3 SSE
Blackbird DEOS
39.40N 75.63W
Delaney Corner
Milton
38.77 N 75.31 W
Smyrna 2.7 SSE
Felton 3.6 NE
Smyrna DEOS
39.29 N 75.61 W
Dover
39.15 N 75.52 W
Smyrna 3 SSE
39.25 N 75.59 W
Seaford 1 SW
38.63 N 75.63 W
Felton 4 NE
39.04 N 75.52 W
Georgetown 5.8 W
Georgetown DEOS
38.69 N 75.39 W
Viola DEOS
39.04 N 75.57 W
Bethany Beach DEOS
38.53 N 75.06 W
Ellendale
38.80 N 75.42 W
Georgetown 6 W
38.68 N 75.50 W
Laurel DEOS
38.55 N 75.57 W
Townsend DEOS
39.39 N 75.69 W
Selbyville
38.45 N 75.22 W
Newport
39.71 N 75.61 W
Greenwood
38.80 N 75.59 W
Bridgeville
38.74 N 75.60 W
Glasgow DEOS
39.61N 75.73W
Seaford
38.64 N 75.62 W

8.74
8.71
8.62
8.48
8.47
8.45
8.39
8.33
8.30
8.30
8.20
8.12
7.98
7.96
7.95
7.94
7.94
7.92
7.84
7.83
7.80
7.73
7.62
7.57
7.53
7.30
7.18
6.92
6.80
6.48

110

Middletown 1 SSW
39.43 N 75.71 W
Greenville DEOS
39.80N 75.61W
Newark DEOS AG Farm
39.67 N 75.76 W
Newark DEOS
39.67 N 75.76 W
Hockessin Chesapeake Bay Girl Scouts (WB)
Newport 2 WNW
39.72 N 75.64 W
New Castle DEOS
39.66 N 75.57 W
Wilmington
39.63 N 75.74 W
Wilmington DEOS
39.78 N 75.53 W
2 S Newark
39.64 N 75.76 W
Claymont DEOS
39.80 N 75.46 W
Wilmington
39.73 N 75.53 W
Newark
39.67 N 75.76 W
Washington, D.C.
Washington 5.1 NW
Maryland
Bellevue
Easton 0.7 NNW
New Market Deer Crossing ES (WB)
Cavetown 3 ESE
Greensboro 1.4 ENE
Ridgely 0.2 ESE
American Corrner
Easton 2 SE
38.75 N 76.05 W
Ridge 1.0 N
Queenstown 2.6 S
Mount Airy Summit Ridge (WB)
Columbia Oakland Mills MS (WB)
Stevensville Bayside ES (WB)
Easton 1 SSW
38.76 N 76.07 W
Greensboro
38.97 N 75.81 W
Queenstown
38.98 N 76.16 W
Trappe 3.5 NE
Columbia Howard Community College (WB)
Trappe
38.65 N 76.06 W
Churchton 1 ENE
38.80 N 76.52W

6.44
6.42
6.12
6.05
6.03
5.83
5.73
5.73
5.52
5.36
5.21
5.20
5.02
5.83
12.83
12.55
11.68
11.15
10.70
10.68
10.55
10.52
10.36
10.29
10.28
10.08
10.00
9.97
9.93
9.89
9.78
9.76
9.60
9.50

111

Sykesville Piney Ridge ES (WB)
Germantown Sally Ride ES (WB)
Bishopville 3.1 E
St. Michaels 0.7 SE
Greenbelt 1 NNE (PGW69)
39.00N 76.88W
Denton 5.8 WSW
Princess Anne 4.4 WSW
Denton
38.88 N 75.82 W
Pasadena 2.6 ESE
Easton Talbot County EMA (WB)
Easton Saints Peter and Paul HS (WB)
Westminister East MS (WB)
Bryans Road 2 ESE ( X386077)
38.61N 77.04W
Burtonsville Banneker MS (WB)
Chestertown Kent County EMA (WB)
Easton 1 SW
38.76 N 76.08 W
Ridge (SMS08)
38.12N 76.36W
Dundalk 1 SW (BL021)
39.25N 76.51W
Parkville (BLS28)
39.38N 76.56W
Laurel St. Vincent Pallotti HS (WB)
Goldsboro VFC (WB)
Seaford 2 SSE
38.08 N 75.34 W
Crofton 1 NNE (MD-AA-1)
39.02N 76.67W
Clarksburg Little Bennett ES (WB)
Olney St. Peter’s School (WB)
Rosedale 1 NNE (BL017)
39.33N 76.50W
Perry Hall MS (WB)
Tracy’s Landing 2 WSW (CT04 )
38.76N 76.64W
Boonsboro HS (WB)
Baltimore Youth in Transition School
Pimlico 1 NE (MD-BC-3)
39.37N 76.6W
Oella 1 E (BLS92)
39.27N 76.77W
Olney ES (WB)
Eckhart Mines (ALW28)
39.65N 78.90W
Baltimore Maryland Science Center (WB)
Upper Marlboro County Administration Building (WB)
Potomoc Bells Mills ES (WB)
Downtown Baltimore 1 SSE (X393076)
39.28N 76.61W
Annapolis US Naval Academy

9.49
9.49
9.48
9.38
9.30
9.28
9.08
8.93
8.70
8.69
8.68
8.61
8.51
8.50
8.50
8.42
8.40
8.38
8.38
8.26
8.14
7.99
7.90
7.90
7.82
7.82
7.78
7.76
7.55
7.52
7.46
7.45
7.22
7.21
7.21
7.20
7.13
7.09

112

Annapolis St. Mary’s ES (WB)
Myersville ES (WB)
Darlington ES (WB)
Bowie 2 NNW (PGE12)
38.98N 76.75W
Worton
Columbia 3 ENE (HWC03)
39.21N 76.81W
Gaithersburg 2 SE (MD-HW-2)
39.34N 76.97W
Stevensville
38.99 N 76.31 W
Manchester 1 SSW (CLC12)
39.65N 76.89W
Savage 1 WSW (HWS04)
39.13N 76.84W
North Beach (X387076)
38.70N 76.53W
Glenmont 1 NNE (MOE01 )
39.07N 77.04W
Stevensville 3 N
39.0 N 76.31W
Catonsville 1 ENE (BLS93)
39.27N 76.73W
Westminster 1 W (X396077)
39.57N -77.03W
Germantown 2 ESE (MO182)
39.17N 77.23W
Cavetown 1 WSW (WAS03)
39.63 N 77.60 W
Aspen Hill 2 ENE (MD-MG-5)
39.09N 77.05W
Gaithersburg 1 ENE (MO060)
39.14 N 77.20W
Bowleys Quarters (MD-BL-4)
39.31N 76.38W
Pimlico (BCN02)
39.35N 76.67W
Cloverly 1 E (MOS117)
39.10N -76.96W
Hagerstown 1 ENE (MD-WH-3)
39.64N 77.70W
Elkton
39.60 N 75.82W
Dentsville 1 SW (CHC34 )
38.46N 76.91W
College Park 1 SW (PGN172)
38.98N 76.94W
Norbeck 1 ESE (MO035)
39.10 N 77.06 W
Hampton 1 W (BLC20)
39.41 N 76.59 W
Elkton 7 NNW
39.69 N 75.87 W

7.08
7.07
7.03
7.00
6.93
6.90
6.82
6.77
6.64
6.59
6.54
6.37
6.40
6.24
6.19
6.19
6.15
6.14
6.13
6.08
6.01
6.00
5.99
5.95
5.94
5.85
5.81
5.71
5.77

113

Myersville (X395077 )
39.50 N 77.56 W
Owings 1 NNE (AAS06)
38.73 N 76.59 W
Belvedere Heights (AAC04)
39.05 N 76.50 W
Glenn Dale 3 ENE (PGE08)
39.00 N 76.75 W
New Jersey
Wildwood Crest
38.97 N 74.84 W
Middle Township 4.4 SW
Green Creek
North Wildwood
39.00 N 74.80 W
Seaville
Rio Grande
39.02 N 74.88 W
Milford
38.91 N 75.43 W
West Cape May
38.94 N 74.94 W
Dover 6 WNW
40.91 N 74.67 W
Dennisville 2.2 NE Lower Township
Erma
Cape May
38.94 N 74.91 W
Woodbine 0.8 NNW
Upper Township 3.2 SE
Woodbine
39.22 N 74.81 W
Cape May Courthouse
38.94 N 74.91 W
Newark 4 SSW
39.62 N 75.78 W
Hamilton Township 2.1 SE
Newport
Vineland 2.6 WSW
Estell Manor
Cedarville
Egg Harbor Township
Upper Deerfield
Barnegat
39.75 N 74.22 W
The Estell Manor School – Estell Manor (WB)
Bivalve
Folsom 3 SE
39.85 N 75.29 W
Pittsgrove Township
Hammonton
39.63 N 74.82 W
Pitman
39.73 N 75.13 W

5.30
5.03
5.00
5.00
Rainfall (inches)
11.91
11.41
11.40
10.24
10.06
9.51
9.38
9.37
9.14
8.41
8.20
8.10
7.87
7.82
7.82
7.69
7.65
7.57
7.30
7.07
7.06
7.00
6.83
6.20
6.14
6.08
5.93
5.74
5.56
5.46
5.31

114

Franklin
Malaga

5.23
5.22

Pennsylvania
Easton
40.68 N 75.22 W
Myerstown ELCO MS (WB)
Dallastown Area HS (WB)
Hanover Clearview ES(WB)
Hanover 5.4 S
Schellsburg 2.6 WNW
Fleetwood 2.0 ESE
Dillsburg ES (WB)
Grantham Messiah College (WB)
Lampeter Martin Meylin MS (WB)
Newtown BioClinica (WB)
Nottingham DEOS
39.74N 76.05W
Carlise Lamberton MS (WB)
Glen Rock 2.2 ESE
New Salem 0.3 WSW
Landenberg 1.8 ENE
Malvern 0.5 NNE
West Chester DEOS
39.95 N 75.61 W
Littlestown 0.8 NNW
Atglen DEOS
39.94 N 75.97 W
West Chester 1.8 SE
Kennett Square
39.84 N 75.71 W
Landenburg
West Chester
39.95 N 75.61 W
Kennett Square DEOS
39.84 N 75.71 W
Exton
40.03 N 75.63 W
West Grove DEOS
39.82 N 75.83 W
Unionville
Media
39.91 N 75.39 W
New York
Warsaw ES (WB)
Riverhead MS (WB)
Whitesville
Hamburg 1 S
Perrysburg
Dunkirk 1 SW
Lockport 0.8 NE
Batavia Genessee
Sherman 0.4 ENE
Niagara Falls International Aiport (KIAG)
Lancaster 4.1 ENE

12.49
9.23
8.81
8.71
8.15
7.94
7.26
7.24
7.19
7.15
7.02
6.97
6.90
6.82
6.47
6.38
6.32
6.18
6.05
6.00
5.96
5.93
5.90
5.78
5.68
5.59
5.12
5.12
5.02
7.07
6.52
4.83
4.59
4.41
4.09
3.87
3.80
3.50
3.32
3.26

115

Alcott Center
West Almond 3.6 SW
Dansville 1.0 ENE
Elma Center 0.7 SE
Rhode Island
Woonsocket 1.3 ESE
Manville 0.2 NE
Little Compton 1.7 NW
Massachusetts
Leominster 1.5 S
Foxborough 0.4 S
Fitchburg
North Ashburnham
Natick 1.7 NNE
Action 1.3 SW
Norwood 1.3 NW
East Milton
Andover 1.5 W
Pepperell
Ashburnham
Ayer
Norton 1.8 NNE
Millis 0.6 SSE
Northborough 0.6 SSE
New Hampshire
Gorham 3.1 S
Randolph 1.4 NE
Center Sandwich 4.9 E
New Ipswich 0.8 S
Unity 3.2 ENE
Greenville 1.1 ENE
Newbury 1.6 NW
Hillsborough 2.1 NNW
Brooksfield 0.9 WSW
Hollis 2.9 ENE
Maine
Kingbury 2 SSE
Greenville 2 E
Pembroke 5.4 SSE
Norway 11.5 WNW
Old Town 1 SE
Whiting 3 NNE
New Sharon 2.0 NW
Acton 2.7 NW
Lubec 4.1 W
Belmont 2.7 SSE
Blanchard
Shirley
Ohio
Kirtland 0.9 SW
North Ridgeville 2.8 W
Painesville 3.8 SSW
Broadview Heights 1.5 NW

3.25
3.14
3.06
3.06
2.98
2.83
2.40
4.40
3.91
3.86
3.70
3.56
3.49
3.47
3.39
3.34
3.30
3.20
3.11
2.80
2.65
2.60
8.45
6.11
5.19
4.72
4.14
4.06
4.00
3.51
3.50
3.50
4.60
4.24
3.30
3.26
3.24
3.00
2.95
2.69
2.65
2.62
2.58
2.52
7.04
6.79
6.51
6.33

116

Elyria 0.4 SE
Brunswick 0.5 NE
Wakeman 4.6 NNE
South Russell 2.0 W

5.80
5.57
5.50
5.42

Table 7. Selected snowfall totals associated with Sandy and its post-tropical remnants, 28-31
Oct. 2012
West Virginia
1 SE Richwood
2 NNW Clayton
Quinwood
Summerville
Flat Top
Davis
Huttonsville 5 WSW
Craigsville
Alpine Lake
Alexander
Mingo 2 SSE
Nettie
Terra Alta
2 E Kitzmiller
Bayard
Beverly
French Creek
Runa 0.1 W
Beaver
MacArthur 1 E
Snowshoe 1 S
Webster Springs
1 SSW Valley Head
Hazelton
Buckhannon
Fayatteville 11 E
Princeton
1 SW Bluefield
Elkins
Crawley
Lashmeet
5 SW Nebo
Bluefield
3 WSW Cherry Grove
Athens
2 N Athens
2 SSW Mullens
1 SE Buckhannon
Pipestem
Hinton
Kentucky
Whitesburg 4 SE

Snowfall (in inches)
36.0
33.0
29.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
28.0
26.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
24.0
22.3
21.0
18.5
18.1
18.0
18.0
18.0
17.0
17.0
16.0
15.0
15.0
15.0
14.5
14.0
13.0
12.0
11.0
11.0
10.0
9.5
9.0
7.0
6.0
6.0
5.0
18.0

117

Payne Gap
Lynch 3 S
Kingdom Come S.P.
Elko 1 NW
Vicco 4 SE
Benham 3 S
Viper
Harlan 5 N
North Carolina
Cove Creek 10 NW
Faust
Newfound Gap
Clifton
Elk Park
Buladean
Beech Mountain
Bakersville 5 N
Boone
Beech Mountain 1 SE
Grayson Highlands
Flat Springs
Ashland
Lansing
4 NW Sugar Grove
Flat Springs
1 WSW Rominger
Deep Gap
Virginia
Norton 2 S
Tazewell 2 N
Wise 6 E
Big Meadows
Lebanon
Tazewell
Grayson Highlands Station
Richlands
Burkes Garden
Honaker
Mouth of Wilson
Richlands
Bland
Mountain Lake
Marion 2.4 ENE
Flat Ridge
1 W McMullin
Ceres
Maryland
Redhouse
Deep Creek Lake
Finzel
Oakland
Champoin 4 SE
Grantsville

14.0
14.0
10.2
9.0
7.0
6.0
6.0
6.0
24.0
24.0
22.0
14.0
14.0
12.0
12.0
11.0
11.0
10.0
10.0
9.8
9.0
9.0
7.0
7.0
6.0
6.0
24.0
15.0
14.0
12.0
12.0
10.0
10.0
9.0
8.4
8.0
8.0
8.0
7.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
29.0
26.0
24.0
24.0
13.0
12.0

118

Frostburg

6.0
Ohio

Bellefontaine
Washington Court House
Mansfield
Pennsylvania
Champion 4 SE
Laurel Summit
Mount Davis
Farmington
Stahlstown
Chalkhill 2 ENE
Tennessee
Gatlinburg 5 SE
Roan Mountain
Newfound Gap
Mount Leconte

4.5
3.0
2.5
13.0
10.0
9.0
8.8
6.0
5.1
34.0
19.0
18.0
17.0

119

Table 8. Direct deaths associated with Sandy by country.
Country
United States
Haiti
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Bahamas
Atlantic Ocean (~90 n mi offshore
of North Carolina)
Canada
Jamaica
Puerto Rico
Total

Direct Deaths
72
54
11
3
2
2
1
1
1
147

Table 9. Direct U.S. deaths associated with Sandy by state.
State
New York
New Jersey
Connecticut
Pennsylvania
Virginia
New Hampshire
West Virginia
Maryland
Total

Direct Deaths
48
12
5
2
2
1
1
1
72

120

Table 10a.
NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) track
forecast errors (n mi) for Hurricane Sandy. Mean errors for the 5-yr period 2007-11 are shown
for comparison. Official errors that are smaller than the 5-yr means are shown in boldface type.
Forecast Period (h)
12

24

36

48

72

96

120

OFCL

23.9

33.2

39.6

41.6

61.3

88.3

148.9

OCD5

56.7

118.2

189.7

252.1

360.8

477.9

647.3

Forecasts

28

26

24

22

18

14

10

OFCL (2007-11)

30.4

48.4

65.9

83.1

124.4

166.5

213.4

OCD5 (2007-11)

46.9

95.2

151.7

211.6

316.8

404.3

485.2

121

Table 10b.

Homogeneous comparison of selected track forecast guidance models (in n mi)
for Hurricane Sandy. Errors smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in
boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here will generally be
smaller than that shown in Table 10a due to the homogeneity requirement.
Forecast Period (h)

Model ID
12

24

36

48

72

96

120

OFCL

21.7

30.6

37.9

40.2

58.7

74.5

139.7

OCD5

57.3

119.8

190.8

239.0

324.5

434.0

613.0

GFSI

21.9

31.2

43.5

38.3

76.7

142.9

241.9

GHMI

25.9

38.6

52.8

66.5

74.6

108.6

146.7

HWFI

29.6

48.4

62.1

54.3

91.0

206.1

374.2

EMXI

23.2

32.1

46.5

53.6

101.9

79.8

71.4

AEMI

20.5

27.1

34.5

34.5

55.4

108.6

164.4

TVCA

21.1

29.1

36.6

31.2

54.3

96.0

181.3

FSSE

20.1

24.8

33.9

29.1

56.1

87.3

142.2

BAMD

69.7

129.3

185.0

226.7

202.1

190.6

119.1

BAMM

41.0

69.5

76.6

54.8

62.0

164.4

225.8

BAMS

72.2

123.7

154.6

157.1

131.2

229.8

310.0

Forecasts

25

23

21

19

16

12

8

122

Table 11a.

NHC official (OFCL) and climatology-persistence skill baseline (OCD5) intensity
forecast errors (kt) for Hurricane Sandy. Mean errors for the 5-yr period 2007-11
are shown for comparison. Official errors that are smaller than the 5-yr means are
shown in boldface type.
Forecast Period (h)
12

24

36

48

72

96

120

OFCL

8.0

10.6

11.0

10.9

10.3

8.9

14.5

OCD5

10.6

14.0

16.9

17.2

18.0

22.9

27.9

Forecasts

28

26

24

22

18

14

10

OFCL (2007-11)

7.1

10.8

13.0

15.0

16.9

17.1

18.1

OCD5 (2007-11)

8.4

12.4

15.4

17.7

20.5

21.5

21.2

Table 11b.

Homogeneous comparison of selected intensity forecast guidance models (in kt)
for Hurricane Sandy. Errors smaller than the NHC official forecast are shown in
boldface type. The number of official forecasts shown here will generally be
smaller than that shown in Table 11a due to the homogeneity requirement.
Forecast Period (h)

Model ID
12

24

36

48

72

96

120

OFCL

8.3

11.3

11.8

11.0

6.6

8.3

12.5

OCD5

10.6

14.6

16.7

16.1

13.7

21.9

30.8

GHMI

8.8

10.7

13.2

13.1

9.2

8.8

7.1

HWFI

9.8

12.6

10.5

9.3

9.8

7.3

9.6

DSHP

9.8

13.6

15.0

13.9

12.1

15.3

33.1

LGEM

9.5

14.2

16.3

17.8

17.8

21.9

29.1

IVCN

8.8

11.8

12.7

12.6

7.8

9.8

18.1

FSSE

8.5

12.0

13.0

13.5

13.4

15.8

17.3

GFSI

9.8

13.0

14.7

15.5

11.4

11.0

12.4

EMXI

9.5

14.5

16.7

18.1

13.0

9.0

3.4

Forecasts

26

24

22

20

16

12

8

123

Table 12.
Date/Time
(UTC)
22 / 1500
23 / 0900

Tropical cyclone watches and warnings for Hurricane Sandy, 22 – 29 Oct 2012.
Action

Location

24 / 1200
24 / 1500

Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Hurricane Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Warning changed to Hurricane
Warning
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Hurricane Watch discontinued
Hurricane Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Hurricane Watch changed to Hurricane Warning
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Warning issued
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Watch modified to
Tropical Storm Watch modified to

24 / 1500

Tropical Storm Watch modified to

24 / 1500
24 / 1800

Hurricane Watch issued
Tropical Storm Watch modified to

24 / 2100

Tropical Storm Warning changed to Hurricane
Warning
Tropical Storm Watch modified to
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Warning issued
Hurricane Watch discontinued
Tropical Storm Watch changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Warning issued
Hurricane Warning issued
Tropical Storm Watch modified to
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Hurricane Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued

23 / 0900
23 / 0900
23 / 1500
23 / 1500
23 / 1500
23 / 1500
23 / 1800
23 / 2100
23 / 2100
24 / 0300
24 / 0900
24 / 0900
24 / 1200

24 / 2100
24 / 2100
24 / 2100
24 / 2100
25 / 0300
25 / 0300
25 / 0300
25 / 0900
25 / 0900
25 / 0900
25 / 1500

124

Jamaica
Jamaica
Jamaica
Haiti
Jamaica
Southeastern and Central Bahamas
Jamaica
Camagüey to Guantánamo
Haiti
Camagüey to Guantánamo
Northwestern Bahamas
Central Bahamas
Jupiter Inlet to Ocean Reef
Ocean Reef to Craig Key
Northwestern Bahamas
Jupiter Inlet to Ocean Reef
Volusia/Brevard County Line to
Ocean Reef
Volusia/Brevard County Line to
Ocean Reef
Central and Northwestern Bahamas
Volusia/Brevard County Line to
Ocean Reef
Central and Northwestern Bahamas
Ocean Reef to Craig Key
Sebastian Inlet to Flagler Beach
Ocean Reef to Sebastian Inlet
All
Southeastern Bahamas
Lake Okeechobee
Ragged Islands
Flagler Beach to Fernandina Beach
Ocean Reef to Flagler Beach
Jamaica
Haiti

25 / 1500
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0300
26 / 0600
26 / 0900
26 / 1500
26 / 1500
26 / 1500
26 / 1500
26 / 1500
26 / 1500
26 / 1800
26 / 1800
26 / 1800
26 / 2100
26 / 2100
26 / 2100
26 / 2100
26 / 2100
27 / 0000
27 / 0900
27 / 1500
27 / 1500
27 / 2100
27 / 2100
28 / 0300
28 / 0900
28 / 2100
29 / 1500
29 / 2100

Hurricane Warning discontinued
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Hurricane Warning discontinued
Hurricane Warning issued
Tropical Storm Warning issued
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued
Tropical Storm Watch issued
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Hurricane Warning changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Watch modified to
Tropical Storm Watch modified to
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning issued
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Watch changed to Tropical Storm
Warning
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Watch discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Warning modified to
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued
Tropical Storm Warning discontinued

125

Camagüey to Guantánamo
Central Bahamas
Southeastern Bahamas
Ragged Islands
Northwestern Bahamas
Andros Island
Savannah River to Oregon Inlet
Northwestern Bahamas except Great
Abaco and Grand Bahama
Ocean Reef to Craig Key
Bermuda
Central Bahamas
Andros Island
Great Abaco to Grand Bahama Island
Great Abaco to Grand Bahama Island
Deerfield Beach to Flagler Beach
Northwestern Bahamas except Great
Abaco and Grand Bahama Island
St. Augustine to Fernandina Beach
Savannah River to South Santee River
Deerfield Beach to St. Augustine
Lake Okeechobee
South Santee River to Duck
Jupiter Inlet to St. Augustine
Sebastian Inlet to St. Augustine
St. Augustine to Fernandina Beach
Sebastian Inlet to St. Augustine
Bermuda
Great Abaco to Grand Bahama Island
All
Cape Fear to Duck
Surf City to Duck
Bermuda
All

Figure 1. Velocity potential anomalies at 200 mb (VP200) from 10°N-20°N. The shading shows
unfiltered VP200 anomalies (negative values [in blue] represent mass
divergence). Red contours show MJO-filtered VP200 anomalies; dashed lines
represent the upper-level divergent (convectively active) phase of the MJO. The
contour interval begins at 1 standard deviation and is in 0.5 standard deviation
increments thereafter. Figure courtesy of Michael Ventrice (SUNY-Albany).

126

Figure 2.

Best track positions for Hurricane Sandy, 22 - 29 October 2012.

127

130
120
110

Wind Speed (kt)

100
90
80
70

BEST TRACK
Sat (TAFB)
Sat (SAB)
ADT
AC (sfc)
AC (flt->sfc)
AC (DVK P->W)
Scatterometer
Surface
Drop (sfc)
Drop (LLM xtrp)
AMSU
Analysis

60
50
40
Hurricane Sandy
October 2012

30
20
10/21

10/23

10/25

10/27

10/29

10/31

Date (Month/Day)
Figure 3.

Selected wind observations and best track maximum sustained surface wind speed curve for Hurricane Sandy, 22 – 29
October 2012. Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates courtesy of UW-CIMSS. AMSU estimates are derived
from the UW-CIMSS technique. Dashed vertical lines correspond to 0000 UTC. The solid vertical lines correspond to
the times of landfall.
128

1010
1000

Pressure (mb)

990
980
970

Hurricane Sandy
October 2012

960
950
940
930
10/21

BEST TRACK
KZC P-W
Sat (TAFB)
Sat (SAB)
ADT
AMSU
AC (sfc)
Surface
Analysis

10/23

10/25

10/27

10/29

10/31

Date (Month/Day)
Figure 4.

Selected pressure observations and best track minimum central pressure curve for Hurricane Sandy, 22 – 29 October
2012. Advanced Dvorak Technique (ADT) estimates courtesy of UW-CIMSS. Dashed vertical lines correspond to
0000 UTC. KZC P-W refers to pressure estimates derived by applying the Knaff-Zehr-Courtney pressure-wind
relationship to the best track wind speeds. AMSU estimates are derived from the UW-CIMSS technique. The solid
vertical lines correspond to the times of landfall.

129

a) 2245 UTC 22 October

b) 1113 UTC 23 October

c) 2232 UTC 23 October

d) 1258 UTC 24 October

e) 2221 UTC 24 October

f) 1054 UTC 25 October

Figure 5.

Series of 85-gHz microwave images showing the gradual and then rapid development of Sandy during its time in or
near the Caribbean Sea, 22-25 October. Images courtesy of the Naval Research Lab in Monterey, California.

130

Figure 6. GOES-E infrared satellite image of Sandy at 0515 UTC 25 October, close to the time of peak intensity and landfall.

131

a) 2209 UTC 25 October

b) 1359 UTC 27 October

c) 0119 UTC 28 October

d) 1345 UTC 28 October

e) 1332 UTC 29 October

f) 0057 UTC 30 October

Figure 7.

Series of 85-GHz microwave images showing the structural evolution of Hurricane Sandy during its track from the
Bahamas until its landfall in New Jersey. Images courtesy of the Naval Research Lab in Monterey, California.

132

Figure 8.

NHC surface post-analysis of Sandy north of the Bahamas valid at 0000 UTC 27 October, superimposed on with the
GOES-E infrared satellite picture at 2345 UTC 26 October. Isobars (blue lines, 4-mb contours), and the 1000-850 mb
thickness (red dashed lines, in dekameters) values are from the GFS analysis at 0000 UTC 27 October.

133

1200 UTC 28 October

0000 UTC 29 October

1200 UTC 29 October

0000 UTC 30 October

Figure 9. GFS analyses of 500-mb geopotential heights (contours) and standardized anomalies (shaded in standard deviations relative
to a 1948-2011 mean) from 28-30 Oct. 2012. Red shaded regions indicate anomalously high heights and blue shaded areas
represent anomalously low heights. Sandy is denoted by the hurricane symbol.

134

Figure 10. SSTs (°C) on 28 Oct 2012 from the NCEP real-time global 1/12° analysis, with the best track of Sandy plotted at 12-h intervals.

135

Figure 11.

GOES-E infrared satellite image of Sandy at 1215 UTC 29 October 2012, near its secondary peak intensity.

136

Figure 12.

Guantánamo Bay Naval Base ARSR-4 FAA ATC Doppler radar reflectivity image showing the eye of Sandy approaching
Santiago de Cuba at 0332 UTC 25 October 2012.

137

Figure 13.

Selected observations of wind gusts of 34 kt or greater from surface stations and buoys during Sandy in the Caribbean Sea,
western Atlantic Ocean and southeastern coast of the United States.

138

Figure 14.

Selected observations of sustained winds of 34 kt or greater along the mid-Atlantic and New England coasts associated with
Sandy. All the observations shown were taken from an elevation of 24 m or less.

139

Figure 15.

Selected observations of wind gusts of 34 kt or greater along the mid-Atlantic and New England coasts associated with
Sandy. All the observations shown were taken from an elevation of 24 m or less.

140

Figure 16.

Selected observations of wind gusts of 34 kt or greater wind gusts associated with Sandy as a tropical or post-tropical
cyclone. Some of these stations were elevated.

141

Figure 17. GFS model analysis (1° resolution) from 1800 UTC 29 October 2012 of Hurricane Sandy’s wind field. 10-m wind barbs
are shown in black. Shaded colors are isotachs representing wind thresholds at 34, 50, and 64 kt.

142

(a)

(b)

1200 UTC 26 October

0000 UTC 26 October
(c)

0000 UTC 27 October

Figure 18.

GFS model analyses from 26-27 October 2012, showing the interaction of Sandy with an upper-level trough to its west.
The plot features 200-mb geopotential heights (solid magenta contours), relative vorticity (shaded), and winds (barbs,
kt), with 1000-850 mb thickness (red dashed) contours superimposed. The upper-level trough axis is denoted by a blue
line, and the center of Sandy is shown by the hurricane or tropical storm symbol.

143

(a)

(b)

0000 UTC 29 October

1200 UTC 29 October

(c)

0000 UTC 30 October
Figure 19.

GFS model analyses from 29-30 Oct., showing the interaction of Sandy with a large upper-level trough over the eastcentral United States prior to landfall. The plot features 200-mb geopotential heights (solid magenta contours), relative
vorticity (shaded), and winds (barbs, kt), with 1000-850 mb thickness (red dashed) contours superimposed. The upperlevel trough axis is denoted by a blue line, and the center of Sandy is shown by the hurricane symbol (or “L” in last
panel).
144

Figure 20. Dropsonde temperature profiles within a few miles of the center of Sandy from 29 October at 1420 UTC (yellow), 1749
UTC (green) and 2052 UTC (red), showing the large lower-tropospheric cooling. The x-axis is temperature (in °C) and
the y-axis is pressure (in mb).

145

(a)

(b)

Figure 21. NHC surface analysis, with aircraft 850-mb temperatures (red, °C), radar from Mt. Holly, NJ, and surface observations from 29
October 2012. Panel (a) is centered at 1730 UTC (aircraft observations within 1 h of valid time), panel (b) is centered at 2134 UTC.
Note the dissipation of the eye feature in the radar reflectivity between these times, along with the center becoming embedded within
cooler air, and just northeast of a warm front extending near the reflectivity gradient extending to the northwest into extreme southern
New Jersey. The center of circulation is indicated by the hurricane symbol and “L” in panels (a) and (b), respectively. An occluded
front in panel b has been omitted for legibility.

146

Figure 22. NHC analysis of fronts and isobars (4-mb contours) at 1500 UTC 29 October 2012, plotted with 1500 UTC surface
observations and a GOES-E visible satellite image at 1445 UTC 29 October.

147

Figure 23. NHC analysis of fronts and isobars (4-mb contours) at 2100 UTC 29 October 2012, plotted with 2100 UTC surface
observations and a GOES-E visible satellite image at 2045 UTC 29 October.
148

Figure 24.

Estimated inundation (feet above ground level) calculated from USGS high-water marks and NOS tide gauges along
the U.S. East Coast from Sandy. Values are rounded to the nearest half-foot.

149

Figure 25.

Estimated inundation (feet above ground level) calculated from USGS high-water marks and NOS tide gauges in New
Jersey, New York, and Connecticut from Sandy.

150

Figure 26.

Rainfall (in inches) associated with Hurricane Sandy and its extratropical remnants from 27-31 October 2012. Figure
courtesy of the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center.

151

Figure 27.

Snowfall (in inches) associated with Hurricane Sandy and its extratropical remnants from 28-31 October 2012. Figure
courtesy of the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center.

152

(a)

(b)

Mayarí, Holguín
(c)

Antilla, Holguín
(d)

Hotel Baconao, near Santiago de Cuba

Banes, Holguín
Figure 28.

a) House in Holguin destroyed by Sandy’s strong winds, b) severe structural damage in Holguin, c) roof damage to a
residence in Holguin, and d) storm surge flooding at the Hotel Baconao near Santiago de Cuba. Images courtesy of the
Cuban Meteorological Service.

153

(b)
(a)

(b)
(a)

Figure 29.

(a) Before and after images of a portion of the coast in Mantoloking, NJ, showing the effect of storm
surge flooding. (b) Before and after image of a portion of the coast near Rockaway, New York, in Queens County,
showing the inland extent of storm surge flooding. All images are courtesy of the U.S. Geological Survey.

154

(a)

(b

(c)

(d)

Figure 30.

a) Image of a rollercoaster sitting in the Atlantic Ocean in NJ after the Fun Town pier it sat on was destroyed by the
storm surge associated with Sandy (courtesy of Getty Images), b) photo showing the Lexington Avenue subway station
flooded during Sandy (courtesy Wzohaib/Flickr) c) storm surge penetrating the lower East Side in Manhattan, New
York City, on 29 October 2012 (courtesy Twitter/nycarecs) , d) photo from a surveillance camera that shows a PATH
station in Hoboken, New Jersey, as it is flooded around 9:30 p.m. EDT 29 October 2012 (courtesy AP/Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey).

155

Figure 31.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Model forecast tracks for Sandy at 0000 UTC 23 October (a), 0000 UTC 24 October (b), 0000 UTC October 25 (c),
and 0000 UTC 26 October (d). Solid color lines are the forecasts through 72 h, while dashed lines are from 72-120 h,
and dotted lines represent the 120-168 h forecasts (top panels only). The ECMWF is in coral, the GFS ensemble in
yellow, the GFS is in cyan, and the TVCA model consensus is in red.

156

Figure 32.

Five-day ECMWF ensemble tracks and probabilities (left) and GFS ensemble tracks (right) in orange issued 0000 UTC
25 October 2012. Note that a majority of ECMWF ensemble members showed a threat to the United States, while most
of the GFS ensemble members were well out to sea (with the deterministic GFS in black). The verifying position is in
southern New Jersey (last white hurricane symbol in the right panel). Left panel image courtesy of ECMWF.

157

