ClinicalTrials.gov record NCT02944682
Record version 27, submitted 2026-05-07

Brief title: Household Air Pollution and Health: A Multi-country LPG Intervention Trial
Official title: Household Air Pollution and Health: A Multi-country LPG Intervention Trial
Lead sponsor: Emory University

Status and dates
  Overall status: COMPLETED
  Study start: 2017-09-01 (ACTUAL)
  Primary completion: 2025-06-30 (ACTUAL)
  Study completion: 2025-06-30 (ACTUAL)

Design
  Study type: INTERVENTIONAL
  Phase: NA
  allocation: RANDOMIZED
  interventionModel: PARALLEL
  primaryPurpose: PREVENTION
  maskingInfo:
    masking: NONE
  Enrollment: 3640 (ACTUAL)

Brief summary
  This study is a randomized controlled trial of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) stove and fuel distribution in 3,200 households in four countries (India, Guatemala, Peru, and Rwanda). Following a common protocol, each intervention site will recruit 800 pregnant women (aged 18-34 years, 9 - \<20 weeks gestation) and will randomly assign half their households to receive LPG stoves and an 18-month supply of LPG. Control households are anticipated to continue to cook primarily with solid biomass fuels and will receive compensation based on a uniform set of trial-wide principles, customized to each site based on formative research. The mother will be followed along with her child until the child is 1 year old. The researchers estimate that 15% of households will have a second, non-pregnant older adult woman (aged 40 to \<80 years) who will also be enrolled at baseline and followed during the 18-month follow-up period. To optimize intervention use, the researchers will implement behavior change strategies informed by previous experiences and formative research in Year 1. This study will assess cookstove use, conduct repeated personal exposure assessments of household air pollution, and collect dried blood spots and urinary samples for biomarker analysis and biospecimen storage. The primary outcomes are low birth weight, severe pneumonia incidence, and stunting of the child, and systolic blood pressure in the older adult woman. Participants in India, Guatemala and Rwanda will be followed until the child is 5 years old to assess the longer-term effects of the intervention.

Detailed description
  Globally, nearly 3 billion people rely on solid fuels for cooking and heating, the vast majority in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). The resulting household air pollution (HAP) is the third leading risk factor in the 2010 global burden of disease, accounting for an estimated 4.3 million deaths annually, largely among women and young children. Previous interventions have provided cleaner biomass-based cookstoves but have failed to reduce exposure to levels that produce meaningful health improvements. There have been no large-scale field trials with liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cookstoves, likely the cleanest scalable intervention.
  
  The aim of this study is to conduct a randomized controlled trial of LPG stove and fuel distribution in 3,200 households in four LMICs (India, Guatemala, Peru, and Rwanda) to deliver rigorous evidence regarding potential health benefits across the lifespan. Each intervention site will recruit 800 pregnant women (aged 18-34 years, 9 - \<20 weeks gestation) and will randomly assign half their households to receive LPG stoves and an 18-month supply of LPG. Control households are anticipated to continue to cook primarily with solid biomass fuels and will receive compensation based on a uniform set of trial-wide principles, customized to each site based on formative research. The mother will be followed along with her child until the child is 1 year old. In households with a second, non-pregnant older adult woman (aged 40 to \<80 years) the researchers will also enroll and follow her during the 18-month follow-up period in order to assess cardiopulmonary, metabolic, and cancer outcomes. To optimize intervention use, the researchers will implement behavior change strategies. This study will assess cookstove use, conduct repeated personal exposure assessments to HAP (PM2.5, black carbon, carbon monoxide), and collect dried blood spots and urinary samples for biomarker analysis and biospecimen storage on all participants at multiple time points. The primary outcomes are low birth weight, severe pneumonia incidence, and stunting of the child, and systolic blood pressure in the older adult woman.
  
  This study will address the following specific aims: (1) using an intent-to-treat analysis, determine the effect of a randomized LPG stove and fuel intervention on health in four diverse LMIC populations using a common protocol; (2) determine the exposure-response relationships for HAP and health outcomes; and (3) determine relationships between LPG intervention and both targeted and exploratory biomarkers of exposure/health effects.
  
  This study will provide evidence, including costs and implementation strategies, to inform national and global policies on scaling up LPG stoves among vulnerable populations. Ultimately, this will facilitate deeper policy-level discussions as well as identify requirements for initiating and sustaining HAP interventions globally.
  
  The intervention delivery occurred until the child was one year of age. The researchers will continue to follow participants in India, Guatemala and Rwanda until the child is 5 years old to assess the longer-term effects of the intervention. Previous evidence suggests that the benefits of reduced exposure during the first, critical year of development will continue even if the intervention ends. The researchers will continue using methods employed during the HAPIN trial period. The HAPIN trial provides a unique context in which to address these questions, particularly given the successful intervention and exposure reduction. Participants are well-characterized and health and exposures to air pollution are being documented. Critically, because of its experimental design of the trial, continued follow-up of the cohort will provide rigorous causal inferences about the effects of this 500-day intervention over the most important period of early childhood development.

Arms and interventions
  Arm: Liquefied petroleum gas cookstove (EXPERIMENTAL)
    Participants randomized to the experimental arm will receive a liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cookstove and 18-month supply of LPG.
  Arm: Control (NO_INTERVENTION)
    Participants in the control group will not receive a liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) stove and will continue using traditional cooking methods (open fire or traditional stoves), or the cooking method of their choice. Control households will receive compensation based on a uniform set of trial-wide principles, customized to each site based on formative research.
  Intervention: OTHER Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cookstove

Outcome measures
  [Primary outcome] Birth weight
    Description: Birth weight is assessed by a trained nurse or health worker within 24 hours of birth. Infants are weighed naked or in a pre-weighed blanket. Weight is measured to the nearest 10 g using a digital electronic scale, if performed by the study field staff; otherwise, hospital medical records are used.
    Time frame: Within 24 hours of birth (up to 5 months post-randomization of mother)
  [Primary outcome] Incidence of HAPIN Defined Severe Pneumonia
    Description: The number of times a child has severe pneumonia over their period of follow-up during the first year of life is assessed. For this study pneumonia criteria are adapted from the WHO classification of childhood pneumonia (2014) and there are 3 algorithms for case criteria: 1) the presence of cough and/or difficult breathing and at least 1 general danger sign plus evidence of pneumonia on lung imaging (i.e., lung ultrasound or chest x-ray), or 2) the presence of cough and/or difficult breathing and hypoxemia (measured either via pulse oximetry (SpO2), or observing a child requiring advanced respiratory support (i.e., intubation and mechanical ventilation, non-invasive ventilation with continuous or bi-level positive airway pressure support, or high-flow nasal cannula oxygen), or 3) children who die prior to evaluation but their death is attributed to pneumonia by verbal autopsy. Cases of pneumonia are recorded children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Primary outcome] Length-for-age z-score 2 standard deviations below the standard
    Description: The primary outcome measured is stunting at one year of age, defined as a length-for-age z-score (LAZ) that is 2 standard deviations below the median of the growth standard. Infant length is assessed at birth and quarterly thereafter, until the child is 12 months old. Z-scores are calculated using the 2006 World Health Organization (WHO) Multi-Growth Reference Standard (MGRS).
    Time frame: 12 months after birth
  [Primary outcome] Systolic Blood Pressure Among Older Adult Women
    Description: Systolic blood pressure is assessed in the older adult women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (Omron HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team uses the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12, and 18 months post-randomization
  [Primary outcome] Child Linear Growth During Extended Follow-up
    Description: Linear growth of children is assessed in centimeters of height.
    Time frame: 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age
  [Primary outcome] Caregiver Reported Early Childhood Development Instrument (CREDI) Score During Extended Follow-up
    Description: Child development is assessed with the Caregiver Reported Early Childhood Development Instrument (CREDI). The CREDI is a population-level measure of early childhood development (ECD) for children from 0-3 years of age. The CREDI assesses 4 domains of child development: 1) motor (fine and gross motor), 2) language (expressive and receptive language), 3) cognitive (executive function, problem solving and reasoning, and pre-academic knowledge), and 4) social-emotional (emotional and behavioral self-regulation, emotional knowledge, and social competence). The CREDI long form consists of up to 108 items and the number of questions answered depends on the age of the child. Responses of "yes" are coded as 1 and "no" is coded as 0; certain items are reverse coded. Both domain-specific and overall z-scores are calculated. Total raw scores increase by age (with developmental progression), and higher scores indicate increased development.
    Time frame: 24 months of age
  [Primary outcome] Malawi Developmental Assessment Tool (MDAT) Score
    Description: The MDAT measures gross motor (39 items), fine motor (42 items), language/cognition (40 items) and social skills (36 items). Originally developed and validated in rural Malawi, it has now been used in over 25 countries with more than 8,000 children as both a clinical and research tool. The MDAT is a continuous test with start and stop rules. Most items are administered directly to the child and items that are not easily observed (e.g., child speaks in full sentences; child understands sharing with others; child can dress self) are administered by parent report. Children receive either a pass or fail for each item, and summed pass scores can produce a composite score as well as domain-specific scores. Total scores range from 0 to 157 where higher scores indicate greater neurodevelopment.
    Time frame: 36, 48 and 60 months of age
  [Secondary outcome] Gestational Systolic Blood Pressure
    Description: Blood pressure is assessed in the pregnant women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (OMRON HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team will use the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: Baseline (9-20 weeks gestation), 24-28 and 32-36 weeks gestation
  [Secondary outcome] Gestational Diastolic Blood Pressure
    Description: Blood pressure is assessed in the pregnant women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (OMRON HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team will use the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: Baseline (9-20 weeks gestation), 24-28 and 32-36 weeks gestation
  [Secondary outcome] Systolic Blood Pressure in New Mothers
    Description: Blood pressure is assessed in the new mothers in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (OMRON HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team will use the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: 9, 12, and 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Diastolic Blood Pressure in New Mothers
    Description: Blood pressure is assessed in the new mothers in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (OMRON HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team will use the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: 9, 12, and 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Diastolic Blood Pressure Among Older Adult Women
    Description: Diastolic blood pressure is assessed in the older adult women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (Omron HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team uses the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Mean arterial pressure
    Description: Mean arterial pressure is assessed in the older adult women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (Omron HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). Mean arterial pressure is calculated as DBP+(SBP-DBP)/3, where SBP=systolic blood pressure and DBP=diastolic blood pressure.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Pulse pressure
    Description: Pulse pressure is assessed in the older adult women in the intervention and control arms using automatic sphygmomanometers (Omron HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). pressure. Pulse pressure is the difference between systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Fetal Growth
    Description: Pregnant women have ultrasounds at Baseline and during gestation weeks 24-28 and gestation weeks 32-36 to measure fetal growth outcomes. Specifically, the researchers evaluate head circumference (HC), abdominal circumference (AC), femur length (FL) and estimated fetal weight (EFW) during gestation. The researchers are comparing (i) z-scores of individual fetal growth measurements (HC, AC, FL, EFW) at the 2 growth ultrasound visits between intervention and control participants (separately at 24-28 weeks gestation and 32-36 weeks gestation); (ii) differences in proportions of the 2.5th percentiles of each of these measurements evaluated separately at 24-28 and 32-36 weeks gestation; (iii) Z-score trajectories of HC, AC, FL and EFW as a function of gestational age and intervention; and (iv) prevalence of small for gestational age (SGA) during the fetal period through birth as measured by WHO INTERGROWTH 21st standards.
    Time frame: Baseline, Gestation Week 24-28 and Gestation Week 32-36
  [Secondary outcome] Gestational age at birth
    Description: Gestational age at birth is measured in weeks, as continuous outcome, among all live births.
    Time frame: Up to 5 months (within 24 hours of birth, 3-5 months post randomization)
  [Secondary outcome] Preterm birth
    Description: Preterm birth is defined as delivery of a living infant prior to 37 completed weeks of gestation.
    Time frame: Up to 5 months (within 24 hours of birth, 3-5 months post randomization)
  [Secondary outcome] WHO Non-severe Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of WHO non-severe pneumonia (2014 definition and 2013 definition) during the first year of life. Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] WHO Severe Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of WHO non-severe pneumonia (2014 definition and 2013 definition) during the first year of life. Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] Hospitalization for respiratory illness
    Description: Cumulative incidence of hospitalizations for a respiratory illness during the first year of life.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] WHO Pocket Book Non-severe Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of WHO non-severe pneumonia during the first year of life, as defined in the second edition of the "Pocket book of hospital care for children" (2013). Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] WHO Pocket Book Severe Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of WHO severe pneumonia during the first year of life, as defined in the second edition of the "Pocket book of hospital care for children" (2013). Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] Hypoxemic Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of hypoxemic pneumonia during the first year of life. Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] Ultrasound or Radiograph Pneumonia
    Description: Cumulative incidence of lung ultrasound or chest radiograph pneumonia during the first year of life. Cases of pneumonia are recorded whenever children present to HAPIN health facilities with respiratory symptoms.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth
  [Secondary outcome] Brachial artery reactivity testing (BART)
    Description: Brachial artery reactivity testing (BART) measures endothelial function via flow-mediated dilatation to reactive hyperemia following the release of arm blood-flow occlusion. In this test, baseline artery diameter is measured, then a blood pressure cuff is inflated to induce distal arm ischemia for 5 minutes and after releasing the pressure, the post-occlusion brachial artery diameter is measured. The ratio of post- to pre-occlusion artery diameter represents endothelial function where lower values indicate worse endothelial function. (Peru only)
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT) Among Older Adult Women
    Description: The carotid intima-media thickness test (CIMT) is used to determine the extent of carotid atherosclerotic vascular disease. The test measures the thickness of the inner two layers of the carotid artery and can detect plaque build up prior to physical symptoms being experienced. The carotid ultrasound will be performed with a portable ultrasound by trained sonographers.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) Score
    Description: Adult respiratory health and well-being is assessed with the St. George Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ). The SGRQ measures impaired health and perceived well-being among individuals with chronic airway disease. The SGRQ has sections assessing symptoms, activities that cause breathlessness or are limited because of breathlessness, and the impacts of respiratory problems on employment, sense of control of health, panic, stigmatization, medication use, side effects of therapies, expectations for health and disturbances of daily life. The questionnaire includes multiple choice, true/false and open-ended questions.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Short Form 36 Survey (SF-36) Score Among Older Adult Women
    Description: The Short Form 36 survey (SF-36) is a standardized, preference-based 36 item questionnaire evaluating quality of life. The survey has 8 sections (vitality, physical functioning, bodily pain, general health perceptions, physical role functioning, emotional role functioning, social role functioning, and mental health). Possible scores range from 0 (lowest quality of life) to 100 (highest quality of life).
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Secondary outcome] Weight
    Description: Weight is measured in kilograms (kg). Weight in new mothers in Rwanda is measured when the child is 24 months old. For new mothers in Guatemala weight is measured when the child is 24 and 36 months old. In older adult women, weight is measured when the child is 24 months old. Weight is measured in children at 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age.
    Time frame: 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age of the child
  [Secondary outcome] Body Mass Index (BMI)
    Description: BMI is calculated as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters (m) squared (kg/m\^2). BMI in new mothers in Rwanda is calculated from height and weight measurements obtained when the child is 24 months old. For new mothers in Guatemala BMI is calculated from height and weight measurements obtained when the child is 24 and 36 months old. In older adult women, BMI is calculated from height and weight measurements obtained when the child is 24 months old.
    Time frame: 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age of the child
  [Secondary outcome] Height
    Description: Height is measured in meters. Height in new mothers in Rwanda is measured when the child is 24 months old. For new mothers in Guatemala height is measured when the child is 24 and 36 months old. In older adult women, height is measured when the child is 24-months old.
    Time frame: 24 and 36 months of age of the child
  [Secondary outcome] Child Blood Pressure
    Description: Blood pressure is assessed in the children using automatic sphygmomanometers (OMRON HEM-907XL; Osaka, Japan). The study team uses the procedures adapted from previously validated methods and cardiovascular outcome studies, following recommendations for the American Heart Association and the European Society of Hypertension.
    Time frame: 24 (Rwanda only) and 60 months of age
  [Secondary outcome] Child Linear Growth
    Description: Linear growth of children is assessed in centimeters at birth and quarterly thereafter, until the child is 12 months old.
    Time frame: Birth (3-5 months post-randomization), and 3, 6, 9, and 12 months of age
  [Secondary outcome] Caregiver Reported Early Childhood Development Instrument (CREDI) Score
    Description: Child development is assessed with the Caregiver Reported Early Childhood Development Instrument (CREDI). The CREDI is a population-level measure of early childhood development (ECD) for children from 0-3 years of age. The CREDI assesses 4 domains of child development: 1) motor (fine and gross motor), 2) language (expressive and receptive language), 3) cognitive (executive function, problem solving and reasoning, and pre-academic knowledge), and 4) social-emotional (emotional and behavioral self-regulation, emotional knowledge, and social competence). The CREDI long form consists of up to 108 items and the number of questions answered depends on the age of the child. Responses of "yes" are coded as 1 and "no" is coded as 0; certain items are reverse coded. Both domain-specific and overall z-scores are calculated. Total raw scores increase by age (with developmental progression), and higher scores indicate increased development.
    Time frame: 3 and 12 months of age
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Change in fine particulate matter (PM2.5) exposure
    Description: Personal monitoring equipment is used to assess exposure to fine particulate matter (PM2.5) over a 24-hour period in intervention and control participants (pregnant women, older adult women, and children). Exposure for pregnant women is measured at baseline, 24-28 weeks gestation, 32-36 weeks gestation, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old. Exposure for the child is measured at 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age. Exposure for the older adult women is measured at baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and at 24, 36, 48, 60 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Change in Carbon monoxide (CO) exposure
    Description: Personal monitoring equipment is used to assess exposure to carbon monoxide (CO) over a 24-hour period in intervention and control participants (pregnant women, older adult women, and children). Exposure for pregnant women is measured at baseline, 24-28 weeks gestation, 32-36 weeks gestation, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old. Exposure for the child is measured at 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age. Exposure for the older adult women is measured at baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and at 24, 36, 48, 60 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Change in Black carbon (BC) exposure
    Description: Personal monitoring equipment is used to assess exposure to black carbon (BC) over a 24-hour period in intervention and control participants (pregnant women, older adult women, and children). Exposure for pregnant women is measured at baseline, 24-28 weeks gestation, 32-36 weeks gestation, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old. Exposure for the child is measured at 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48 and 60 months of age. Exposure for the older adult women is measured at baseline, 3, 6, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and in Guatemala and India, when the child is 24 months old.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and at 24, 36, 48, 60 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Maternal Perceived Stress Scale (PSS)
    Description: The 10-item Cohen's Perceived Stress Scale (PPS) assesses the way an individual appraises their life events as stressful (e.g., "In the last month, how often have you felt difficulties were piling up so high that you could not overcome them?") (Cohen, 1983). Likert-level responses ranged from 0 (never) to 4 (very often), meaning a high PPS score would result in a high level of perceived stress. A Spanish language PPS created and tested and found to be valid and reliable (Vallijo et al., 2018).
    Time frame: 9 to 18 months post-randomization (3 to 12 months of age of the child)
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Spontaneous abortion
    Description: Fetal death before 19 weeks 6 days.
    Time frame: Baseline through 20 weeks gestation
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Early preterm birth
    Description: Births at less than 34 weeks completed gestation, among all live births.
    Time frame: Birth
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Preterm delivery
    Description: Including preterm birth and stillbirth.
    Time frame: Birth
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Stillbirth
    Description: Any fetal deaths occurring at or after 20 weeks' gestation OR indicated on Serious Adverse Event form OR on Pregnant Woman Medical History form OR on verbal autopsy form.
    Time frame: Up to birth
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Neonatal death
    Description: Death between birth and 28 days.
    Time frame: Birth through 28 days
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Messenger Ribonucleic Acid (mRNA) Expression and microRNA in Older Adult Women
    Description: Two buccal cell scrapes will be collected by gently scraping the buccal mucosa on both sides of the mouth with a small plastic collection spoon. Nasal turbinate brush samples can be collected using a soft cytobrush on each turbinate. Collection is gentle and causes no discomfort to study participants. Both samples will be processed in the laboratory according to procedures detailed in the protocol. This will occur in the older adult women in an NCI substudy.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Microbiome Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) in Older Adult Women
    Description: For the oral rinse, participants will vigorously rinse their mouth and the rinsates are collected in a centrifuge tube. The tube is centrifuged and the pellet and supernatant are removed to separate cryovials, labeled and frozen. This will occur in the older adult women in an NCI substudy.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Epigenetics (DNA methylation) in Older Adult Women
    Description: Two buccal cell scrapes will be collected by gently scraping the buccal mucosa on both sides of the mouth with a small plastic collection spoon. A 5-mL venous blood sample will be collected in an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) vacutainer tube by standard clinical venipuncture of a cubital vein. Both samples will be transported and processed in the laboratory according to procedures detailed in the protocol. This will occur in the older adult women in an NCI substudy.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Metabolomics and MicroRNA in Older Adult Women
    Description: A 5-mL venous blood sample will be collected in an EDTA vacutainer tube by standard clinical venipuncture of a cubital vein. The sample will be transported and processed in the laboratory according to procedures detailed in the protocol. This will occur in the older adult women in an NCI substudy.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Household food insecurity
    Description: Household food insecurity will be measured using the Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), developed and validated by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The FIES module includes eight questions, each with yes/no response options, on the household's access to adequate food, and is intended to measure three domains of food insecurity: uncertainty/anxiety, food quantity, and food quality. Each question takes values of 0/1, which are summed for a possible total score of 0-8.
    Time frame: Baseline, 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Dietary diversity - women
    Description: Dietary diversity for women will be measured using the Minimum Dietary Diversity - Women (MDD-W) questionnaire from the FAO and FHI 360, which uses an open recall format to collect data on foods and beverages consumed by the respondent during the previous day and night. Responses will be categorized into ten food groups and women who report consuming five or more out of ten food groups will be categorized as achieving minimum dietary diversity.
    Time frame: Baseline to 18 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Dietary diversity - infants
    Description: Minimum dietary diversity for children will be measured using the World Health Organization (WHO) infant and young child feeding questionnaire. The questionnaire uses a combination of open and closed recall and asks caregivers to report on foods and beverages consumed by the infant or young child during the previous day and night. Responses will be categorized into eight food groups and infants who consumed five or more out of ten eight food groups will be categorized as achieving minimum dietary diversity.
    Time frame: 9, 12, 15 and 18 months post-randomization (3, 6, 9, and 12 months of age)
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Hemoglobin (Hb) concentration / anemia - women
    Description: Hb will be measured from a single drop of capillary blood obtained via finger prick, using the HemoCue(R) Hb 201system (HemoCue(R) AB) point-of-care device
    Time frame: Baseline, 3 and 5 months post-randomization
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Hemoglobin (Hb) concentration / anemia - infants
    Description: Hb will be measured from a single drop of capillary blood obtained via finger prick, using the HemoCue(R) Hb 201system (HemoCue(R) AB) point-of-care device
    Time frame: 12 and 18 months post-randomization (6 and 12 months of age)
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Child Lung Function
    Description: Lung function measurements will be made using the forced oscillation technique (FOT) with the Tremoflo C-100 device with disposable mouthpieces. FOT is a technique that can identify early changes in the airways. The FOT device measures the relationship between externally applied pressure waves and the resulting air flow to measure respiratory impedance. Values produced at high frequencies correspond to the proximal and large airways, and values produced at low frequencies correspond to distal and small airways. This measurement will be conducted in children in Guatemala.
    Time frame: 36, 48 and 60 months of age
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT) Among Older Adult Women During Extended Follow-up
    Description: The carotid intima-media thickness test (CIMT) is used to determine the extent of carotid atherosclerotic vascular disease. The test measures the thickness of the inner two layers of the carotid artery and can detect plaque build up prior to physical symptoms being experienced. The carotid ultrasound will be performed with a portable ultrasound by trained sonographers. This outcome is only assessed in Guatemala during the extended follow-up period (after the birth of the household child).
    Time frame: 24 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Change in Urinary Biomarkers
    Description: Multiple exposure biomarkers will be measured: 3-OH Cotinine, 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanol (NNAL), levoglucosan, 8OH-deoxyguanosine (8OHdG), and Volatile Organic Chemicals (VOC) metabolites. Exposure biomarkers (especially for children whose urine may be limited) will be prioritized as follows: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) biomarkers, levoglucosan, volatile organic chemicals (VOC) biomarkers, heavy metals, and tobacco-related biomarkers. Urinary biomarkers will be measured in pregnant women at baseline, 24-28 weeks gestation, and 32-36 weeks gestation, and in new mothers when the child is 24-months old. Biomarkers will be measured in older adult women at baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization. Biomarkers will be measured in children at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months of age.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and 24 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Change in Dried Blood Spot (DBS) Biomarkers
    Description: The main biomarkers to be measured from the dried blood spots is: inflammation markers, endothelial markers of cardiovascular disease, oxidative stress markers, Hb, HbA1C, tumor-associated antigen antibodies, cytochrome P450, p53 tumor-associated antigen (TAA), lipids, metabolomics, MiRNA, heavy metals. DBS biomarkers will be measured in pregnant women at baseline, 24-28 weeks gestation, and 32-36 weeks gestation, and in new mothers when the child is 24-months old. DBS biomarkers will be measured in older adult women at baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization. DBS biomarkers will be measured in children at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months of age.
    Time frame: Baseline, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months post-randomization, and at 24 months of age of the child
  [Other pre-specified outcome] Reported Diarrhea in Children
    Description: Reported diarrhea will be extracted from the Monthly Child Health Status Visit case report form. Each month, the child's caretaker will be administered a survey to obtain information on whether the child under 1 year of age (the HAPIN study index child) or any other child in the home under 5 has experienced WHO-defined diarrhea (defined as three or more loose stools that can take the shape of a container within a 24-hour period) in the past 7 days. Persistent diarrhea will be defined as 14 or more continuous days of diarrhea. The presence of blood in the stool will also be noted as an indicator of severity.
    Time frame: Up to 12 months after birth

Eligibility
  Sex: ALL  Minimum age: 18 Years
  Inclusion Criteria for Pregnant Women:
  
  * Confirmed pregnancy (hCG positive blood or urine test)
  * Aged 18 to \<35 years (via self-report)
  * Uses biomass stove predominantly
  * Lives in study area
  * 9 - \<20 weeks gestation confirmed by ultrasound
  * Singleton pregnancy (one fetus)
  * Viable fetus with normal fetal heart rate (120-180 beats per minute) at time of ultrasound
  * Continued pregnancy at the time of randomization confirmed by self-report
  * Agrees to participate with informed consent
  
  Exclusion Criteria for Pregnant Women:
  
  * Currently smokes cigarettes or other tobacco products
  * Plans to move permanently outside study area in the next 12 months
  * Uses LPG stove predominantly, or is likely to use LPG predominantly in the near future
  
  Inclusion Criteria for Older Adult Woman in the Same Household:
  
  * Aged 40 to \<80 years (via self-report)
  
  Exclusion Criteria for Older Adult Woman in the Same Household:
  
  * Currently smokes cigarettes or other tobacco products
  * Pregnant (by self-report)
  * Plans to move out of her current household in the next 12 months
