HIPAA Security Rule NPRM | HHS.gov Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here’s how you know Here’s how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Join HHS in Celebrating Freedom 250 About HHS About HHS HHS is a U.S. executive department that touches the lives of nearly all Americans by protecting your rights, research, food safety, health care, aging, and much more. Explore About HHS About the Department Leadership HHS Divisions Organizational Chart Priorities Budget in Brief Contact Us Press Room Press Releases Request for Comment Request for Interview Connect on Social Media HHS Live Podcasts Careers Working at HHS Opportunities for Attorneys Join the Health Workforce I am HHS New Employee Orientation Transportation Services Standards and Compliance Gold Standard Science Accessibility Plain Writing Digital Communications Standards Records Management Accountability and Transparency Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Open Government No Fear Act Privacy at HHS RealFood.gov MAHA Programs & Services Programs & Services HHS is responsible for public health, health care, and human/social services for the United States of America. This includes administering over 100 programs and services. Explore Programs & Services Health Care Find a Health Center Find an Indian Health Service Facility Find Support for Mental Health, Drugs, or Alcohol Find a Cancer Center Dental Care Options Telehealth Health Insurance Medicare – 65+ or With Disability Medicaid - Low-Income, With Disability, or Pregnant Children’s Health Insurance Programs (CHIP) Find Health Insurance Coverage Insurance Help for Mental Health and Substance Use No Surprise Medicals Bills Social Services Programs for Children and Families Programs for People with Disabilities Programs for Older Adults Resources for Caregivers Public Health and Prevention Emergency Preparedness and Response Healthy Lifestyle Mental Health and Substance Use Food Safety and Nutrition Drug and Product Safety Health Research and Information National Library of Medicine Surgeon General Reports Health Data National Center for Health Statistics Medline Plus Clinical Research Studies Volunteering to Participate in Research Laws & Regulations Laws & Regulations HHS protects and helps you understand the laws and regulations, also known as "rules," that govern the nation. You also have the power to voice your opinion on these laws and regulations. Explore Laws & Regulations Regulatory Information What is a Rule? Find Rules by Division Comment on Open Rules Suggest Deregulatory Actions Understand Key Federal Laws Civil Rights Your Civil Rights Civil Rights Laws Enforced by HHS Health Information Privacy Substance Use Disorder Patient Confidentiality Conscience and Religious Freedom Laws and Regulations by Topic HIPAA Privacy Rule Health Insurance Protections Health IT Legislation Food and Drug Safety Public Health Emergencies Human Research Protections The Belmont Report Regulations, Policy, and Guidance Human Subjects Regulations (45 CFR 46) Register IRBs and Obtain FWAs Trainings, Tutorials, and Workshops International Research Complaints and Appeals File a Medicare Complaint File a HIPAA Complaint File a Civil Rights Complaint Appeal an Insurance Company Decision Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse to OIG Report a Problem to the FDA Report a Tip on the Chemical and Surgical Mutilation of Children Grants & Contracts Grants & Contracts HHS gives the most money in grants of any federal agency in the U.S. Find out about our grants and how your organization can apply for them. We also provide information on how you can work with us and our support of small businesses. Explore Grants & Contracts Grants Get Ready for Grants Management Grant Policies and Regulations Research Grants and Funding from NIH Search Grants.gov Avoid Grant Scams Contact HHS Grant Officials Contracts Get Ready to Do Business with HHS Programs for Businesses Contract Policies and Regulations Search Opportunities on SAM.gov Contact HHS Contracting Managers Small Business Contract Opportunities Small Business Programs Small Business Resources Contact Small Business Staff Radical Transparency Radical Transparency HHS protects and helps you understand the laws and regulations, also known as "rules," that govern the nation. You also have the power to voice your opinion on these laws and regulations. Explore Radical Transparency CDC’s ACIP Conflicts of Interest Ending Anti-Semitism on College Campuses Ending Wasteful Spending Keeping Food Ingredients Safe Chemical Contaminants Transparency Tool Show search form HHS Search (hipaa) Search Health Information Privacy HIPAA for Individuals Filing a Complaint HIPAA for Professionals Newsroom Menu Breadcrumb HHS HIPAA Home For Professionals The Security Rule HIPAA Security Rule NPRM Page sharing options Navigate to: HIPAA for Professionals Regulatory Initiatives Privacy Summary of the Privacy Rule Guidance Combined Text of All Rules HIPAA Related Links Security Security Rule NPRM Summary of the Security Rule Security Guidance Cyber Security Guidance Breach Notification Breach Reporting Guidance Reports to Congress Regulation History Compliance & Enforcement Enforcement Rule Enforcement Process Enforcement Data Resolution Agreements Case Examples Audit Reports to Congress State Attorneys General Special Topics Parental Access Mental and Behavioral Health Change Healthcare Cybersecurity Incident FAQs HIPAA and COVID-19 HIPAA and Reproductive Health HIPAA and Final Rule Notice HIPAA and Telehealth HIPAA and FERPA Research Public Health Emergency Response Health Information Technology Health Apps Patient Safety Covered Entities & Business Associates Business Associate Contracts Business Associates Training & Resources FAQs for Professionals Other Administrative Simplification Rules Substance Use Disorder Confidentiality HIPAA Security Rule NPRM The Department’s Office for Civil Rights seeks to update HIPAA Security Rule for the first time since 2013 On December 27, 2024, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), through its Office for Civil Rights (OCR), issued a proposed rule to improve cybersecurity and better protect the U.S health care system from a growing number of cyberattacks. The proposed rule would modify the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Security Rule to require health plans, health care clearinghouses (an organization that enables the exchange of health care data between a provider and a payer (insurance company)), and most health care providers, and their business associates, to strengthen cybersecurity protections for individuals’ protected health information. This proposed rule is the latest step taken by OCR to address more frequent cyberattacks targeting the U.S. health care system, consistent with the HHS Healthcare and Public Health critical infrastructure sector Cybersecurity Performance Goals . “The increasing frequency and sophistication of cyberattacks in the health care sector pose a direct and significant threat to patient safety,” said Deputy Secretary Andrea Palm. “These attacks endanger patients by exposing vulnerabilities in our health care system, degrading patient trust, disrupting patient care, diverting patients, and delaying medical procedures. This proposed rule is a vital step to ensuring that health care providers, patients, and communities are not only better prepared to face a cyberattack, but are also more secure and resilient.” “Cyberattacks continue to impact the health care sector, with rampant escalation in ransomware and hacking causing significant increases in the number of large breaches reported to OCR annually. The number of people affected every year has skyrocketed exponentially, a number we expect to grow even bigger this year with the Change Healthcare breach, the largest breach in our health care system in U.S. history,” said OCR Director Melanie Fontes Rainer. “This proposed rule to upgrade the HIPAA Security Rule addresses current and future cybersecurity threats. It would require updates to existing cybersecurity safeguards to reflect advances in technology and cybersecurity, and help ensure that doctors, health plans, and others providing health care meet their obligations to protect the security of individuals’ protected health information across the nation.” OCR has seen a substantial increase in reports of large breach reports received over the last five years. From 2018-2023, reports of large breaches increased by 102 percent, and the number of individuals affected by such breaches increased by 1002 percent, primarily because of increases in hacking and ransomware attacks. In 2023, over 167 million individuals were affected by large breaches—a new record. Since 2019, large breaches caused by hacking and ransomware have increased 89 percent and 102 percent. Accordingly, the proposed rule would modify the HIPAA Security Rule to require health plans, health care clearinghouses, and most health care providers, and their business associates to better protect individuals’ electronic protected health information against both external and internal threats. It would clarify and provide more specific instruction about what covered entities and their business associates must do to protect the security of electronic protected health information. The proposed rule also would require that policies and procedures be in writing, reviewed, tested, and updated on a regular basis. Additionally, it would better align the Security Rule with modern best practices in cybersecurity. These proposals address: Changes in the environment in which health care is provided. Significant increases in breaches and cyberattacks. Common deficiencies OCR has observed in investigations into Security Rule compliance by covered entities and their business associates. Other cybersecurity guidelines, best practices, methodologies, procedures, and processes. Court decisions that affect enforcement of the Security Rule. While the Department is undertaking this rulemaking, the current Security Rule remains in effect. The HIPAA Security Rule NPRM can be viewed at the Federal Register at: https://www.federalregister.gov/public-inspection/2024-30983/health-insurance-portability-and-accountability-act-security-rule-to-strengthen-the-cybersecurity-of . A fact sheet on the HIPAA Security Rule NPRM is available in English at: https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/security/hipaa-security-rule-nprm/factsheet . OCR is committed to enforcing the HIPAA Rules that protect the privacy and security of individuals’ health information. If you believe that your or another person’s health information privacy or civil rights have been violated, you can file a complaint with OCR at: https://www.hhs.gov/ocr/complaints/index.html . Content last reviewed December 27, 2024 Back to top Follow @SecKennedy Follow @HHSGov HHS Email updates Receive email updates from HHS. Subscribe HHS Headquarters 200 Independence Avenue, S.W. Washington, D.C. 20201 Toll Free Call Center: 1-877-696-6775​ Contact HHS Careers HHS FAQs Nondiscrimination Notice Press Room HHS Archive Accessibility Statement Privacy Policy Budget/Performance Inspector General Web Site Disclaimers EEO/No Fear Act FOIA The White House USA.gov Vulnerability Disclosure Policy