Congress grills UnitedHealth CEO over Change cyberattack | Healthcare Dive Skip to main content CONTINUE TO SITE ➞ Don't miss tomorrow's healthcare industry news Let Healthcare Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox. Daily Dive M-F Payer Weekly Every Wednesday IT Weekly Every Thursday By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Informa TechTarget | BioPharma Dive MedTech Dive Xtelligent Healthcare Payers Xtelligent Health IT Explore our brands An Informa TechTarget Publication Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Topics Sign up Search Sign up Search People also ask Loading questions... Hospitals Payer Health IT Government Finances Medical Groups Telehealth An article from Change Healthcare cyberattack Congress grills UnitedHealth CEO over Change cyberattack Legislators slammed Andrew Witty over the company’s lack of cybersecurity practices and the impact of the breach, which may have compromised the data of a third of Americans. Published May 2, 2024 Emily Olsen Reporter Share Copy link Email LinkedIn X/Twitter Facebook Print License Add us on Google UnitedHealth CEO Andrew Witty testifies before the Senate Finance Committee on Capitol Hill on May 1, 2024 in Washington, DC. In February hackers stole health and personal data of what UnitedHealth says is "potentially a substantial proportion" of patient information from its systems. Kent Nishimura/Getty Images via Getty Images Listen to the article 6 min This audio is auto-generated. Please let us know if you have feedback . Legislators slammed UnitedHealth Group CEO Andrew Witty over the cyberattack on subsidiary Change Healthcare at two Congressional hearings on Wednesday, raising concerns about the technology firm’s lack of cybersecurity and the potentially huge breach of Americans’ health data. “This hack could have been stopped with cybersecurity 101,” said Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., during a hearing in the Senate Committee on Finance. The attack, which took place in late February, has snarled the healthcare sector for months, disrupting claims processing, payments to providers, prior authorization requests and eligibility checks. During testimony in front of the Senate finance committee and a House Energy and Commerce subcommittee, Witty discussed new details about the incident, including an estimate of the number of individuals affected by the breach and how cybercriminals accessed Change’s systems. Witty said a portal hackers used to attack Change didn’t have multifactor authentication , which requires a second method to verify a user’s identity beyond a password. Witty estimates the attack compromised the data of a third of U.S. individuals, though the company is still working to determine the extent of the exposure. “It’s extremely frustrating to have one of the largest companies in the world failing to meet its obligations under existing law to adequately protect some of our most sensitive personal information,” said Rep. Frank Pallone, D-N.J. “[...] Mr. Witty, this never should have happened, and it can’t happen again.” Missing cyber protections At the hearings, Witty provided more details on how hackers were able to access Change’s systems. On Feb. 12, cybercriminals used compromised credentials to access a portal for gaining remote access to desktops, according to written testimony . The portal didn’t have multifactor authentication turned on — a protection one expert told Cybersecurity Dive would likely have prevented the breach . The attacker deployed ransomware nine days after first accessing Change’s systems, according to the testimony. At the hearings, Witty said UnitedHealth, which acquired Change about a year and half ago, was still working to bring the technology firm’s protections up to snuff at the time of the attack. UnitedHealth’s policy is to use multifactor authentication on externally facing systems, he said. But some legislators seemed skeptical that a company as large as UnitedHealth couldn’t have more quickly adopted cyber protections. Sen. John Barrasso, R-Wyo., said even a small rural hospital in his home state has multifactor authentication. The facility operates in the red, and it was established in the 1960s, long before cybersecurity was a major issue — and far earlier than Change, which was founded in 2007. “Did you lack the financial resources to implement a multifactorial authentication system? I'm just not sure why you haven’t had this in place yet,” he said. Witty also confirmed UnitedHealth paid a $22 million ransom in Bitcoin in an attempt to protect personal information after the attack, which he called “one of the hardest decisions I've ever had to make.” Paying a ransom is a difficult choice, but it sets a bad precedent that rewards criminals, said Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash. “Here’s the problem. It didn’t stop a data leak . Americans’ personal and private health information is on the dark web. This is private health data that you are responsible for protecting,” she said. “Mr. Witty, I suspect that decision will be a case study in crisis mismanagement for decades to come.” Is UnitedHealth too big to fail? Some legislators argued UnitedHealth has simply become too large , making the healthcare behemoth a high-risk target for cybercriminals. The company operates the nation’s largest insurer and a major pharmacy benefit manager, and it employs thousands of physicians. At the hearings, Witty said UnitedHealth currently has less than 10,000 employed physicians, but it contracts and affiliates with another 80,000. “We would have to ask, is the dominant role of United too dominant? Because it’s into everything, messing up United messes up everybody?” said Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La. The federal government has challenged UnitedHealth’s market power before, and contested the company’s acquisition of Change. The Department of Justice sued to block the buy , arguing the acquisition would give UnitedHealth an advantage over other payers. But a federal judge allowed the deal to close in October 2022 in a high-profile setback for the agency. Now, UnitedHealth is reportedly under investigation from regulators over the large role the company plays in the healthcare industry, including the relationship between its insurer UnitedHealthcare and its health services arm Optum, which employs physicians. Witty argued that Change’s footprint was the same on the day of the cyberattack as it was before the acquisition. UnitedHealth’s size and resources could even help the firm recover, he said. Some lawmakers also raised concerns that UnitedHealth could take advantage of financial turmoil caused by the cyberattack to expand its reach further and acquire struggling physician practices . Witty said UnitedHealth acquired one practice in Oregon in a deal that was negotiated before the attack, and the company doesn’t have other planned purchases. “I would highly recommend that anyone out there that’s thinking about buying out clinics based on the fact that they can't file their claims through Change would reconsider,” said Rep. Larry Bucshon, R-Ind. “[...] They may be sitting in a Congressional hearing explaining why they’re doing that.” Recommended Reading Lawmakers raise healthcare consolidation concerns after Change cyberattack By Emily Olsen • April 16, 2024 Change Healthcare, compromised by stolen credentials, did not have MFA turned on Cybersecurity Dive UnitedHealth confirms ransom, compromised health data from Change attack By Emily Olsen • April 23, 2024 Add us on Google Share Copy link Email LinkedIn X/Twitter Facebook Print License Filed Under: Health IT, Government Healthcare Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Editors' picks Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images via Getty Images Tracker The Trump administration is overhauling healthcare policy. Follow the changes here. The FDA said it’s sending letters to drugmakers demanding they take down or modify ads that don't comply with federal guidelines, out of concern consumers aren’t seeing a “fair balance” of risks and benefits in drug ads. By Healthcare Dive staff • Updated Sept. 10, 2025 Anna Moneymaker via Getty Images Stopping a ‘moral obscenity’: Senate Judiciary Committee expresses support for PBM reform Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, suggested Congress could once again move to overhaul PBMs’ controversial business practices after legislators pass President Donald Trump’s conservative megabill this summer. By Rebecca Pifer Parduhn • May 14, 2025 Keep up with the story. Subscribe to the Healthcare Dive free daily newsletter Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Get the free newsletter Subscribe to Healthcare Dive for top news, trends & analysis Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Take your knowledge further with Sign up for the free newsletter. Interested? Explore more of what has to offer. One-click newsletter signup You're all set Thanks for signing up! Please keep an eye out for a confirmation email from [email protected] To ensure we make it into your inbox regularly, add us to your allow list, mark us as a safe sender, or add us to your address book. Check out more from Most Popular Hospitals irate after Eli Lilly follows through on 340B ultimatum HHS details takeaways from sweeping AI request for information ACA enrollment declines by nearly 3M Rush health system CEO to step down in 2027 Library resources Webinar - on demand The retention killer you can't see: How admin chaos is costing healthcare its best clinicians and staff Custom content for Rippling Playbook Quick-Start Guide: Get Audit-Ready for CMS-0057 Enforcement Custom content for 1upHealth Playbook How Streamlining Operations Boosts Recruitment and Retention Custom content for Rippling View all Company Announcements View all | Post a press release What We're Reading STAT News Nutex Health’s incredible rebound rests on two regulatory gray areas Axios Medicare pushes end-of-life discussions in hospitals Politico Health insurers are looking for MAHA wins View all Events View all | Promote an event Industry Intel Fixing the frontend: Modernizing patient access for regulatory success Webinar - on demand • Provided by Waystar The new frontier of patient payments: What's now and what’s next? Webinar - on demand • Provided by Waystar Leveraging Competitor Rate Data for Success Webinar - on demand • Provided by Zelis Healthcare Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Company Announcements View all | Post a press release Covista and Advocate Health Launch Strategic Nursing Collaboration to Strengthen Workforce Rea… From Covista June 29, 2026 RISE West 2026 to Convene Medicare Advantage Leaders in San Diego, Sept. 2–4 From RISE June 16, 2026 Dental Care Alliance Becomes First DSO to Deploy Overjet AI Across the Entire Patient Journey,… From Overjet June 15, 2026 Karias Health Launches Faith, an AI Care Companion Built for Real-Time Healthcare Decisions From Karias Health June 09, 2026 Editors' picks Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images via Getty Images Tracker The Trump administration is overhauling healthcare policy. Follow the changes here. The FDA said it’s sending letters to drugmakers demanding they take down or modify ads that don't comply with federal guidelines, out of concern consumers aren’t seeing a “fair balance” of risks and benefits in drug ads. By Healthcare Dive staff • Updated Sept. 10, 2025 Anna Moneymaker via Getty Images Stopping a ‘moral obscenity’: Senate Judiciary Committee expresses support for PBM reform Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, suggested Congress could once again move to overhaul PBMs’ controversial business practices after legislators pass President Donald Trump’s conservative megabill this summer. By Rebecca Pifer Parduhn • May 14, 2025 Latest in Health IT ONC rolls out new TEFCA oversight efforts By Emily Olsen HHS details takeaways from sweeping AI request for information By Emily Olsen Patient messages to providers have skyrocketed, study finds By Emily Olsen BD’s Bilal Muhsin talks AI in connected care By Elise Reuter Explore About Editorial Team Contact Us Newsletter Purchase Licensing Rights Press Releases What We're Reading Reach our audience Advertising Post a press release Submit an opinion piece Promote an event Related Publications BioPharma Dive MedTech Dive Xtelligent Healthcare Payers Xtelligent Health IT This website is owned and operated by Informa TechTarget , a global network that informs, influences and connects the world's technology buyers and sellers. © 2025 TechTarget, Inc. or its subsidiaries. All rights reserved. An Informa PLC company. Privacy policy | Terms of use | Take down policy | Cookie Preferences / Do Not Sell Search Home Topics Hospitals Payer Health IT Government Finances Medical Groups Telehealth Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Get Healthcare Dive in your inbox The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter.