Healthcare and Public Health Cybersecurity | ASPR Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know Here's how you know U.S. Department of Health & Human Services Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Menu Search Menu Search Search About ASPR Toggle submenu About Us ASPR Strategic Plan Centers Leadership Organizational Chart Budget Business Center Law, Policy, and Strategy Contact Us Join and Connect Careers National Advisory Committees Partnering with ASPR Readiness & Response Toggle submenu Join. Train. Respond. Overview MRC: Medical Reserve Corps NDMS: National Disaster Medical System ESAR-VHP: Emergency System for the Advance Registration of Volunteer Health Professionals Response Operations Overview RECs: Regional Emergency Coordinators EPAP: Emergency Prescription Assistance Program Cybersecurity: Healthcare and Public Health ASPR Disaster Telemedicine Program At-Risk Individuals Disaster Behavioral Health Health Care Readiness Overview CIP: Critical Infrastructure Protection Healthcare Readiness in Action Health Care Readiness Near You HPP: Hospital Preparedness Program RDHRS: Regional Disaster Health Response System NSPS: National Special Pathogen System Workforce Capacity and Capability Funding Performance Measures, Guidance, and Reports Recovery Medical Countermeasures & Biodefense Overview TechWatch IBx Connect IBMSC: Industrial Base Management and Supply Chain BARDA: Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority SNS: Strategic National Stockpile S3: Science, Safety, and Security PHEMCE: Public Health Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise News & Updates Toggle submenu Newsroom Blog ASPR in Action Current Response and Recovery Health Resources & Tools Toggle submenu Technical Assistance & Information Management ASPR TRACIE: Technical Resources, Assistance Center, and Information Exchange NETEC: National Emerging Special Pathogens and Education Center RECs: Regional Emergency Coordinators ASPR Ready Training Strategic National Stockpile Course Listing HHS emPOWER Program Web-Based Training Access and Functional Needs Web-Based Training Addressing the Needs of Older Adults in Disasters Web-Based Training Cross-Functional Tools RISC 2.0 Threat-Specific Tools CHEMM: Chemical Hazards Emergency Medical Management REMM: Radiation Emergency Medical Management GIS Based Tools HHS emPOWER Program Geospatial Health Systems HHS Treatment Locator Breadcrumb Home Readiness & Response Response Operations Healthcare and Public Health Cybersecurity Healthcare and Public Health Cybersecurity ASPR Serves as the Sector Risk Management Agency for the Health Care and Public Health Sector to Protect Patient Health and Safety The Healthcare and Public Health (HPH) sector continues to experience increasingly sophisticated cyberattacks that exploit complex, interconnected IT systems at hospitals and health care facilities. Nationwide, health care and public health IT infrastructures suffer from many common vulnerabilities: underfunded cybersecurity programs, vulnerable legacy systems, a growing need for skilled cybersecurity professionals, and network-connected medical technologies, including medical devices. These cyberattacks against the HPH sector are growing both in numbers and severity, with the frequency of cyberattacks on hospitals and health systems more than doubling from 2016 to 2021. The HPH sector experienced a 42 percent increase in ransomware attacks in 2022 compared to 2021. The cost of an average health care data breach has reached $10.93 million, according to a report from IBM Security. That's an 8% jump from a year ago, when the average cost topped $10 million for the first time. In health care, cyber risks are patient risks - unlike other more typical industries impacted by cybersecurity threats (e.g., energy, finance), disruptions in health care could cost lives. ASPR has worked with our partners in HHS, across the federal government, and with industry to develop resources to help hospitals and health care facilities protect themselves and their patient's from cyber attacks. Response Operations EPAP: Emergency Prescription Assistance Program Healthcare and Public Health Cybersecurity Telemedicine Program Disaster Behavioral Health At-Risk Individuals Regional Operations ASPR leads the HHS divisions and works with our public and private partners to provide guidance and support to help enhance cybersecurity for the health care and public health sectors. Learn more about ASPR's role in cybersecurity Subscribe to ASPR’s Cybersecurity Bulletins Get information on cyber incidents, news, resources, engagement opportunities, and security updates sent right to your inbox. Stay Informed. Subscribe Today. Search Resource Category All Top Resource Cross Cutting Tools Risk Assessment Response Supply Chain Hospitals and Healthcare Facilities CISA CyberSecurity Advisory #StopRansomware: Black Basta This joint CSA to provides information on Black Basta, a ransomware variant whose actors have encrypted and stolen data from at least 12 out of 16 critical infrastructure sectors, including the Healthcare and Public Health (HPH) Sector. Learn More CISA Alert: CISA and Partners Release Advisory on Black BASTA Ransomware CISA, in partnership with the FBI, HHS, and the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC) released joint Cybersecurity Advisory (CSA) #StopRansomware: Black Basta to provide cybersecurity defenders tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs) and indicators of compromise (IOCs) used by known Black Basta ransomware affiliates and identified through FBI investigations and third-party reporting. Learn More Plan: Version 2 of the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan Version 2 of the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan (NCSIP)outlines actions the Federal Government is taking to improve U.S. National Cybersecurity posture. This updated roadmap describes 100 high-impact Federal initiatives, each intended to substantively increase our collective digital security and systemic resilience. Learn More Fact Sheet: Version 2 of the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan This next phase of the NCSIP follows the progress to date and displays the Administration's commitment to transparency and accountability as the National Cybersecurity Strategy is implemented.Highlights of the Version 2 of the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan (NCSIP) are included in this fact sheet. Learn More HPH Cybersecurity Performance Goals (CPG) These CPGs are a voluntary subset of cybersecurity practices that healthcare organizations, and healthcare delivery organizations in particular, can prioritize to strengthen cyber preparedness, improve cyber resiliency, and ultimately protect patient health information and safety. Learn More Health Care and Public Health sector cybersecurity framework implementation guide Developed to help organizations establish a strong cybersecurity program or validate the effectiveness of an existing program, this guide helps organizations map their existing program to the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, identify improvements, and communicate results. This guide was developed to incorporate and align with processes and tools currently in use or under consideration. Learn More Health care Sector Cybersecurity: Introduction to the Strategy of the U.S. Department of Health And Human Services Overview of HHS recommendations to help the health care and public health sector address cyber threats. Learn More National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan (2023) This plan outlines a path for achieving two significant changes: the need for more capable actors in cybersecurity and the need to increase incentive to make investments in long-term resilience. Learn More Health industry cybersecurity practices: Managing threats and protecting patients (hicp 2023 ed.) Featuring recommendations and best practices to prepare for and fight against cybersecurity threats that can impact patient safety, this document outlines the top threats facing the HPH Sector. It has been developed with all stakeholders in mind; organizations from small to large can benefit from the resources and best practices provided in the main document and additional two technical volumes. Learn More health care system cybersecurity: readiness and response considerations Focuses on the effects of a cyber incident on the health care operational environment; one that impacts the ability to effectively care for patients and maintain business practices and readiness during such an event. It covers many strategies and principles relevant to a range of cybersecurity incidents and health care facilities included disruptions associated with a large-scale cyberattack. Learn More Health industry cybersecurity protection of innovation capital With a focus on Innovation Capital protection, this resource can help security and risk practitioners protect their systems at any stage of their information protection program's maturity. Learn More Hospital Cyber Resiliency Landscape Analysis This resource highlights findings and issues affecting the cybersecurity resiliency of U.S. hospitals to better identify the biggest threats facing hospitals and assess their cybersecurity capabilities relative to commonly accepted cybersecurity practices. Learn More Health industry cybersecurity tactical crisis response guide With a focus on Innovation Capital protection, this resource can help security and risk practitioners protect their systems at any stage of their information protection program's maturity. Learn More health industry cybersecurity information sharing best practices Provides HPH Sector organizations interested in information sharing with a set of guidelines and best practices for efficient and effective information sharing. Learn More security risk assessment tool This risk assessment toolhelps your organization ensure it is compliant with HIPAA's administrative, physical, and technical safeguards. It also helps reveal areas where your organization's protected health information could be at risk. Designed for medium and small providers. Learn More risc toolkit 2.0: the risk identification and site criticality toolkit An objective, data-driven all-hazards risk assessment for use by public and private organizations within the HPH sector to inform emergency preparedness planning, risk management activities, and resource investments. This tool enables the user to estimate the human, property, and business impacts to a facility that may result from 67 internal and external threats, including cyber threats. Learn More ASPR TRACIE: Health Care Cybersecurity Updated in 2022, this collection of resources can help stakeholders (including practitioners, facility executives, information technology professionals, and emergency managers) better protect against, mitigate, respond to, and recover from cyberattacks to ensure patient safety and operational continuity. Learn More Tailored top reads from 405(D) The 405(d) program has developed a tailored list of must-read resources for health care practitioners and IT professionals at health care organizations of all sizes. Just indicate your role and the size of your organization, and the 405(d) program will provide you with a customized list of resources to help you improve your organization's cybersecurity posture. Learn More Health Industry Cybersecurity Supply Chain Risk Management Guide v2.0 This tool for smaller to mid-sized health organizations is focused on supply chain cybersecurity risk management. Learn More Top 10 Myths of Security Risk Analysis This checklist from the HHS Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (HHS/ONC/IT) helps separate fact from fiction. Learn More Top 10 Tips for cybersecurity in Healthcare HHS/ONC/IT provides its top ten tips for strengthening cybersecurity and provides information to help you get started on implementation. Learn More Follow @ASPRGov Follow us on X Follow us on Facebook Connect on LinkedIn Watch on YouTube Follow us on Instagram View photos on Flickr Contact Us via Email Follow @HHS_ASPR Follow HHS ASPR on X Sign-up for email updates from ASPR Subscribe Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 200 Independence Ave. Washington, D.C. 20201 Contact Us ASPR Archive Accessibility Privacy Policies Disclaimer HHS Viewers & Players HHS Plain Language FOIA Vulnerability Disclosure Policy EEO/No Fear Act Share Your Feedback