Change Healthcare starts sending data breach notifications after cyberattack | Healthcare Dive Skip to main content CONTINUE TO SITE ➞ Don't miss tomorrow's healthcare industry news Let Healthcare Dive's free newsletter keep you informed, straight from your inbox. Daily Dive M-F Payer Weekly Every Wednesday IT Weekly Every Thursday By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Informa TechTarget | BioPharma Dive MedTech Dive Xtelligent Healthcare Payers Xtelligent Health IT Explore our brands An Informa TechTarget Publication Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Topics Sign up Search Sign up Search People also ask Loading questions... Hospitals Payer Health IT Government Finances Medical Groups Telehealth An article from Dive Brief // Change Healthcare cyberattack Change Healthcare starts sending data breach notifications after cyberattack The attack may have exposed data like medical information, payment details and Social Security numbers for a potentially huge swath of Americans. Published June 21, 2024 Emily Olsen Reporter Share Copy link Email LinkedIn X/Twitter Facebook Print License Add us on Google UnitedHealth subsidiary Change Healthcare said it started sending data breach notifications to its customers Thursday. Courtesy of UnitedHealth Group Listen to the article 3 min This audio is auto-generated. Please let us know if you have feedback . Dive Brief: Change Healthcare has started sending out data breach notifications after a cyberattack against the payments processor earlier this year compromised information like Social Security numbers and medical diagnoses for a potentially massive swath of Americans. On Thursday, the UnitedHealth subsidiary began notifying its customers if their members’ or patients’ data was exposed, according to a data breach notification. Change plans to start sending letters to the affected individuals themselves in late July, though the company noted it may not have addresses for everyone. Exposed data could include contact information, health insurance details, medical information like diagnoses and test results, billing and payment information and personal details like Social Security numbers or ID numbers, according to Change’s notice. Dive Insight: Change, a major medical claims processor, was hit by a ransomware attack in late February, disrupting key healthcare operations like payments to providers, eligibility checks, prior authorization requests and prescription fulfillment for weeks . Some services still haven’t been fully restored . The attack may have exposed data from a “substantial proportion of people in America,” UnitedHealth said in April. Though the company didn’t say how many individuals were affected on Thursday, UnitedHealth CEO Andrew Witty estimated in May that the breach may have compromised the data of one-third of Americans . The review of personal information involved in the attack is now in its late stages, Change said. So far, the company hasn’t yet seen patients’ full medical histories be breached, though information from guarantors — whoever paid the bill for healthcare services — could be exposed. Change has faced criticism from some lawmakers over the delay in sending data breach notifications. In a letter sent early this month , Sens. Maggie Hassan, D-N.H., and Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn., argued UnitedHealth had taken too long to send letters to affected individuals — in violation of the HIPAA privacy law — and pushed the healthcare giant to mail notifications by June 21. Providers had raised concerns about who was responsible for sending breach notifications in the wake of the attack, arguing that burden should be placed on Change to avoid duplicative notifications to patients. Federal regulators confirmed early this month they could tap UnitedHealth . The healthcare giant had previously said it could take on notification tasks for providers and other customers. The notifications come as the impact from the cyberattack continues. Last week, the Biden administration said it would give providers impacted by the attack extra time to request out-of-network billing arbitration under the No Surprises Act. However, the CMS also this week said it would wind down a Medicare funding program that offered financial support for providers who had struggled to receive payment during the Change outage. Recommended Reading HHS says providers can tap Change to issue data breach notifications after cyberattack By Emily Olsen • June 3, 2024 CMS to end Change Healthcare cyberattack financial relief program By Emily Olsen • June 18, 2024 Congress grills UnitedHealth CEO over Change cyberattack By Emily Olsen • May 2, 2024 Biden administration gives providers grace period to open surprise billing arbitration By Rebecca Pifer Parduhn • June 17, 2024 Add us on Google Share Copy link Email LinkedIn X/Twitter Facebook Print License Filed Under: Health IT Healthcare Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Editors' picks Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images via Getty Images Tracker The Trump administration is overhauling healthcare policy. Follow the changes here. The FDA said it’s sending letters to drugmakers demanding they take down or modify ads that don't comply with federal guidelines, out of concern consumers aren’t seeing a “fair balance” of risks and benefits in drug ads. By Healthcare Dive staff • Updated Sept. 10, 2025 Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images via Getty Images CMS expands audits to crack down on Medicare Advantage overpayments The agency said it would increase the number of MA plan audits and complete its backlog of reviews by investing in technology and growing its medical coding workforce. By Emily Olsen • May 22, 2025 Get the free newsletter Subscribe to Healthcare Dive for top news, trends & analysis Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Take your knowledge further with Sign up for the free newsletter. Interested? Explore more of what has to offer. One-click newsletter signup You're all set Thanks for signing up! Please keep an eye out for a confirmation email from [email protected] To ensure we make it into your inbox regularly, add us to your allow list, mark us as a safe sender, or add us to your address book. Check out more from Most Popular Hospitals irate after Eli Lilly follows through on 340B ultimatum HHS details takeaways from sweeping AI request for information ACA enrollment declines by nearly 3M Rush health system CEO to step down in 2027 Library resources Webinar - on demand The retention killer you can't see: How admin chaos is costing healthcare its best clinicians and staff Custom content for Rippling Playbook Quick-Start Guide: Get Audit-Ready for CMS-0057 Enforcement Custom content for 1upHealth Playbook How Streamlining Operations Boosts Recruitment and Retention Custom content for Rippling View all Company Announcements View all | Post a press release What We're Reading STAT News Nutex Health’s incredible rebound rests on two regulatory gray areas Axios Medicare pushes end-of-life discussions in hospitals Politico Health insurers are looking for MAHA wins View all Events View all | Promote an event Industry Intel Fixing the frontend: Modernizing patient access for regulatory success Webinar - on demand • Provided by Waystar The new frontier of patient payments: What's now and what’s next? Webinar - on demand • Provided by Waystar Leveraging Competitor Rate Data for Success Webinar - on demand • Provided by Zelis Healthcare Dive news delivered to your inbox Get the free daily newsletter read by industry experts Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter. Company Announcements View all | Post a press release Covista and Advocate Health Launch Strategic Nursing Collaboration to Strengthen Workforce Rea… From Covista June 29, 2026 RISE West 2026 to Convene Medicare Advantage Leaders in San Diego, Sept. 2–4 From RISE June 16, 2026 Dental Care Alliance Becomes First DSO to Deploy Overjet AI Across the Entire Patient Journey,… From Overjet June 15, 2026 Karias Health Launches Faith, an AI Care Companion Built for Real-Time Healthcare Decisions From Karias Health June 09, 2026 Editors' picks Kevin Dietsch/Getty Images via Getty Images Tracker The Trump administration is overhauling healthcare policy. Follow the changes here. The FDA said it’s sending letters to drugmakers demanding they take down or modify ads that don't comply with federal guidelines, out of concern consumers aren’t seeing a “fair balance” of risks and benefits in drug ads. By Healthcare Dive staff • Updated Sept. 10, 2025 Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images via Getty Images CMS expands audits to crack down on Medicare Advantage overpayments The agency said it would increase the number of MA plan audits and complete its backlog of reviews by investing in technology and growing its medical coding workforce. By Emily Olsen • May 22, 2025 Latest in Health IT ONC rolls out new TEFCA oversight efforts By Emily Olsen HHS details takeaways from sweeping AI request for information By Emily Olsen Patient messages to providers have skyrocketed, study finds By Emily Olsen BD’s Bilal Muhsin talks AI in connected care By Elise Reuter Explore About Editorial Team Contact Us Newsletter Purchase Licensing Rights Press Releases What We're Reading Reach our audience Advertising Post a press release Submit an opinion piece Promote an event Related Publications BioPharma Dive MedTech Dive Xtelligent Healthcare Payers Xtelligent Health IT This website is owned and operated by Informa TechTarget , a global network that informs, influences and connects the world's technology buyers and sellers. © 2025 TechTarget, Inc. or its subsidiaries. All rights reserved. An Informa PLC company. Privacy policy | Terms of use | Take down policy | Cookie Preferences / Do Not Sell Search Home Topics Hospitals Payer Health IT Government Finances Medical Groups Telehealth Deep Dive Opinion Library Events Press Releases Get Healthcare Dive in your inbox The free newsletter covering the top industry headlines Email: Select Newsletter: Daily Dive M-F Select Newsletter: Payer Weekly Every Wednesday Select Newsletter: IT Weekly Every Thursday Select user consent: By signing up to receive our newsletter, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . You can unsubscribe at anytime. Sign up A valid email address is required. Please select at least one newsletter.