BRIEF
SERIES
OFFICE OF FINANCIAL RESEARCH
24-05 | November 13, 2024
Introduction
The financial system relies on uninterrupted service 
by many interconnected institutions and technology 
service providers.
2 Service outages, regardless of 
cause, can lead to immediate and serious financial 
system disruptions. Cyberattacks are of particular 
concern because they can be timed and targeted for 
maximum damage. In just the last 12 months, parts of 
the financial sector have experienced disruptions from 
cyberattacks at critical service providers (CSPs). The 
attacks on ICBC Financial Services, EquiLend, and 
Ongoing Operations are examples. In each case, the 
CSP was forced offline, and its customers were without 
access to its critical services for days to weeks. In each 
case, financial institutions implemented their business 
continuity plans to cope with the service outage. And 
in each case, the cyberattack revealed a CSP that was 
more critical to the financial sector than previously 
understood.
3 More frequent operational disruptions 
due to cyberattacks pose a growing systemic risk. 4
Fortunately, none of the cyberattacks on the finan -
cial system have caused a major outage at a true 
single point of failure (SPoF) to the financial system. 
Other industries have not fared as well. The Colonial 
Pipeline attack disrupted fuel supply to the East Coast 
in 2021 and revealed the firm to be a SPoF. And in 
February 2024, an attack on Change Healthcare, the 
largest medical claims clearinghouse in the United 
States, disrupted critical operations and payment flows 
across the healthcare sector. Change Healthcare also 
provided technology solutions for essential back-office 
functions for healthcare providers. 
As a clearinghouse, Change Healthcare has much in 
common with the financial market utilities (FMUs) 
and other CSPs on which the financial system relies. 
The Change Healthcare outage that occurred as a result 
of the firm’s cyberattack underscores the far-reaching 
impact of a disruption at a CSP.
This brief examines lessons learned from the cyber -
attack on Change Healthcare and how these can be 
Cyberattacks are a growing threat to U.S. businesses, even with investments in 
cybersecurity. The U.S. financial system depends on technology for its operations. 
Even a brief outage of key services could have wide-ranging effects. While the 
financial system’s cyber defenses have been strong so far, they can be improved by 
learning from recent attacks in other sectors. This brief examines the cyberattack 
on Change Healthcare, a critical service provider in healthcare. It also discusses 
how the U.S. financial system can better prepare for and reduce the risk of a 
similar attack on a systemically important firm.
by Arthur Fliegelman and Daniel Stemp 1
The Cyberattack on Change Healthcare:  
Lessons for Financial Stability
The views and opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent 
official positions or policy of the OFR or the U.S. Department of the Treasury
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 2
applied to the financial system. During the outage, many 
healthcare providers that use Change Healthcare could 
not submit medical claims or receive payments. These 
providers included hospitals, physicians, and pharma-
cies. The service disruption strained cash flows and 
triggered a medical sector liquidity event. Healthcare 
providers’ business continuity plans afforded some 
degree of operational resilience. Federal government 
support, somewhat similar to what has been used in 
the financial sector, mitigated the liquidity effects. 
Overall, the event highlights the importance of identi -
fying potential SPoFs within the financial system and 
the economy and having robust plans for maintaining 
operations during service outages.
Change Healthcare is a SPoF in the 
U.S. Healthcare System
The U.S. healthcare system, like the financial system, 
has a network structure. They both have a multitude of 
service providers that securely exchange information. 
In healthcare, these providers include doctors’ offices, 
hospitals, and pharmacies, and ultimate payers like 
insurance companies. Also included are many tech -
nology service providers that enable the exchange of 
information or automate almost every back-office and 
customer-facing function. The financial system simi-
larly has numerous participants relying upon constant 
and rapid information flow that inform financial 
asset evaluation and the settlement of payments, for 
example. The financial system in particular relies on 
key providers to keep the system operating in a consis-
tent and resilient manner, with generally little room for 
unexpected delay.
Claims clearinghouses like Change Healthcare play 
a critical role in the healthcare technology network. 
They manage and administer the healthcare authoriza -
tion and payment system. Claims clearinghouses also 
perform vital functions, including confirming patients’ 
insurance coverage, transferring claims and medical 
data, and facilitating payments for services rendered. 
In performing all these roles, clearinghouses are crit -
ical nodes that connect the many participants in the 
technology network (see Figure 1).
Before administering a service, medical providers must 
verify a patient’s insurance eligibility and coverage. 
They do so by submitting an authorization request via 
a claims clearinghouse. This action is analogous to a 
debit card processor confirming a cardholder’s bank 
balance before approving a transaction. Additionally, 
the medical provider may generate and submit a claim 
for payment using the clearinghouse’s specialized 
software.
Change Healthcare is the largest medical claims clear -
inghouse in the United States. About 189 thousand 
medical providers use its software and services.
5 The 
A B C D
Patient
Medical Provider
Claims Clearinghouse
Claim
copay
service
creates
securely
transmits
securely
transmits
Insurance
Company
Payer 1
Insurance
Company
Payer 2
request for
payment
payments
premiums
approval &
authorization
reimbursementreimbursement
eligibility veri/f_ication
& authorization
ABC Employer
Other Ultimate Payers
Figure 1. The Role of Claims Clearinghouses in the U.S. Healthcare System
Notes: A) Patients present their insurance cards, and the medical provider verifies coverage via claims clearinghouse. B) Claims 
clearinghouse reviews and processes the claim and forwards the claim to the payer. C) Insurers verify eligibility, approve, or reject claims, 
and reimburse medical providers through the claims clearinghouse. D) Employers pay premiums to insurance companies. Insurance 
companies may also act as administrators for self-insured organizations.
Source: Authors’ creation
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 3
American Hospital Association (AHA) described it as 
the major source for “more than 100 critical functions 
that keep the healthcare system operating.”
6 As a result, 
Change Healthcare touches one of every three patient 
records and handles $2 trillion in annual medical 
claims. This is estimated to be 44% of the funds that 
will flow through the U.S. medical system in 2024.
7 
These features give Change Healthcare a scale compa -
rable to that of an FMU and make it a potential SPoF 
for the healthcare system. A court filing made by the 
Department of Justice quotes Change Healthcare 
as saying, “[The] healthcare system, and how payers 
and providers interact and transact, would not work 
without Change Healthcare.”
8
Like most FMUs, Change Healthcare provides a 
digital platform with strong network effects. As a 
clearinghouse, it stands in the middle of the many 
providers seeking to submit claims and the insurance 
companies seeking to pay claims. The more parties 
that use the same clearinghouse, the faster the claim 
can be processed and paid, which increases the value 
of the clearinghouse to its customers. As with most 
digital platforms, it has evolved over time to perform 
an expanded suite of technology solutions, making it a 
one-stop shop for many customers. Change Healthcare 
performs many functions similar to those of an FMU 
(see Figure 2).
The Cyberattack at Change 
Healthcare
On February 21, 2024, Change Healthcare discovered 
that a Russian-linked ransomware gang had breached 
its computer systems.
9 To mitigate the damage, Change 
Healthcare went offline. This effectively shut down 
the medical claims clearing process for a substantial 
portion of the medical sector. As of August 30, 2024, 
Change Healthcare reported that it was still attempting 
to restore some of its services.
10 
An AHA survey found 94% of hospitals affected 
financially by the attack. More than half of survey 
respondents said that the impact was “significant 
or serious.”
11 A breakdown of the claims processing 
system severely affects the financial condition of U.S. 
healthcare providers. After the attack, Q1 2024 quar -
terly revenue for hospitals fell short of prior projections 
by 16.5% to 17.9%, according to Strata Decision 
Technology (see Figure 3).
12 By June 30, 2024, the 
smallest providers were still short about 7% of their 
expected Medicare revenue for the January to March 
2024 period.
13 
The Change Healthcare cyberattack may also cause 
substantial cyber insurance claims. Property Claims 
Services (PCS), an insurance industry data provider, 
labeled the attack as a cyber catastrophe, only the 
Figure 2. Parallels Between Financial Market Utilities and Healthcare Claims Clearinghouses
Source: Authors’ creation
Financial Sector 
Critical Functions
Healthcare Sector 
Critical Functions Description 
Clearing and 
Settlement
Claims 
Adjudication
Verifying and processing transactions in financial markets. In healthcare, 
clearinghouses adjudicate claims, checking for accuracy and facilitating 
payments between payers and providers.
Liquidity Provision Cash Flow 
Facilitation
Ensuring sufficient cash flow in financial systems. In healthcare, clearinghouses 
maintain provider cash flow by speeding up claims processing.
Regulatory 
Reporting 
Compliance and 
Reporting
Reporting transaction data for compliance in financial markets. In healthcare, 
clearinghouses check that claims data meet HIPAA patient information 
transmission standards.
Credit Risk 
Assessment
Insurance Eligibility 
Check
Evaluating counterparty risk before trades in financial markets. Healthcare 
clearinghouses verify patient insurance coverage before services are rendered 
to reduce non-payment risks for medical providers.
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 4
second loss event to get that label. PCS defines a cyber 
catastrophe as an event with expected insured losses 
of over $250 million.
14 There might also be non-cyber 
insurance claims, including for business interruption 
and directors and officers liability insurance. However, 
most business losses would not be covered by any 
insurance. 
The financial impact of the breach might be worse for 
other businesses than for Change Healthcare itself. 
According to S&P Global Ratings, the attack will not 
materially impact the credit rating of UnitedHealth 
Group, Change Healthcare’s parent company.
15 
However, many smaller and weaker medical providers 
have been severely affected by the cash flow disrup -
tion the cyberattack caused.
16 The American Medical 
Association found that 55% of doctors used their 
personal funds to cover their practice’s expenses during 
the outage.
17 Fitch Ratings said that the cybersecurity 
incident at Change Healthcare could “negatively affect 
the credit profiles of smaller healthcare providers, phar-
macies, and other companies that rely upon Change.”
18 
Smaller providers such as physician practices could 
have been substantially impacted as they often have 
limited liquidity and need the missing funds to pay for 
operational expenses, including payroll and supplies.
19
To mitigate the cash flow issue from turning into a 
wider healthcare crisis and liquidity event with potential 
spillovers to the financial sector, the federal govern -
ment provided support in various forms. The Centers 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) advanced 
more than $3.2 billion to hospitals and other medical 
providers between March 9 and June 17.
20 CMS also 
asked private insurers to ease preauthorization require-
ments to reduce provider paperwork. UnitedHealth 
Group lent $6.5 billion to providers through April 30.
21 
The combined $9.7 billion from these two programs 
was only about 2.6% of the roughly $375 billion in 
quarterly claims that Change Healthcare normally 
processes.
22 The level of financial assistance given to 
providers was likely inadequate, especially to small 
providers facing cash shortfalls.
23 In contrast, larger 
hospitals, which typically have four to ten months of 
cash reserves, fared better.
24 The financial sector lacks 
similar cash buffers to handle such disruptions.
Lessons Learned from the 
Cyberattack on Change Healthcare
The Change Healthcare cyberattack offers a case study 
about how such events at CSPs and potential SPoFs 
can affect downstream organizations. This attack 
began as a security breach on an unprotected server at 
a vital payment ecosystem participant. It then became 
a broader systemic problem for the healthcare sector. 
Emergency industry and federal government financial 
support mitigated the harm to patient care and the 
disruption of liquidity among healthcare providers. 
This section highlights three lessons learned with rele -
vance for the financial sector and beyond.
Figure 3. Hospitals Average Missing Share of Payments by Annual Operating Expense
Sources: Strata Decision Technology, Authors’ analysis
17.9%16.5%16.6%
$2.5B <$1B - $2.5B $500M - $1B < $500M 
Jan Feb Mar Q1
2024
Jan Feb Mar Q1
2024
Jan Feb Mar Q1
2024
Jan Feb Mar Q1
2024
17.1%
0
5
10
15
20
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 5
Cyberattacks can disrupt liquidity, even 
when they occur outside the financial 
system.
Liquidity is a vital financial resource that keeps any 
organization operating. The Change Healthcare 
cyberattack substantially interrupted cash flow in the 
U.S. healthcare system for a considerable period. This 
then caused financial stress at a wide range of medical 
providers.
The Change Healthcare attack highlights the potential 
value of liquidity support outside the financial sector. In 
the case of Change Healthcare, UnitedHealth offered 
limited emergency liquidity to certain providers. Also, 
the federal government advanced limited emergency 
funds to certain Medicare healthcare providers. The 
combined funds that were advanced fell far short of 
the amounts needed to fully fund normal operations. 
This led to financial stress at many providers, which in 
a few cases resulted in providers ceasing operations or 
having to sell their businesses to another more finan -
cially stable operator. 
Unlike the financial sector, where firm failures can 
trigger a chain reaction in which other firms close, 
healthcare provider failures typically don’t cause wide -
spread disruptions among related entities. However, 
the U.S. financial system is far less tolerant of major 
failures, especially among large, highly leveraged firms.
This provision of emergency funding resembles the 
Federal Reserve’s provision of liquidity to the banking 
system. Banks can obtain short-term, collateralized 
loans from the Federal Reserve through the discount 
window. In recent years, the Federal Reserve also 
introduced various lending facilities to address other 
sources of extreme stress within the financial system.
25 
The Change Healthcare attack illustrates how a cyber -
attack at an FMU to the financial system could have 
serious and immediate repercussions. The U.S. finan -
cial system relies on a constant flow of funds between 
counterparties to settle trades and satisfy other obliga-
tions. A prolonged interruption in this process could 
require substantial emergency liquidity support from 
the official sector.
Vendor dominance and high transition 
costs amplify systemic risks.
When critical business functions depend on only 
one or a few vendors, there is a higher risk of broad 
disruptions if one vendor fails. Having a diverse set 
of vendors can help reduce this risk. If one vendor 
fails, other vendors can step in to meet the demand. 
Although using multiple vendors can be complex and 
expensive, it provides an immediate backstop if the 
main vendor fails. However, in many cases, it may 
be functionally impractical to have multiple vendors 
because of limited interoperability.
Part of what made the cyberattack on Change 
Healthcare so severe was that Change Healthcare 
had exclusivity clauses in its contracts with more than 
one-third of its clients. These clients were at high risk 
of business interruption when Change Healthcare’s 
services became unavailable.
26 
Some payers had no backup payment system and 
depended entirely on Change Healthcare. Change 
Healthcare’s “managed gateway” payer clients only 
used Change Healthcare to process provider’s claims.
27 
They had no automated way to process claims once 
Change Healthcare suspended its operations. This 
severely crimped providers’ cash flows.
Additionally, exclusivity contracts prevented other 
clearinghouses from connecting to payers that only 
accepted claims through Change Healthcare. Even 
clients of competitive clearinghouses were affected 
because of these exclusivity requirements. Change 
Healthcare did waive its exclusivity clauses, possibly 
in part due to pressure from insurance regulators.
28 
However, switching to a new claims clearinghouse is a 
costly and time-consuming process.
29
Operational resilience is critical.
Operational resiliency is crucial for an organiza-
tion to continue functioning despite disruptions. 
Organizations need well-prepared and practiced busi-
ness continuity plans that can be activated quickly 
during internal issues or external service interruptions 
at a CSP. Developing these plans requires forethought 
and flexibility, as workarounds may be less efficient 
but still allow operations to proceed. These strategies 
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 6
might involve manual processes or switching to alter -
native service providers, but the key is ensuring that 
operations do not stop.
Change Healthcare lacked resiliency in the form of 
a recovery plan with well-rehearsed procedures to 
minimize downtime. Its history of growth through 
acquisitions may have contributed to this vulnera -
bility. Integrating disparate acquired systems poses 
substantial technological challenges. These challenges 
complicate and divert resources from cybersecurity 
planning. Growth through acquisitions is a common 
strategy in many sectors, including the financial sector.
Change Healthcare had data backups, but those 
backups were not properly isolated from the compro -
mised network and were in turn affected by the breach. 
A compromised backup is not a functional backup.
As a result of the outage, Change Healthcare lost access 
to critical information. Change Healthcare could no 
longer communicate with clients, providers, and other 
stakeholders.
Coordinating mitigation efforts and maintaining 
network stability is essential when a central network 
node goes offline. The financial system might tolerate 
brief FMU service interruptions if robust commu-
nication reassures stakeholders that service will be 
restored promptly.
30 For major central counterparties, 
the standard recovery time objective after an opera -
tional failure is two hours or less. 31 Rapid and accurate 
communication after a cyberattack is an important 
aspect to recovery.
The financial sector is likely better prepared than 
other sectors in terms of business continuity planning. 
Regulations emphasize the importance of reliable 
and tested data backups for restoring functionality.
32 
Shared backup facilities like Sheltered Harbor offer a 
robust solution.
33 Reciprocal backup agreements and 
cloud-based solutions may be more practical for smaller 
firms.
34 Cost-effective robust business continuity plans 
is essential for improving financial stability.
Conclusion
Networks such as the U.S. financial system can be 
highly dependent upon one or a few CSPs. These 
networks can be at high risk of operational disruptions 
when even one provider is down. Interruptions often 
occur because of an external cyberattack but they can 
also be the result of operational failures.
When interruptions occur, it is important: (1) that 
the CSP has an effective business continuity plan 
to continue its operations to the maximum extent 
possible; (2) that affected downstream organizations 
have their own business continuity plans so they too 
can continue operating; and (3) that the stricken CSP 
has a plan to restore normal operations on a timely 
basis.
The more dominant a CSP’s role, the more important it 
becomes that the CSP has an effective business conti-
nuity plan that can be readily implemented. FMUs by 
definition have a vital role in the U.S. financial system. 
Consequently, FMUs are expected to have a high level 
of cybersecurity combined with effective business 
continuity plans.
However, it has become clear that other, less domi-
nant organizations, may play more important roles in 
the financial system than previously thought. The role 
of these vendors was only fully realized when their 
operations were disrupted. Within the financial sector, 
examples include ICBC Financial Services, EquiLend, 
and Ongoing Operations.
The Change Healthcare incident illustrates how 
interruptions outside of the financial system can 
have liquidity effects in nonfinancial sectors of the 
economy. If not mitigated, such liquidity events could 
result in higher default rates on nonfinancial business 
debt, stressing financial institutions and perhaps the 
broader financial system. Fortunately, in this case, 
support from UnitedHealth and CMS helped contain 
the damage from extending beyond the healthcare 
system. Without this financial aid, business failures in 
the healthcare sector and their knock-on effects could 
have more broadly affected patient care and the wider 
U.S. economy.
So far, the U.S. financial system has avoided a long-
lasting technology outage with effects as severe and 
far-reaching as those occurring in healthcare from 
the Change Healthcare cyberattack. However, as the 
financial system’s reliance on technology grows, such 
an event becomes more likely.
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 7
Endnotes
1  Arthur Fliegelman, Senior Financial Analyst, 
Office of Financial Research ( Arthur.
Fliegelman@ofr.treasury.gov) and Daniel Stemp, 
Senior Financial Analyst, Office of Financial 
Research ( Daniel.Stemp@ofr.treasury.gov).
2  The authors wish to thank the College 
of Healthcare Information Management 
Executives (CHIME) and Chelsea Arnone 
for their assistance in the preparation of this 
report.
3  For an analysis of how financial institutions 
dealt with an earlier cyberattack on a CSP, 
see: Antonis Kotidis and Stacey L. Schreft, 
“Cyberattacks and Financial Stability: 
Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 
(FEDS) no. 2022-025 (Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, May 2022), 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/
feds/cyberattacks-and-financial-stability-evi-
dence-from-a-natural-experiment.htm.
4  Annual Report 2023 (Financial Stability 
Oversight Council, 2023), https://
home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/
FSOC2023AnnualReport.pdf.
5  William Altman, Ethan Spangler, and John 
Laux, “The Change Healthcare Attack: 
Quantifying Footprint for Cyber (Re)insurers,” 
CyberCube, undated blog post, https://insights.
cybcube.com/en/the-change-healthcare-at-
tack-quantify-footprint-for-cyber-reinsurers.
6  “AHA Letter to House E&C Subcommittee 
for May 1 Hearing on Change Healthcare 
Cyberattack,” American Hospital Association, 
April 29, 2024, https://www.aha.org/
lettercomment/2024-04-29-aha-letter-house-ec-
subcommittee-may-1-hearing-change-healthcare-
cyberattack
7  “AHA Letter to House E&C Subcommittee 
for May 1 Hearing on Change Healthcare 
Cyberattack,” American Hospital Association, 
April 29, 2024, https://www.aha.org/
lettercomment/2024-04-29-aha-letter-house-ec-
subcommittee-may-1-hearing-change-healthcare-
cyberattack
8  Department of Justice filing, February 
24, 2022, https://www.justice.gov/atr/
case-document/file/1476901/dl.
9  TechTarget Editorial Staff, “Change 
Healthcare Cyberattack Fallout Continues,” 
TechTarget, May 2, 2024, https://
healthitsecurity.com/news/change-healthcare-dis-
connects-system-amid-cyberattack.
10  “Information on the Change Healthcare 
Cyber Response,” Change Healthcare, 
September 3, 2024, https://www.unitedhealth-
group.com/ns/changehealthcare.html. 
11  “AHA Survey: Change Healthcare 
Cyberattack Significantly Disrupts Patient 
Care, Hospitals’ Finances,” American Hospital 
Association, February 21, 2024, https://www.
aha.org/2024-03-15-aha-survey-change-health-
care-cyberattack-significantly-disrupts-patient-
care-hospitals-finances.
12  “Healthcare Performance Trends Report: Q2 
2024,” Strata Decision Technology, August 
9, 2024, https://www.stratadecision.com/
quarterly-healthcare-performance-trends-report/.
13  “Performance Trends Report: Second 
Quarter 2024,” Strata Decision Technology, 
Second Quarter 2024, https://www.syntellis.
com/sites/default/files/2024-08/performance_
trends_aug_hc.1132.08.24.pdf.
14  Steve Evans, “PCS Designates Change 
Healthcare & MOVEit as Cyber 
Catastrophe Loss Events,” Artemis, April 
29, 2024, https://www.artemis.bm/news/
pcs-designates-change-healthcare-moveit-as-cy-
ber-catastrophe-loss-events/.
15  Francesca Mannarino and James Sung, 
“Bulletin: Cyber Attack at Change Healthcare 
Poses Reputational Risks for UnitedHealth 
Group Inc. Uncertainties Remain,” S&P 
Global Ratings, March 11, 2024, https://disclo-
sure.spglobal.com/ratings/en/regulatory/article/-/
view/type/HTML/id/3136919. 
16  Kailash Chhaya et al., “Providers Continue 
to Suffer Disruption from Change Healthcare 
Attack,” Moody’s Investors Service, March 
8, 2024, https://www.moodys.com/research/
Healthcare-US-Providers-continue-to-suffer-
disruption-from-Change-Healthcare-Sector-
Comment--PBC_1400730; and Steven 
Bisciello et al., “The Change Healthcare Data 
Breach and Navigating Your Exposure,” 
Eisner Amper, March 13, 2024, https://
www.eisneramper.com/insights/health-care/
change-healthcare-data-breach-navigate-expo-
sure-0324/.
17  “Change Healthcare Cyberattack Impact,” 
American Medical Association, 2024, https://
www.ama-assn.org/system/files/change-health-
care-survey-results.pdf.
18  “Change’s Cyber Security Incident 
May Affect Smaller Healthcare Issuers,” 
Fitch Ratings, March 18. 2024, https://
www.fitchratings.com/research/insurance/
changes-cyber-security-incident-may-af-
fect-smaller-healthcare-issuers-18-03-2024.
19  Mike Bradley, “Outages from Change 
Healthcare Cyberattack Causing Financial 
‘Mess’ for Doctors,” CNBC, March 1, 2024, 
https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/
outages-change-healthcare-cyberattack-caus-
ing-financial-mess-doctors-rcna141321. 
20  “CMS Preparing to Close Program that 
Addressed Medicare Funding Issues 
Resulting from Change Healthcare 
Cyber-Attack,” Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services, June 17, 2024, https://
www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-releases/
cms-preparing-close-program-addressed-medi-
care-funding-issues-resulting-change-health-
care-cyber.
21  UnitedHealth Group Incorporated, Form 
10-Q, March 31, 2024, https://www.united-
healthgroup.com/content/dam/UHG/PDF/
investors/2024/UNH_Q1-2024_Form-10-Q.
pdf.
22  “A Trusted Advisor to the Healthcare 
System,” Change Healthcare, 2021. Retrieved 
August 21, 2024, from https://www.change-
healthcare.com/content/dam/change-healthcare/
sales---marketing-content/payer-and-provider/
corporate-content/brochure/corporate-over-
view-brochure/corporate_overview.pdf.
23  Matthew Cahill and Dean Ungar, 
“Providers continue to suffer disruption 
from Change Healthcare cyberattack,” 
Moody’s Ratings, https://www.moodys.com/
research/Healthcare-US-Providers-continue-
to-suffer-disruption-from-Change-Healthcare-
Sector-Comment--PBC_1400730; and 
“Change Healthcare cyberattack,” American 
Medical Association, May 24, 2024, https://
www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/
sustainability/change-healthcare-cyberattack.
24  S&P Global Ratings, “U.S. Not-For-Profit 
Health Care Stand-Alone Hospital Median 
Financial Ratios—2023,” August 7, 2024, 
https://www.spglobal.com/ratings/en/research/
articles/240807-u-s-not-for-profit-health-
care-stand-alone-hospital-median-financial-ra-
tios-2023-13207056. 
25  For example: the Bank Term Funding 
Program (BTFP) in 2023; and the Commercial 
Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), Primary 
Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), and Term 
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 
in 2020. 
26  Steve Alder, “Senators Grill UHG CEO 
About Change Healthcare Cyberattack,” The 
HIPAA Journal, May 3, 2024, https://www.
hipaajournal.com/change-healthcare-respond-
ing-to-cyberattack/; and Senator Ron Wyden’s 
opening comments to Senate Committee on 
Finance hearing “Hacking America’s Health 
Care: Assessing the Change Healthcare Cyber 
Attack and What’s Next,” May 1, 2024, https://
www.finance.senate.gov/chairmans-news/
wyden-hearing-statement-on-change-healthcare-
cyberattack-and-unitedhealth-groups-response.
27  “Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions 
of Law of Defendants UnitedHealth Group 
Incorporated and Change Healthcare Inc.,” 
September 7, 2022, https://appliedanti-
trust.com/14_merger_litigation/cases_doj/
unitedhealth_change2022/1_ddc/unitedhealth_
change_ddc_pff_def2022_09_07redacted.pdf.
28  Mike Kreidler, “Third Notification Regarding 
Change Healthcare Cybersecurity Event,” 
State of Washington Office of Insurance 
Commissioner, April 15, 2024, https://www.
OFR Brief Series | 24-05 November 13, 2024 | Page 8
insurance.wa.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
OIC%20Letter%20to%20Industry%20
regarding%20Change%20Healthcare%20
04152024.pdf. 
29  “Change Healthcare Cyberattack Impact,” 
American Medical Association, 2024, https://
www.ama-assn.org/system/files/change-health-
care-survey-results.pdf 
30  Ann Saphir, “Fedwire Resumes 
Operations After Hours Long 
Disruption,” Reuters, February 24, 2021, 
https://global.factiva.com/redir/default.
aspx?P=sa&an=LBA0000020210224eh2o04ch-
d&drn=drn%3aarchive.newsarticle.LBA0000020
210224eh2o04chd&cat=a&ep=ASE. 
31  CCPView Clarus Financial Technology.
32  Ivet Petrova, “Disaster Recovery Compliance 
in the Financial Sector: How a Managed 
Service Provider Can Help,” Cloudflare, 
July 21, 2023, https://cloudscale365.com/
disaster-recovery-compliance-in-the-financial-sec-
tor-how-a-managed-service-provider-can-help/.
33  For additional information on Sheltered 
Harbor and its role in the banking system, see 
https://shelteredharbor.org/.
34  FFIEC IT Examination Handbook Infobase, 
https://ithandbook.ffiec.gov/it-booklets/
business-continuity-management/v-business-con-
tinuity-plan/vc-facilities-and-infrastructure/
vc1-data-center-recovery-alternatives/. 