 
 
February 26, 2024 
 
 
The Honorable Xavier Becerra  
Secretary  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
200 Independence Avenue, S.W. 
Washington, DC 20201  
 
RE: Implications of Cyberattack on Change Healthcare for Patient Care and Next 
Steps 
 
Dear Secretary Becerra: 
 
On behalf of our nearly 5,000 member hospitals, health systems and other health care 
organizations, our clinician partners — including more than 270,000 affiliated 
physicians, 2 million nurses and other caregivers — and the 43,000 health care leaders 
who belong to our professional membership groups, the American Hospital Association 
(AHA) thanks you for your leadership in responding to the recent cyberattack on 
Change Healthcare. We are grateful for your partnership and the Department of 
Health and Human Services’ (HHS) efforts to help minimize the fallout from this 
attack, and we ask for your continued support until the situation is fully resolved. 
 
This unprecedented attack against one of America’s largest health care companies has 
already imposed significant consequences on hospitals and the communities they 
serve. Although the full scope of the impact is still unclear, Change Healthcare’s vast 
nationwide reach suggests that it could be massive. According to Change Healthcare, 
the company processes 15 billion health care transactions annually and touches 1 in 
every 3 patient records. These transactions include a range of services that directly 
affect patient care, including clinical decision support, eligibility verifications and 
pharmacy operations. All of these have been disrupted over the past several days.  
Thankfully, Change Healthcare has informed our members that its prior authorization 
portals are active, but our members are reporting that a substantial portion of their 
claims still cannot be processed, nor can they complete eligibility checks necessary to 
determine whether a patient’s insurance covers a prospective treatment. 
 
Change Healthcare’s downed systems also will have an immediate adverse impact on 
hospitals’ finances and the work they do every day to care for patients and 
communities. Their interrupted technology controls providers’ ability to process claims 
The Honorable Xavier Becerra  
February 26, 2024 
Page 2 of 3 
 
for payment, patient billing and patient cost estimation services. Any prolonged 
disruption of Change Healthcare’s systems will negatively impact many hospitals’ ability 
to offer the full set of health care services to their communities. After all, without this 
critical revenue source, hospitals and health systems may be unable to pay salaries for 
clinicians and other members of the care team, acquire necessary medicines and 
supplies, and pay for mission critical contract work in areas such as physical security, 
dietary and environmental services. In addition, replacing previously electronic 
processes with manual processes will add considerable administrative costs on 
providers, as well as divert team members from other tasks. It is particularly concerning 
that while Change Healthcare’s systems remain disconnected, it and its parent entities 
benefit financially, including by accruing interest on potentially billions of dollars that 
belong to health care providers.   
 
We appreciate that the resolution to this attack ultimately lies with Change Healthcare 
and its parent company UnitedHealth Group. We are in communication with their 
leadership and have asked for certain support, including greater transparency about the 
nature and scope of the attack, an anticipated timeline for resolution, and temporary 
access to advanced payments to help providers weather the period while normal claims 
processing functions are down. 
 
However, we believe there are several areas where hospitals and health systems 
may need immediate federal support as the disruption persists. Because the 
situation is still fluid and many facts have not been shared with AHA or its members, 
these represent our best understanding of some of the steps that would help hospitals 
and health systems at this time. Specifically, we ask that HHS: 
 
• Continue efforts to facilitate communication and transparency from Change 
Healthcare to the provider community. 
• Offer guidance to providers about how they may request Medicare advanced 
and accelerated payments and including by directing the Medicare 
Administrative Contractors to prioritize processing applications by hospitals for 
advanced payments. 
• Alert surveyors to the likelihood that some hospitals’ systems are not functional, 
which may cause longer than normal waits for care, upsetting patients and their 
families, but are out of the control of hospitals and should not result in additional 
citations or complaint surveys being conducted. 
• Provide enforcement discretion related to good faith estimates and educate the 
public that these estimates may temporarily be unavailable. 
• Provide an extension to the timely filing requirements under federally regulated 
health plans. 
• Provide flexibility with respect to e-prescribing regulations.  
• Evaluate whether this attack may impact value-based purchasing programs 
given that hospitals and health systems may not be able to receive remittances, 
as well as any other policies and programs. 
The Honorable Xavier Becerra  
February 26, 2024 
Page 3 of 3 
 
 
We thank the Administration for its ongoing support and stand ready to work with you, 
Change Healthcare and its corporate ownership to minimize any further disruption to 
patient care as a result of this attack. Please contact me if you have questions, or feel 
free to have a member of your team contact AHA Executive Vice President Stacey 
Hughes at shughes@aha.org.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
/s/ 
 
Richard J. Pollack  
President and Chief Executive Officer  
 
CC: The Honorable Chiquita Brooks-LaSure, Administrator, Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services 