 
 
Testimony 
of the 
American Hospital Association 
for the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce 
Subcommittee on Health 
of the 
U.S. House of Representatives 
 "Examining Health Sector Cybersecurity in the Wake of the Change Healthcare 
Attack"  
April 16, 2024  
Chairman Guthrie, Ranking Member Eshoo and members of the Subcommittee, my 
name is John Riggi and I am the National Advisor for Cybersecurity and Risk at the 
American Hospital Association (AHA). Prior to joining the AHA, I spent nearly 30 years 
working at the FBI, including as a senior executive for the Bureau’s Cyber Division.  
 
On behalf of AHA’s nearly 5,000 member hospitals, health systems and other health 
care organizations, our clinician partners — including more than 270,000 affiliated 
physicians, 2 million nurses and other caregivers — and the 43,000 health care leaders 
who belong to our professional membership groups, thank you for the opportunity to 
testify at today’s hearing, “Examining Health Sector Cybersecurity in the Wake of the 
Change Healthcare Attack." In my testimony, I will provide background regarding the 
cyberattack on Change Healthcare, give an update on the current state of play, and 
outline the impacts on hospitals, health systems and patients around the country. I also 
will highlight proposals for Congress and the Administration to consider going forward, 
as well as share concerns about proposals that would unfairly penalize hospitals and 
not improve cybersecurity of the entire health care sector.  
 
 
 
2 
 
HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SYSTEMS ARE COMMITTED TO CYBERSECURITY  
 
Hospitals and health systems have invested billions of dollars and taken many steps to 
protect patients and defend their networks from cyberattacks that can disrupt patient 
care and erode privacy by the loss of personal health care data. The AHA has long 
been committed to helping hospitals and health systems with these efforts, working 
closely with our federal partners, including the FBI, the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS), National Security Council, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure 
Security Agency and many others to prevent and mitigate cyberattacks.  
 
As data theft and ransomware attacks targeting health care have increased dramatically 
over the past several years, the AHA has worked closely with federal agencies and the 
hospital field to build trusted relationships and channels for the mutual exchange of 
cyber threat information, risk mitigation practices and resources to implement these 
practices. The AHA’s work in this area was critically important and allowed us to quickly 
assist members in their response to the Change Healthcare cyberattack. 
 
BACKGROUND ON THE CYBERATTACK AND IMPACT TO HOSPITALS, HEALTH SYSTEMS, 
COMMUNITIES AND PATIENTS 
 
On Feb. 21, Change Healthcare, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group, was the victim of 
the most significant and consequential cyberattack on the U.S. health care system in 
American history. Change Healthcare is the predominant source of more than 100 
critical functions that keep the health care system operating. Among them, Change 
Healthcare manages the clinical criteria used to authorize a substantial portion of 
patient care and coverage, processes billions of claims, supports clinical information 
exchange, and processes drug prescriptions. Significant portions of Change 
Healthcare’s functionality were incapacitated and are still being brought back online. As 
a result, patients struggled to get timely access to care and billions of dollars stopped 
flowing to providers, thereby threatening the solvency of our nation’s provider network 
including hospitals, health systems, physicians, pharmacists and virtually every other 
type of care provider. 
 
According to Change Healthcare, the company processes 15 billion health care 
transactions annually and touches 1 in every 3 patient records. These transactions 
include a range of services that directly affect patient care, including insurance eligibility 
verifications and pharmacy operations, as well as claims transmittals and payment. 
Change Healthcare is part of UnitedHealth Group, which is a Fortune 5 company that 
brought in more than $370 billion in revenue and $22 billion in profit in 2023 and has 
reach throughout the health care sector. When UnitedHealth Group proposed its 
acquisition of Change Healthcare in 2021, the AHA wrote to the Department of Justice 
(DOJ) to express its significant concerns about the transaction, explaining that “[t]he 
acquisition also will concentrate an immense volume of competitively sensitive data in 
 
 
3 
 
the hands of the most powerful health insurance company in the United States.”1 The 
Department of Justice’s listened to the AHA’s concerns, and during its investigation of 
the deal, DOJ uncovered internal Change Healthcare documents stating that the 
“healthcare system, and how payers and providers interact and transact, would not work 
without Change Healthcare.”2 The past two months have shown everyone what Change 
knew years ago: The health care system did not work without Change Healthcare. 
 
This unprecedented attack against one of America’s largest health care companies 
imposed significant consequences on patients and the hospitals, health systems and 
other providers who care for them. In some communities, patients struggled to obtain 
prescriptions or faced delays in scheduling care or receiving and paying bills. 
Responses to a March AHA survey representing nearly 1,000 hospitals found that 74% 
reported direct patient care impact, including delays in authorizations for medically 
necessary care.3 In addition, hospitals, health systems and other providers have 
experienced extraordinary reductions in cash flow. In the same survey, 94% of hospitals 
reported that the Change Healthcare cyberattack was impacting them financially, with 
more than half reporting the impact as “significant or serious.” Indeed, a third of the 
survey respondents indicated that the attack disrupted more than half of their revenue.  
 
The staggering loss of revenue has meant that some hospitals and health systems had 
to seek alternate ways to ensure they could pay salaries for clinicians and other 
members of the care team, acquire necessary medicines and supplies, and pay for 
mission critical contract work in areas such as physical security, dietary and 
environmental services. In addition, replacing previously electronic processes with 
manual processes has often proved ineffective and is adding considerable 
administrative costs for providers, as well as diverting team members from other tasks. 
Nearly all hospitals that responded to AHA’s survey have implemented one or more 
workarounds with varying degrees of success and at high cost. While 81% of survey 
respondents have found these workarounds to be “somewhat” effective, nearly half 
reported that the cost to their organization to implement workarounds was “significant or 
serious.”  
 
CURRENT STATE OF PLAY 
 
Since the AHA first learned of the attack, we have remained in communication with 
UnitedHealth Group leadership to lend our support and share our members’ challenges 
because of the Change Healthcare outage.  
 
 
 
1 https://www.aha.org/system/files/media/file/2021/03/aha-urges-doj-investigate-unitedhealth-groups-
acquisition-change-healthcare-letter-3-18-21.pdf 
https://www.aha.org/lettercomment/2021-08-04-letter-doj-antitrust-division-unitedhealth-groups-proposed-
acquisition 
2 https://www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/file/1476901/dl, Page 12 
3 The AHA issued a survey to all U.S. hospitals on Friday, March 9, 2024. These results reflect responses 
representing 960 hospitals as of the morning of Tuesday, March 12, 2024.  
 
 
4 
 
During the early days and weeks of the event, it was very difficult to obtain clear 
information from UnitedHealth Group. Initially, there was little communication and a 
minimization of the impact this event was having on the ability to process medical 
claims. While this event had disparate impacts on providers, ultimately all communities 
felt the effects in some way. Change Healthcare’s loss of functionality due to the 
cyberattack prevented most payers’ ability to process claims and complete other critical 
functions for the delivery and payment of care. According to Kodiak Solutions, a 
revenue cycle data analytics firm, the value of claims submitted dropped $6.3 billion for 
their 1,850 hospital and 250,000 physician clients alone.4 
 
While much of the claims and payment system functionality has been restored, it 
remains unclear as to how long it will take for all operations to return to normal. This is 
because reconnecting is not the only step to recovery. Providers will need to work 
through the backlog of claims, reprocess denials received during this time, reconcile 
payments to accounts, and bill patients, among other tasks. Therefore, hospitals, 
physicians and patients are continuing to experience financial and operational impacts. 
In the AHA’s March survey, 60% of hospitals reported they expect it would take 
between two weeks and three months to resume normal operations once Change 
Healthcare’s full prior functionality is established, and some expect impacts to linger for 
even longer. 
 
The burden — financial and workload — has been immense. While some hospitals 
were able to access Medicare’s advance and accelerated payments (AAP) and 
UnitedHealth Group’s temporary financial assistance program, many had to pull from 
reserves or take out private loans to continue providing 24/7 care for their communities. 
In the meantime, UnitedHealth Group and other insurers have held on to premium 
dollars, collecting as-yet unknown amounts of interest on what they have not paid out to 
providers. What we do know, however, is that UnitedHealth Group reported to the 
Securities and Exchange Commission on March 21 that, “the Company has not 
determined the incident is reasonably likely to materially impact the Company’s financial 
condition or results of operations,”5 even as it has harmed providers across the country. 
 
It is unclear what other impacts may emerge over the coming weeks and months, and 
we urge Congress and the Administration to continue oversight of the aftermath of the 
attack. 
 
While we will continue to work with UnitedHealth Group and other payers as this 
situation evolves to communicate the state of the field and ensure support for our 
members and the patients they serve, all options for assistance must be explored so 
that the health care field can continue to care for patients and communities. 
 
 
 
4 https://www.hcinnovationgroup.com/cybersecurity/news/53099257/cyberattack -costing-hospitals-2-
billion-a-week-in-cash-flow-report-shows  
5 https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/731766/000073176624000085/unh -20240221.htm  
 
 
 
5 
 
ACTION BY DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO 
ASSIST HOSPITALS AND HEALTH SYSTEMS 
  
On day 18 of the initial event, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) 
issued a notice formally announcing terms for hospitals, physicians and other providers 
impacted by the Change Healthcare cyberattack to apply for AAPs. The agency stated 
that it would provide a maximum of a 30-day payment amount, with repayment in full 
required 90 days after the date that the AAP is issued. However, we are close to 
completing the second month of disruption from this attack, so hospitals and health 
systems will need additional support. Specifically, we urge Congress and CMS to 
consider supporting legislation to expand these programs to help providers 
access necessary support in future events. AHA would support allowing 
providers to access up to 90 days of payment, as well as an extension of the 
recoupment terms. Currently, payback begins immediately at 100%; AHA would 
support a delay and a reduced recoupment amount, such as 25% or 50%. In 
addition, interest rates are at prevailing Treasury rates, which is over 12%. During 
COVID-19, Congress reduced that amount to 4%. The AHA would support 
Congress taking similar action to reduce the interest rates. For this event, needed 
flexibilities were not immediately available, which threatened the viability of our 
nation's provider network. Additional authority for the AAP would allow CMS to 
expand these programs to make them more responsive to the needs of providers 
during an emergency going forward.  
 
The AHA welcomed the letter sent on March 10 to all providers from HHS and the 
Department of Labor recognizing the unprecedented nature of the Change Healthcare 
cyberattack and its far-reaching impacts on hospitals, physicians and the health care 
sector. We appreciated the letter asked for greater transparency from UnitedHealth 
Group and expedited payments to impacted providers so that they can continue timely 
care for patients. The departments also urged other commercial insurance companies 
and payers to make interim payments to providers, ease administrative burdens, and 
pause prior authorizations, requirements on timely billing and other utilization 
management requirements. It is critical that all payers help providers during this incident 
to ensure patient care is not compromised. We urge payers to broadly adopt waivers 
of timely filing requirements for new claims and appealing denied claims within a 
45-day window of the attack (Feb. 21, 2024) and its full resolution, as well as 
waivers of prior authorization for a shorter window (e.g., within 14 days of the 
cyberattack until the point of full resolution). 
 
We recognize that the federal government does not have statutory authority to 
require private payers to take all the actions that may be needed, and, therefore, 
Congress may need to take specific steps to ensure that payers do not penalize 
providers and patients. We will continue to work with Congress and policymakers 
as the impacts from the cyberattack persist. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
REACTION TO HHS OFFICE FOR CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATION 
 
In a March 13 letter, the HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR) notified stakeholders it was 
initiating an investigation into the Change Healthcare cyberattack that will focus on 
whether a breach of protected health information occurred, as well as Change 
Healthcare and UnitedHealth Group’s compliance with the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy, Security and Breach Notification Rules. 
The AHA is grateful that OCR recognizes that the cyberattack “is disrupting health care 
and billing information systems nationwide” and “poses a direct threat to critically 
needed patient care and essential operations of the health care industry.” While OCR is 
not prioritizing investigations of health care providers, the AHA remains 
concerned providers may be required to make breach notifications to HHS and 
affected individuals if it is later determined that a breach occurred.  
 
The AHA has requested OCR provide additional clarification that hospitals and other 
providers do not have to make additional notifications if UnitedHealth Group and 
Change Healthcare are doing so already. Providing duplicative notifications is 
inconsistent with Change Healthcare’s regulatory obligations. Given the scope and 
scale of the cyberattack on Change Healthcare, without a unified notification 
process, patients could possibly face multiple notifications of this same breach, 
which could unnecessarily increase public confusion and misunderstandings. We 
ask Congress to reinforce this important message with OCR and HHS, urging 
those agencies to take steps to protect patients and providers from these 
needless consequences. 
 
COMMENTS ON CYBERSECURITY PROPOSALS  
 
The AHA supports voluntary consensus-based cybersecurity practices, such as those 
announced in January by HHS. These cybersecurity performance goals (CPGs) are 
targeted at defending against the most common tactics used by cyber adversaries to 
attack health care and related third parties, such as exploitation of known technical 
vulnerabilities, phishing emails and stolen credentials.  
 
The AHA was meaningfully involved in the development of the CPGs and will continue 
to work collaboratively with HHS, the Healthcare Sector Coordinating Council and other 
federal partners to enhance cybersecurity efforts for the entire health care field, 
including hospitals and health systems, technology providers, payers, pharmacists and 
other vendors, to ensure we are all protected against the primary source of cyber risk – 
criminal and nation state-supported cyber adversaries. 
 
Hospitals and health systems are not the primary source of cyber risk exposure facing 
the health care sector. A review of the top data breaches in 2023 shows that over 95% 
of the most significant health sector data breaches, defined by those where over 1 
million records were exposed, were related to “business associates” and other non-
hospital health care entities, including CMS, which had a breach included in the top 20 
largest data breaches last year. Any proposals that unfairly focus on one part of the 
 
 
7 
 
health care sector will ultimately not address cyber-risk in a comprehensive, strategic 
manner.  
 
For example, the President’s fiscal year (FY) 2025 budget recommends new penalties 
for hospitals and health systems for not meeting what the Administration defines as 
essential cybersecurity practices. Beginning in FY 2029, the Administration proposes to 
enforce adoption of essential practices with hospitals failing to meet these standards 
facing penalties of up to 100% of the annual market basket increase and, beginning in 
FY 2031, potential additional penalties of up to 1% off the base payment. Critical access 
hospitals that fail to adopt the essential practices would incur a payment reduction of up 
to 1%, but their total penalty is capped. While it is coupled with funding purported to 
assist hospitals in defending against cyberattacks, the per hospital benefit would be 
extremely limited.  
 
The AHA opposes proposals for mandatory cybersecurity requirements being 
levied on hospitals as if they were at fault for the success of hackers in 
perpetrating a crime. The now well-documented source of cybersecurity risk in the 
health care sector, including the Change Healthcare cyberattack, is from vulnerabilities 
in third-party technology, not hospitals’ primary systems. No organization, including 
federal agencies, is or can be immune from cyberattacks. Imposing fines or cutting 
Medicare payments would diminish hospital resources needed to combat cybercrime 
and would be counterproductive to our shared goal of preventing cyberattacks. These 
proposals for hospitals are misguided and will not improve the overall cybersecurity 
posture of the health care sector.  
 
To make meaningful progress in the war on cybercrime, Congress and the 
Administration should focus on the entire health care sector and not just 
hospitals. Furthermore, for any defensive strategy imposed on the health care sector, 
Congress should call on federal agencies to protect hospitals and health systems — 
and the patients they care for — by deploying a strong and sustained offensive cyber 
strategy to combat this ongoing and unresolved national security threat. Health care is a 
top critical infrastructure sector with direct impact to public health and safety and must 
be protected. Any cyberattack on the health care sector that disrupts or delays patient 
care creates a risk to patient safety and crosses the line from an economic crime to a 
threat-to-life crime. These attacks should be aggressively pursued and prosecuted as 
such by the federal government. We use the term “prosecuted” in all sense of the 
definition related to the totality of the government’s capabilities and authorities, including 
intelligence and military authorities. 
 
Imposing swift and certain consequences upon cyber adversaries, who are often 
provided safe harbor in non-cooperative foreign jurisdictions, such as Russia, China, 
Iran and North Korea, is essential to reducing the cyber threats targeting health care 
and the nation. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
CONGRESSIONAL REQUEST 
 
The AHA recommends that Congress consider any statutory limitations that exist 
for an adequate response from CMS and HHS to help minimize further fallout 
from the Change Healthcare cyberattack and for future incidents. The 
Administration has limited tools available, particularly because the government is not 
operating under a declared Public Health Emergency and National Emergency. While 
CMS has offered payments under the AAP, the agency only has authority to do so for 
limited time periods and amounts and with very high interest rates after repayments are 
due.  
 
We also urge Congress to put forward policies that would alleviate administrative 
requirements imposed by payers, including Medicare Advantage and other 
commercial payers. Without relief from these payers in the form of waivers of prior 
authorization and timely filing requirements, providers, including hospitals and health 
systems, will likely see significant denials of care as a result of the shutdown of Change 
Healthcare. In addition, we ask Congress to urge OCR to relieve providers from 
the burden of making duplicative breach notifications based on the outcome of 
their investigation to reduce any further confusion and unnecessary costs from 
this cyberattack. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
We must address the outstanding issues resulting from the cyberattack on Change 
Healthcare for the wellbeing of our patients and communities. These include ensuring 
providers are reconnected to services, are able to process claims and appeal denials, 
have the information needed to reconcile payments and issue patient bills, and are able 
to access needed financial support to mitigate the considerable costs incurred by 
hospitals and health systems as a result of the cyberattack. We stand ready to work 
with Congress, Change Healthcare and its corporate ownership to ensure hospitals and 
health systems have the resources they need to continue serving their patients and 
communities. At the same time, we also must enact policies that bolster support for the 
entire health care system’s efforts to protect health care services, data and patients 
from cyberattacks.   