CMS Statement Following Health Care Payer and Provider Roundtable on the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare | CMS Skip to main content Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services CMS Newsroom Search the Newsroom Search Search CMS Global Secondary Menu About CMS Newsroom Data & Research Newsroom Newsroom Menu Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Search Suggestions Search Newsroom Homepage Press Releases CMS Statement Following Health Care Payer and Provider Roundtable On The Cyberattack On Change Healthcare Press Releases Mar 12, 2024 CMS Statement Following Health Care Payer and Provider Roundtable on the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare Billing & payments Share The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) Administrator Chiquita Brooks-LaSure participated in a roundtable with senior Administration leaders to hear from health care providers about the challenges they are experiencing following the cyberattack on UnitedHealth Group’s subsidiary Change Healthcare, and to urge health insurers to do more to support affected providers and suppliers. At the roundtable, CMS announced that guidance to states is forthcoming that will provide needed flexibilities to allow states to support Medicaid providers and suppliers during this time, particularly those operating in fee-for-service delivery systems. CMS recognizes that many Medicaid providers are deeply affected by the cyberattack. We are continuing to work closely with states and are urging Medicaid managed care plans to make prospective payments to impacted providers. Medicaid managed care plans do not need CMS authority make prospective payments to providers and suppliers who need them; we are encouraging Medicaid managed care plans to make prospective payments as soon as possible. This announcement follows Saturday’s statement that, in addition to considering applications for accelerated payments for Medicare Part A providers, we will also be considering applications for advance payments for Part B practitioners and suppliers. Medicare Part A providers and Part B practitioners and suppliers may submit accelerated or advance payment requests to their respective Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) for individual consideration. CMS continues to look for ways to further support the provider and supplier community during this difficult situation. All affected providers and suppliers should reach out to health plans and other payers for assistance with the disruption. CMS has encouraged other payers including Medicare Advantage (MA) organizations to offer advance funding to providers affected by this cyberattack. The rules governing CMS’s payments to MA organizations and Part D sponsors remain unchanged. Please note that nothing in this statement speaks to the arrangements between MA organizations or Part D sponsors and their contracted providers and suppliers or facilities. For more information on the Accelerated and Advance Payment Programs for Medicare Part A providers and Part B suppliers, please view the Fact Sheet: https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/change-healthcare/optum-payment-disruption-chopd-accelerated-payments-part-providers-and-advance . For additional information, view the HHS readout on the Biden-Harris Administration convening with the health care community concerning the Change Healthcare cyberattack: https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2024/03/12/readout-biden-harris-administration-convening-health-care-community-concerning-cyberattack-change-healthcare.html . ### Previous Newsroom Article Next Newsroom Article Related Releases Press Releases Jun 11, 2026 CMS Takes Bold New Approach to Stewarding Medicaid Demonstration Project Spending Press Releases Jun 04, 2024 Biden-Harris Administration Expands Access to Mental Health and Substance Use Services with Addition of 10 New States to CCBHC Medicaid Demonstration Program Press Releases Mar 19, 2024 Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Initiative to Increase Investments in Person-Centered Primary Care Press Releases Mar 09, 2024 CMS Statement on Continued Action to Respond to the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare Contact us CMS News and Media Group Catherine Howden, Director Media Inquiries Form 202-690-6145 Get email updates Sign up to get the latest information about your choice of CMS topics. You can decide how often to receive updates. Email Sign up - opens in a new window Sign up CMS & HHS Websites CMS & HHS Websites Medicare.gov Medicaid.gov InsureKidsNow.gov HealthCare.gov HHS.gov HHS.gov/Open About CMS About CMS About Us Careers Newsroom Tools Tools Acronyms Archive Contacts Glossary Helpful Links Helpful Links Privacy Policy Plain Language Privacy Settings Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Developer Information Vulnerability Disclosure Policy USA Government Sites USA Government Sites Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Inspector General USA.gov Connect with CMS Linkedin link Youtube link Facebook link Twitter link RSS Feed link A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244