Change Healthcare Cyberattack Underscores Urgent Need to Strengthen Cyber Preparedness for Individual Health Care Organizations and as a Field | AHA Skip to main content Secondary Menu AHA Member Center About Press Center AHA Help Center Search Advocacy Quick Links Action Center Advocacy Agenda Advocacy Issues Action Alerts Special Bulletins Advisories Letters Testimony We Care, We Vote Press Releases Topics Access & Health Coverage Affordability Behavioral Health Compliance Current & Emerging Payment Models Reducing Disparities in Health Outcomes Technology and Cybersecurity Quality and Patient Safety Regulatory Relief Workforce Issues for You The Value of Health Systems The 340B Drug Pricing Program Rural Health and Critical Access Hospitals Hospitals Against Violence | #HAVhope Post-Acute Care Maternal and Child Health Cybersecurity & Risk Advisory Physician Leaders Nurse Leadership Trustees Health Systems Providers with Health Plans Teaching Hospitals Surprise Billing Career Resources Current AHA Openings Certification Center American Organization for Nursing Leadership Professional Membership Groups Data & Insights Fast Facts on U.S. Hospitals The AHA Survey Center AHA Data Products AHA Funded Partnerships AHA Health Care Workforce Scan Market Scan AHA Center for Health Innovation AHA Coding Clinic National Uniform Billing Committee (NUBC) Hospitals and Systems Community Health Data Sustainability Roadmap Resource Center AHA Online Store Guides and Reports Education & Events Events & Webinars Calendar AHA Annual Membership Meeting AHA Healthier Together Conference AHA Leadership Summit AHA Rural Health Care Leadership Conference Individual Membership Organization Events Webinar Recordings AHA Team Training AHA Knowledge Exchange Innovation Resources Care Delivery Transformation Sponsorship Information News News Articles Advancing Health Podcast My AHA Connect app AHA Stat Blog AHA News RSS Feed Subscribe to AHA Today Perspective Chair File Leadership Dialogue Individuals & Communities Telling the Hospital Story Promoting Healthy Communities AHA Community Health Improvement Change Healthcare Cyberattack Underscores Urgent Need to Strengthen Cyber Preparedness for Individual Health Care Organizations and as a Field The cyberattack on Change Healthcare in February 2024 disrupted health care operations on an unprecedented national scale, endangering patients' access to care, disrupting critical clinical and eligibility operations, and threatening the solvency of the nation's provider network. It demonstrated that the national consequences of cyberattacks targeting mission-critical third-party providers can be even more devastating than when hospitals or health systems are attacked directly. Incident Overview Attack Target Change Healthcare, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group, is the predominant source of more than 100 critical functions that keep the U.S. health care system operating. It annually processes 15 billion health care transactions — touching 1 in every 3 patient records — including insurance eligibility verification and authorization, drug prescriptions, claims transmittals and payment. What Happened On Feb. 21, 2024, an attack by the Russian ransomware group ALPHV BlackCat encrypted and incapacitated significant portions of Change Healthcare’s functionality. Impact The attack had significant care delivery and financial consequences for patients, providers and communities, endangering patients and threatening the solvency of U.S. health care providers. Every hospital in the country felt the impact, either directly or indirectly. Impacts varied depending on factors such as amount of cash reserves, vendor redundancy and reliance on Change Healthcare technology. A March 2024 AHA survey of nearly 1,000 hospitals found: 74% reported direct patient care impact, including delays in authorizations for medically necessary care. 94% reported the attack impacted them financially. 33% reported the attack disrupted more than half of their revenue. 60% reported requiring two weeks to three months to resume normal operations once Change Healthcare’s full functionality was re-established. Many providers were forced to seek alternate ways — including pulling from reserves or taking out private loans — to pay clinician and care team salaries, acquire necessary medicine and supplies, and pay for critical physical security, dietary and environmental services contract work. The need to rely on less efficient manual processes in place of electronic ones also added substantial administrative costs. AHA Response The AHA mobilized swiftly and served as a leading voice in the entire health care sector during the crisis. To facilitate collaboration, provide input and secure support, the AHA immediately engaged with top contacts at the White House, Congress, FBI, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA). As UnitedHealth Group downplayed the severity of the event over the ensuing weeks, the AHA, among other actions, consistently set the record straight, informed the media and testified before Congress. These efforts ensured that Change Healthcare, not hospitals, bore responsibility for notifying patients of any data breach. According to Kodiak Solutions, a revenue cycle data analytics firm, the attack caused the value of claims submitted to drop $6.3 billion for their 1,850 hospital and 250,000 physician clients alone in just the first three weeks after the attack. Download the full report. Download the Full Report Key Resources Change Healthcare Cyberattack Underscores Urgent Need to Strengthen Cyber Preparedness for Individual Health Care Organizations Cybersecurity AHA Footer About AHA Careers at AHA Membership AHA Online Store Chicago Office: 312.422.3000 D.C. Office: 202.638.1100 AHA Support: 1.800.424.4301 AHA Help Center: Contact Us and FAQs Advocacy Access & Health Coverage Action Center Affordability Behavioral Health Compliance Current & Emerging Payment Models Hospitals Against Violence (HAV) Leveraging Technology Quality and Patient Safety Reducing Disparities in Health Outcomes Regulatory Relief Surprise Billing Workforce Career Resources Current AHA Openings Certification Center Data & Insights Fast Facts on U.S. Hospitals Community Health Data AHA Data Products Education and Events Events and Webinars Calendar AHA Leadership Summit AHA Rural Health Care Leadership Conference AHA Team Training AHA Knowledge Exchange Sponsorship Information News Subscribe to AHA Today Advancing Health Podcast Download My AHA Connect App AHA Stat Blog AHA News RSS Feed Advancing Health in America Telling the Hospital Story Promoting Healthy Communities AHA Community Health Improvement Press Center Press Releases Press Kit Affiliated Organizations Health Research & Educational Trust AHA Physician Alliance AHA Trustee Services American Organization for Nursing Leadership Professional Membership Groups Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram © 2026 by the American Hospital Association. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information Terms of Use Manage Cookie Settings Noncommercial use of original content on www.aha.org is granted to AHA Institutional Members, their employees and State, Regional and Metro Hospital Associations unless otherwise indicated. AHA does not claim ownership of any content, including content incorporated by permission into AHA produced materials, created by any third party and cannot grant permission to use, distribute or otherwise reproduce such third party content. Request permission to reproduce AHA content.