CMS Preparing to Close Program that Addressed Medicare Funding Issues Resulting from Change Healthcare Cyber-Attack | CMS Skip to main content Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services CMS Newsroom Search the Newsroom Search Search CMS Global Secondary Menu About CMS Newsroom Data & Research Newsroom Newsroom Menu Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Search Suggestions Search Newsroom Homepage Press Releases CMS Preparing To Close Program That Addressed Medicare Funding Issues Resulting From Change Healthcare Cyber-Attack Press Releases Jun 17, 2024 CMS Preparing to Close Program that Addressed Medicare Funding Issues Resulting from Change Healthcare Cyber-Attack Medicare Parts A & B Share Today, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) announced that payments under the Accelerated and Advance Payment (AAP) Program for the Change Healthcare/Optum Payment Disruption (CHOPD) will conclude on July 12, 2024. Launched in early March, the CHOPD payments were designed to ease cash flow disruptions experienced by some Medicare providers and suppliers, such as hospitals, physicians, and pharmacists, due to the unprecedented cyberattack that took health care electronic data interchange Change Healthcare offline in February. “In the face of one of the most widespread cyberattacks on the U.S. health care industry, CMS promptly took action to get providers and suppliers access to the funds they needed to continue providing patients with vital care,” said CMS Administrator Chiquita Brooks-LaSure. “Our efforts helped minimize the disruptive fallout from this incident, and we will remain vigilant to be ready to address future events.” CHOPD accelerated payments have been issued to over 4,200 Part A providers, such as hospitals, totaling more than $2.55 billion. CMS also issued 4,722 CHOPD advance payments, totaling more than $717.18 million, to Part B suppliers, including doctors, non-physician practitioners, and durable medical equipment suppliers. Providers of services and suppliers are now successfully billing Medicare, and to date, CMS has already recovered over 96% of the CHOPD payments. After July 12, 2024, CMS will no longer accept new applications for CHOPD accelerated or advance payments. Any providers of services or suppliers that are having difficulty billing or receiving payment should contact Change Healthcare, owned by UnitedHealth Group, by visiting https://www.unitedhealthgroup.com/ns/changehealthcare.html and/or their Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC). To find your MACs contact information, please visit https://www.cms.gov/mac-info . All new CHOPD program applications must be submitted from eligible providers and suppliers prior to that date. CMS will continue to monitor for other effects of the cyberattack on Medicare providers of services and suppliers and will continue to engage industry partners to address any remaining issues or concerns. CMS encourages all providers of services and suppliers, technology vendors, and other members of the health care ecosystem to double down on cybersecurity, with urgency. Please visit the HPH Cyber Performance Goals website at https://hphcyber.hhs.gov/performance-goals.html for more details on steps to stay protected. ### Previous Newsroom Article Next Newsroom Article Related Releases Press Releases Apr 11, 2025 CMS Seeks Public Input on Inpatient Hospital Whole-Person Care, Proposes Updates to Medicare Payments Press Releases Nov 01, 2024 HHS Finalizes Physician Payment Rule Strengthening Person-Centered Care and Health Quality Measures Press Releases Aug 01, 2024 HHS Finalizes New Policies to Support Underserved Communities, Mitigate Drug Shortages, and Promote Safety Press Releases Jul 10, 2024 HHS Proposes Physician Payment Rule to Drive Whole-Person Care and Improve Health Quality for All Individuals with Medicare Contact us CMS News and Media Group Catherine Howden, Director Media Inquiries Form 202-690-6145 Get email updates Sign up to get the latest information about your choice of CMS topics. You can decide how often to receive updates. Email Sign up - opens in a new window Sign up CMS & HHS Websites CMS & HHS Websites Medicare.gov Medicaid.gov InsureKidsNow.gov HealthCare.gov HHS.gov HHS.gov/Open About CMS About CMS About Us Careers Newsroom Tools Tools Acronyms Archive Contacts Glossary Helpful Links Helpful Links Privacy Policy Plain Language Privacy Settings Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Developer Information Vulnerability Disclosure Policy USA Government Sites USA Government Sites Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Inspector General USA.gov Connect with CMS Linkedin link Youtube link Facebook link Twitter link RSS Feed link A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244