 
Page 1 of 7 
 
May 14, 2024 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC TRANSMISSION 
 
Andrew Witty 
Chief Executive Officer 
UnitedHealth Group 
9900 Bren Road East 
Minnetonka, MN 55343 
 
Mr. Witty: 
 
I write to request additional information about the cyberattack targeting Change Healthcare 
(Change) and actions taken by UnitedHealth Group (UHG) prior to, and in the wake of this data 
breach. Change is one of the largest clearinghouses for medical claims in the United States and 
processes approximately 15 billion health care transactions annually. Given the magnitude of this 
cyberattack, it is imperative UHG provides information about the scale of the breach, the number 
of patients affected, the financial effects on providers and rela ted entities, and the amount of 
protected health information (PHI) that was compromised. It is also important that, given UHG’s 
history of data governance issues, the Senate Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions (HELP) 
Committee receives an accounting of the proactive and reactive measures UHG has taken to protect 
sensitive patient data since the cyberattack.  
 
On February 21, 2024, UHG’s Optum posted a systems update notifying the public that its 
subsidiary, Change, was “experiencing a network interruption related to a cyber security issue.”
1 
The following day, UHG filed Form 8- K with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
stating that the company had “identified a suspected nation- state associated cyber security threat 
actor had gained access to so me of the Change information technology systems.” 2 The filing 
further stated that UHG “proactively isolated the impacted systems from other connecting 
systems” in an attempt to protect patient and provider data and contain the threat. 3 UHG further 
claimed that “the Company believes the network interruption is specific to Change  systems,” an 
assertion we now know to be false. It is unclear what other, if any, reporting UHG made to 
regulators, patients, and providers in the immediate aftermath of the cyberattack. It is also unclear 
what specific steps UHG took to disconnect Change from its other systems and to what extent this 
action prevented the compromise of patient and provider data.  
                                                           
1 Optum Solution Status, Update: restoration in progress of Change Healthcare products and services. , OPTUM, 
https://solution-status.optum.com/incidents/hqpjz25fn3n7 (last visited Apr. 23, 2024). 
2 UnitedHealth Group Inc., Current Report (Form 8-K) (Feb. 22, 2024), https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/ 
edgar/data/0000731766/000073176624000045/unh-20240221.htm. 
3 Id. 
 
Page 2 of 7 
 
A week later, the Russia-based ALPHV Blackcat ransomware group claimed responsibility for the 
cyberattack, which has since been confirmed by UHG. 4 While UHG has not disclosed the exact 
extent of the cyber attack, in a since deleted February 28 blog post on the dark web, ALPHV 
Blackcat claimed it stole at least six terabytes of “highly selective” data from Change including 
provider data from Medicare, T RICARE, CVS Caremark, Loomis, Davis Vision, Health Net, 
MetLife, Teachers Health Trust, and more. 5 ALPHV Blackcat also claimed to have extracted 
the personal data and records of millions of individuals, including: active U.S. military 
personnel and Veterans’ personally identifiable information (PII); patients’ PII including 
phone numbers, addresses, Social Security Numbers (SSN), and emails; medical and dental 
records; financial p ayment information; and insurance records and claims information .
6 
UHG has since acknowledged that the stolen data contains PHI and PII “which could cover a 
substantial proportion of people in America,” but has not provided more specifics and has done 
little to notify patients and providers of whether their data was extracted during the breach.7 
 
In response to the group’s demand for a ransom payment to prevent the public release of the data, 
UHG reportedly paid about $22 million to a Bitcoin address connec ted to ALPHV Blackcat on 
March 1.8 UHG belatedly confirmed that it paid a ransom in a statement to news outlets more than 
a month and a half later saying, “[a] ransom was paid as part of the company’s commitment to do 
all it could to protect patient data from disclosure.”9 However, it is unclear what assurances UHG 
received to ensure the data was deleted and recovered, as the ransom payment does not appear to 
have ended the threat of the stolen data being released.  
 
On April 8, a second hacker group, RansomHub, claimed that it was cheated out of its share of the 
ransom payment and said it has four terabytes of the stolen data that it would sell to the “highest 
bidder” if it did not receive an additional ransom payment.
10 For its part, UHG has responded by 
saying that there is no evidence of a new cyber incident, but recent reports about the validity of 
RansomHub’s claims show that this threat may be very real.11 On April 12, WIRED reported that 
RansomHub provided it several screenshots of what appeared to be “patient records and a data-
sharing contract for United Healthcare.” 12 Subsequently, on April 15, RansomHub published 
several files on the dark web containing personal information about patients, including billing files, 
                                                           
4 Zach Whittaker, UnitedHealth confirms ransomware gang behind Change Healthcare hack amid ongoing 
pharmacy outages, TECHCRUNCH (Feb. 29, 2024, 10:15 AM), https://techcrunch.com/2024/02/29/unitedhealth-
change-healthcare-ransomware-alphv-blackcat-pharmacy-outages/. 
5 Stefanie Schappert, ALPHV/BlackCat exposes UnitedHealth hack details on leak blog, CYBERNEWS (Feb. 29, 2024, 
12:56 AM), https://cybernews.com/news/alphv-blackcat-unitedhealth-change-healthcare-hack-details/. 
6 Id.  
7 Change Healthcare cyberattack fallout continues, XTELLIGENT HEALTHCARE MEDIA, https://healthitsecurity.com/ 
news/change-healthcare-disconnects-system-amid-cyberattack (last visited Apr. 23, 2024). 
8 Andy Greenberg, Hackers Behind the Change Healthcare Ransomware Attack Just Received a $22 Million 
Payment, WIRED (Mar. 4, 2024, 12:41 PM), https://www.wired.com/story/alphv-change-healthcare-ransomware-
payment/. 
9 Andy Greenberg, Change Healthcare Finally Admits It Paid Ransomware Hackers — and Still Faces a Patient 
Data Leak, WIRED (Apr. 22, 2024, 11:55 PM), https://www.wired.com/story/change-healthcare-admits-it-paid-
ransomware-hackers/. 
10 Andy Greenberg & Matt Burgess, Change Healthcare Faces Another Ransomware Threat — and It Looks 
Credible, WIRED (Apr. 12, 2024, 2:25 PM), https://www.wired.com/story/change-healthcare-ransomhub-threat/. 
11 Zach Whittaker, Change Healthcare stolen patient data leaked by ransomware gang, TECHCRUNCH (Apr. 15, 
2024, 3:38 PM), https://techcrunch.com/2024/04/15/change-healthcare-stolen-patient-data-ransomhub-leak/. 
12 Greenberg & Burgess, supra note 10.   
 
Page 3 of 7 
 
insurance records, and medical i nformation. It also published files that contain contracts and 
agreements between Change and its partners.13 On April 22, UHG confirmed that 22 screenshots 
containing PHI and PII were posted on the dark web for about a week, but that no further 
publication of PHI and PII has occurred.14 This was the first time information alleged to have been 
extracted from the breach was shared publicly and confirmed that hackers possessed medical and 
patient records.15 Despite all of this, UHG has still not provided an accounting for the data that 
was compromised and has left millions of patients and providers wondering if their private data 
would be released publicly.   
 
In addition to the cybersecurity concerns arisin g from the cyberattack, the widespread outages to 
Change’s systems caused massive disruption to the entire health care industry, including patients, 
providers, pharmacies, and payers. In describing the magnitude of the disruption, the Department 
of Health and Human Services’ (HHS) Office for Civil Rights (OCR) has stated  “[t]he incident 
poses a direct threat to critically needed patient care and essential operations of the health care 
industry.”
16 The American Hospital Association also stated, “patients have struggled to get timely 
access to care and billions of dollars have stopped flowing to providers.” 17 For example, m ajor 
pharmacy chains such as CVS and Walgreens, as well as T RICARE pharmacies, faced serious 
challenges in dispensing medications to patients.18 There were also major disruptions to electronic 
prescribing, claim submission, and payment transmission functionalities on Change’s platform. 
This resulted in patients not getting the medication they needed and providers struggling to submit 
claims, halting cash flows resulting in providers going weeks without being paid.  
 
For many providers, switching to manual submission of claims to insurers or finding another 
clearinghouse to process claims, as suggested by UHG, were not realistic solutions, and take time 
to implement—all while they remained strapped for cash. W hen UHG announced that its 
electronic payments platform was back online  several weeks after the attack , on March 15,  
providers report ed that they were still unable to access claims and payment processing. 19 In 
response to calls for UHG to provide financial assistance to providers,20 the company has advanced 
                                                           
13 Whittaker, supra note 11. 
14 Change Healthcare cyberattack fallout continues, XTELLIGENT HEALTHCARE MEDIA, https://healthitsecurity.com/ 
news/change-healthcare-disconnects-system-amid-cyberattack (last visited Apr. 23, 2024). 
15 Whittaker, supra note 11. 
16 Dear Colleague from Melanie Fontes Rainer, Dir., U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs. Off. for C.R. (Mar. 13, 
2024), https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/cyberattack-change-healthcare.pdf. 
17 Letter from Richard J. Pollack, President & CEO, Am. Hosp. Ass’n, to The Honorable Jason Smith, Chairman, H. 
Comm. on Ways & Means & The Honorable Richard Neal, Ranking Member, H. Comm. on Ways & Means (Mar. 
19, 2024), https://www.aha.org/lettercomment/2024-03-20-congress-urged-help-hospitals-impacted-change-
healthcare-cyberattack.  
18 “U.S. military health insurance provider Tricare said in a statement that the cyberattack at Change Healthcare is 
‘impacting all military pharmacies worldwide and some retail pharmacies nationally.’” Whittaker, supra note 4.  
19 Samantha Liss, Medical Providers Still Grappling With UnitedHealth Cyberattack: ‘More Devastating Than 
Covid’, KFF HEALTH NEWS (Apr. 19, 2024), https://kffhealthnews.org/news/article/cyberattack-fallout-unitedhealth-
change-healthcare-medical-providers-financial-instability/; Sriparna Roy, UnitedHealth hack looms over first-
quarter earnings report, REUTERS (Apr. 15, 2024, 12:04 PM), https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-
pharmaceuticals/unitedhealth-hack-looms-over-first-quarter-earnings-report-2024-04-15/. 
20 E.g. Letter from Xavier Becerra, Sec’y, U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs. & Julie A. Su, Sec’y, U.S. Dep’t of 
Lab. to Health Care Leaders (Mar. 10, 2024), https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2024/03/10/letter -to-health-care-
leaders-on-cyberattack-on-change-healthcare.html; Dan Diamond, White House summons UnitedHealth CEO as 
 
Page 4 of 7 
 
more than $7 billion in funding to providers .21 This has not addressed much of the outstanding 
financial hardship and backlog of claims process ing, however, and it is unclear what flexibilities 
providers will have in repaying this short -term financial assistance. There are also concerns that 
UHG did not take necessary steps to make it easier for other clearinghouses to route claims outside 
of Change and that it has not offered a detailed explanation for what will happen to claims that 
were submitted prior to the cyberattack. Given that Change processes about 50 percent of medical 
claims nationwide, it is incumbent upon UHG to ensure that fallback mechanisms are in place and 
can be quickly activated in the event of a system outage or cyberattack. Based on the severe 
hardships providers have faced over the last two months, it is clear  that UHG did not have  the 
infrastructure in place respond to such an event, resulting chaos for patients and providers alike. 
 
This cyberattack could have been mitigated  if UHG acted more quickly to implement  stronger 
cybersecurity measures  when it acquired Change in October 2022. On April 30, you briefed 
Republican members of this Committee to discuss the cyberattack, and explained that ALPHV 
Blackcat accessed UHG’s system by using a Citrix remote portal installed with Change legacy 
software that did not have multifactor authentication (MFA) enabled.
22 Health care providers and 
affiliates, like UHG, are prime targets for cyberattacks by hackers like ALPHV Blackcat because 
they store and have access to large troves of patient information. Health care data is among the 
most valuable information available to black market actors to perpetuate identity theft and financial 
fraud.23 Indeed, some estimates have found that criminals will pay up to $250 per health care data 
record versus $5.40 for a stolen payment card. 24 The risk to health care providers is so prevalent 
that, in December 2023, the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), and HHS released a joint Cybersecurity Advisory (CSA) 
alerting cybersecurity professionals that ALPHV Blackcat was encouraging its  affiliates to target 
heath care providers. Not only does the December 2023 CSA provide technical details regarding 
ALPHV Blackcat’s methods, but the CSA also provides a host of mitigation strategies.
25 These 
mitigation strategies include the use of MFA which is resistant to techniques known to be used by 
ALPHV Blackcat.26  
 
Following the acquisition of Change, UHG should have taken aggressive steps to update Change 
legacy systems and implement stronger cybersecurity protocols including MFA . However, it 
didn’t, leading to questions about whether known data governance failures played a role in the 
ALPHV Blackcat cyberattack. C ourt filings submitted by the federal government in December 
                                                           
payment paralysis enters 3rd week, WASH. POST (Mar. 12, 2024, 6:40 PM), https://www.washingtonpost.com/ 
health/2024/03/12/unitedhealth-change-healthcare-white-house-becerra-hhs/. 
21 Liss, supra note 19.   
22 Zack Whittaker, UnitedHealth says Change hackers stole health data on ‘substantial portion of people in 
America’, TECHCRUNCH (Apr. 22, 2024), https://techcrunch.com/2024/04/22/unitedhealth-change-healthcare-
hackers-substantial-proportion-americans/. 
23 Juta Gurinaviciute, Why The Healthcare Industry Has Become A Primary Target For Cybercriminals, FORBES 
(Apr. 17, 2024, 8:30 AM), https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2024/04/17/why -the-healthcare-industry-
has-become-a-primary-target-for-cybercriminals/?sh=7ae7cb4915b8. 
24 Hackers, breaches, and the value of healthcare data, IMPRIVATA (June 31, 2021), https://www.imprivata.com/ 
blog/healthcare-data-new-prize-hackers.  
25 Federal Bureau of Investigation et al., Joint Cybersecurity Advisory, #StopRansomware: ALPHV Blackcat , 
CYBERSECURITY & INFRASTRUCTURE SEC. AGENCY (Dec. 19, 2023), https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/2024-
03/aa23-353a-stopransomware-alphv-blackcat-update_2.pdf. 
26 Id.  
 
Page 5 of 7 
 
2021 when challenging the merger between Change and Optum —a subsidiary of UHG —show 
that UHG’s Internal Audit and Advisory Services conducted an audit of  its data management 
practices and “assigned a rating of Needs Improvement .”27 In particular, this audit showed “a 
‘heightened risk of data being mismanaged at Optum,’” “a ‘large opportunity for classification 
error and inconsistency and subsequent treatment of PHI and PII data,’” and, “‘no effective means 
of enforcement if or when data misuse is discovered or reported’ leading to a ‘risk that [UHG] will 
be unable to effectively intervene or reinforce data management practices.’”28  
 
While UHG is now reporting that its pharmacy services and medical claims are back to “near -
normal levels,” as one of the largest health care providers in the United States, UHG must be held 
accountable for the actions it took or failed to take to protect highly-sensitive patient data given 
the historic nature of this breach. As such, I ask that you answer the following questions, on a 
question-by-question basis, by May 28, 2024:  
 
UHG’s Data Governance Framework Generally 
 
1. What security protocols, both cyber a nd physical, does UHG have in place to prevent 
against a cyberattack?  
 
2. Does UHG incorporate information from the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology’s (NIST) National Vulnerability Database (NVD) as part of these protocols? 
If so, how regularly are revisions made based on any new vulnerabilities when identified 
by NIST? 
 
3. Is UHG accredited by any privacy and security organizations? If so, which? 
 
4. Describe how UHG incorporates cybersecurity best practices implemented by other 
critical infrastructure sectors. 
 
5. Is UHG a member in any cross-sector organizations that focuses on cybersecurity? 
 
6. Does UHG hold an insurance policy for cybersecurity incidents? If so, has it filed a claim 
with its insurer following the Change cyberattack? 
 
Data Governance Prior to Change Cyberattack 
 
7. Describe UHG’s process for conducting due diligence for companies it enters into business 
arrangements with, including for any merger or acquisition agreements made to acquire 
both private and publicly traded companies.  
 
                                                           
27 Proposed Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law of the United States, State of Minnesota, and State of New 
York, at 113, United States v. UnitedHealth Grp. Inc., 630 F.Supp.3d 118 (D.D.C. 2022), dismissed, No. 22-5301, 
2023 WL 2717667 (D.C. Cir. Mar. 27, 2023), https://www.justice.gov/atr/case -document/file/1534776/dl?inline 
(emphasis added). 
28 Id.  
 
Page 6 of 7 
 
8. As part of its due diligence, did UHG conduct a cybersecurity audit prior to acquiring 
Change? Please explain. If not, what statutory, regulatory, and/or other legal barriers, 
including current safe harbor laws, prevented UHG from conducting this audit?     
 
9. As part of its due diligence, what independent third party performed objective assessments 
of Change’s infrastructure and cybersecurity readiness?  
 
10. What changes did UHG make to Change’s internal IT operations (including cybersecurity 
divisions) af ter it acquired the company in October 2022? Did UHG make any staff 
reductions to these teams?  
 
11. Describe UHG’s process for upgrading Change legacy systems following its acquisition of 
the company in October 2022. 
 
12. What Change legacy systems were still in use prior to the cyberattack on February 21? 
 
13. What specific risk management frameworks, assessments, and mitigation strategies were 
implemented before February 21 as it relates to technology infrastructure and 
cybersecurity?   
 
14. At the board of director (BOD) level, what data protection mechanisms were discussed and 
how often was infrastructure discussed? What type of resiliency planning was in place (e.g. 
failover exercises, penetration testing, red team exercises)? Were these discussions regular 
agenda items during board meetings or were these discussions performed ad hoc?  
 
a. What infrastructure risks were identified?  
b. At what level were these assessments discussed?   
c. Did you and/or UHG’s BOD review and accept the risk?  
d. Please produce all due diligence documents related to cybersecurity, infrastructure 
 investments, data, and business process ownership. 
 
Data Governance After the Change Cyberattack 
 
15. Please produce detailed impact data of the events of February 21.   
 
16. When did Change first become aware of a cyberattack on its systems? 
  
a. What was the national impact at a monetary level?   
b. Daily transactions halted?   
c. Number of providers impacted? 
 
17. When did Change notify federal agencies of a cyberattack and which agencies did Change 
notify? 
 
 
Page 7 of 7 
 
18. Describe UHG’s process for upgrading or replacing UHG and/or Change’s cybersecurity 
infrastructure after the events of February 21. 
 
19. What improvements has Change made to its cybersecurity systems since the cyberattack, 
including confirming whether additional systems  within Change or UHG have been 
compromised? 
 
20. What additional reporting does UHG commit to doing for individuals, providers, and third-
parties who have had their information disclosed beyond the reporting requirements under 
HIPAA?  
 
Thank you for your prompt response to this very important matter. As UHG continues to 
investigate the breadth and scope of the February 21 attack on its systems, I ask that you continue 
to keep members of this Committee informed.  
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
____________________________  
Bill Cassidy, M.D.  
Ranking Member  
U.S. Senate Committee on Health,  
Education, Labor, and Pensions 
 