CMS Statement on Continued Action to Respond to the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare | CMS Skip to main content Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services CMS Newsroom Search the Newsroom Search Search CMS Global Secondary Menu About CMS Newsroom Data & Research Newsroom Newsroom Menu Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Newsroom Press Kit Data Contact CMS.gov Home About CMS Data & Research Search Suggestions Search Newsroom Homepage Press Releases CMS Statement On Continued Action To Respond To The Cyberattack On Change Healthcare Press Releases Mar 09, 2024 CMS Statement on Continued Action to Respond to the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare Billing & payments Share The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is continuing to monitor and assess the impact that the cyberattack on UnitedHealth Group’s subsidiary Change Healthcare has had on all provider and supplier types. Today, CMS is announcing that, in addition to considering applications for accelerated payments for Medicare Part A providers, we will also be considering applications for advance payments for Part B suppliers. Over the last few days, we have continued to meet with health plans, providers and suppliers to hear about their most pressing concerns. As announced previously, we have directed our Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs) to expedite actions needed for providers and suppliers to change the clearinghouse they use and to accept paper claims if providers need to use that method. We will continue to respond to provider and supplier inquiries regarding MAC processes. CMS also recognizes that many Medicaid providers are deeply affected by the impact of the cyberattack. We are continuing to work closely with States and are urging Medicaid managed care plans to make prospective payments to impacted providers, as well. All MACs will provide public information on how to submit a request for a Medicare accelerated or advance payment on their websites as early as today, Saturday, March 9. CMS looks forward to continuing to support the provider community during this difficult situation. All affected providers should reach out to health plans and other payers for assistance with the disruption. CMS has encouraged Medicare Advantage (MA) organizations to offer advance funding to providers affected by this cyberattack. The rules governing CMS’s payments to MA organizations and Part D sponsors remain unchanged. Please note that nothing in this statement speaks to the arrangements between MA organizations or Part D sponsors and their contracted providers or facilities. For more information view the Fact Sheet: https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/change-healthcare/optum-payment-disruption-chopd-accelerated-payments-part-providers-and-advance ### Previous Newsroom Article Next Newsroom Article Related Releases Press Releases Jun 11, 2026 CMS Takes Bold New Approach to Stewarding Medicaid Demonstration Project Spending Press Releases Jun 04, 2024 Biden-Harris Administration Expands Access to Mental Health and Substance Use Services with Addition of 10 New States to CCBHC Medicaid Demonstration Program Press Releases Mar 19, 2024 Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Initiative to Increase Investments in Person-Centered Primary Care Press Releases Mar 12, 2024 CMS Statement Following Health Care Payer and Provider Roundtable on the Cyberattack on Change Healthcare Contact us CMS News and Media Group Catherine Howden, Director Media Inquiries Form 202-690-6145 Get email updates Sign up to get the latest information about your choice of CMS topics. You can decide how often to receive updates. Email Sign up - opens in a new window Sign up CMS & HHS Websites CMS & HHS Websites Medicare.gov Medicaid.gov InsureKidsNow.gov HealthCare.gov HHS.gov HHS.gov/Open About CMS About CMS About Us Careers Newsroom Tools Tools Acronyms Archive Contacts Glossary Helpful Links Helpful Links Privacy Policy Plain Language Privacy Settings Nondiscrimination & Accessibility Developer Information Vulnerability Disclosure Policy USA Government Sites USA Government Sites Freedom of Information Act No Fear Act Inspector General USA.gov Connect with CMS Linkedin link Youtube link Facebook link Twitter link RSS Feed link A federal government website managed and paid for by the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244