On Feb. 21, Change Healthcare, a subsidiary of UnitedHealth Group, was the victim of the most significant and 
consequential cyberattack on the U.S. health care system in American history. Change Healthcare processes 15 
billion health care transactions annually and touches 1 in every 3 patient records. These transactions include a 
range of services that directly affect patient care, including eligibility verifications and pharmacy operations, as 
well as claims transmittals and payment. Since this attack, patients have struggled to get timely access to care and 
billions of dollars have stopped flowing to providers, thereby threatening the financial viability of hospitals, health 
systems, physician offices and other providers.
The American Hospital Association fielded a survey to all U.S. hospitals on the impact of the Change Healthcare 
cyberattack  The following results represent responses from nearly 1,000 hospitals and were collected between 
Friday, March 9, 2024 and Tuesday, March 12, 2024.
© 2024 American Hospital Association   |   March 2024   |  www.aha.org
AHA Survey 
Change Healthcare Cyberattack 
Having Significant Disruptions on 
Patient Care, Hospitals’ Finances 
94% 
of hospitals report financial impact, with more than 
half reporting “significant or serious” impact.
•  82% of hospitals report impacts on their cash flow. Of these:
•   More than 33% report impact to more than half of their revenue.
•  Nearly 60% report that the impacts to revenue is $1 million per day or greater.
•  44% report they expect the negative impact on revenue to continue for  
2-4 more months.
•   There is still substantial uncertainty over revenue cycle impacts, with  
more than 20% currently uncertain of the magnitude of the impacts.
Most hospitals are implementing workarounds,  
but they are labor intensive and costly.
•  67% report it is “difficult or very difficult” to switch clearinghouses.
•  81% have found the workarounds to be only somewhat successful, while an 
additional 11% have not found them to be successful.
74% 
of hospitals report direct patient care impact.
•  Nearly 40% report patients having difficulty accessing care because of delays 
in processing of health plan utilization requirements (e.g. prior authorization).