ANALOG DEVICES INC (ADI) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: ANALOG DEVICES INC
Ticker: ADI
CIK: 6281
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-01-23

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance practices to shareholders, seeking their valuable perspective and feedback. We look forward to our continued engagement and collaboration in 2026 and beyond. 
 
JANENE ASGEIRSSON 
Chief Legal Officer and Corporate Secretary 
 
 
Board Policies and Practices 
We periodically review our corporate governance policies and practices and compare them to those suggested by various authorities in corporate governance and the practices of other public companies. For more information about recent changes we made to our corporate governance policies and practices, please see the What’s New section on page 5 of this Proxy Statement. 
We have long believed that good corporate governance is important to ensure that ADI is managed for the long-term benefit of our shareholders. As a result, we have adopted the following policies and procedures that we believe are in the best interests of ADI and our shareholders: 
 
 Policy/Practice Summary 
 
 
Corporate Governance Guidelines 
Our Board of Directors has adopted Corporate Governance Guidelines for ADI that establish a common set of expectations to assist our Board of Directors and its committees in performing their duties. Our Board of Directors reviews these guidelines at least annually and updates them as necessary to reflect changing regulatory requirements and evolving practices. 
 
 
 
Declassified Board of Directors 
Our Bylaws provide that each director will serve for a term ending on the date of the annual meeting following the one at which such director was elected. 
 
 
 
Majority Voting for Election of Directors 
Our Bylaws provide for a majority voting standard in uncontested director elections, so a director nominee is elected to our Board of Directors if the votes “for” that director exceed the votes “against” (with abstentions and broker non-votes not counted as for or against the election). If a director nominee does not receive more for votes than against votes, the director must offer his or her resignation, which our Board of Directors must determine whether to accept, and we will publicly disclose the results of such determination. 
 
 
 
Director Overboarding 
So that each director is able to devote adequate time to their duties to ADI, our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that our directors shall not serve on the board of directors of more than three other public companies. All of our director nominees are in compliance with this requirement. 
 
 
 
Executive Sessions 
At least twice per year, our Board of Directors holds executive sessions with our independent, non-employee directors, as defined under the Nasdaq Rules. Our Lead Independent Director, Mr. Jennings, presides at these independent director executive sessions. In addition, the committees of our Board of Directors regularly hold executive sessions without management present and with their advisors. 
 
 
 
No Hedging and No Pledging Policy 
We prohibit all hedging transactions or short sales involving ADI securities by our directors and employees, including our executive officers. Since January 2013, we have prohibited our directors and executive officers from holding any ADI securities in a margin account, and from any future pledging of their ADI securities as collateral for a loan. 
 
 
 
Equity Award Grant Date Policy 
We do not time or select the grant dates of any stock options or stock-based awards in coordination with our release of material non-public information, nor do we have any program, plan, or practice to do so. In addition, our Compensation and Talent Committee has adopted specific written policies regarding the grant dates of equity awards made to our directors, executive officers, and employees. See

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis , executive compensation tables, and accompanying narrative disclosures in this Proxy Statement. 
3. The ratification of the selection of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year ending October 31, 2026. 
4. The approval of the Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan. 
5. A shareholder proposal, if properly presented at the Annual Meeting. 
The shareholders will also act on any other business that may properly come before the meeting or any postponement, adjournment, rescheduling, or continuation of the Annual Meeting. 
Q: Who can vote? 
A: To be able to vote, you must have been an ADI shareholder of record at the close of business on January 8, 2026. This date is the record date for the Annual Meeting. The number of shares entitled to vote on each proposal at the Annual Meeting is 488,628,595 shares of our common stock. 
Q: How many votes do I have? 
A: Each share of our common stock that you own on the record date entitles you to one vote on each matter that is voted on. 
Q: Is my vote important? 
A: Yes. Your vote is important no matter how many shares you own. Please take the time to vote. Take a moment to read the instructions below. Choose the way to vote that is easiest and most convenient for you and cast your vote as soon as possible. 
Q: How do I vote? 
A: If you are the “record holder” of your shares, meaning that you own your shares in your own name and not through a bank, broker, or other nominee, you may vote in one of four ways. 
1. By Internet. If you have Internet access, you may vote by proxy from any location in the world by going to proxyvote.com and following the Internet voting instructions on the Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials or the proxy card. Proxies submitted via the Internet must be received by 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time on March 10, 2026. 
2. By telephone. You may vote by proxy by calling 1-800-690-6903 toll-free within the United States, U.S. territories and Canada and following the instructions provided by the recorded message. Proxies submitted via telephone must be received by 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time, on March 10, 2026. 
3. By mail. If you received a printed proxy card, you may vote by proxy by completing and signing the proxy card and promptly mailing it in the enclosed postage-prepaid envelope. You do not need to put a stamp on the enclosed envelope if you mail it in the United States. The shares you own will be voted according to your instructions on the proxy card that you mail. If you return the proxy card, but do not give any instructions on a particular matter described in this Proxy Statement, the shares you own will be voted in accordance with the recommendations of our Board of Directors. The Board of Directors recommends that you vote FOR each director nominee, FOR each of Proposals 2, 3, and 4, and AGAINST Proposal 5. 
4. In person. If you attend the Annual Meeting, you may vote by delivering your completed proxy card in person or by completing a ballot. Ballots will be available at the Annual Meeting. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
93 
Q: Can I vote if my shares are held in “street name”? 
A: If the ADI shares that you own are held in “street name” by a bank, broker, or other nominee, your bank, broker, or other nominee is considered, with respect to those shares, the record holder of your shares, and is required to vote your shares according to your instructions. In order to vote your shares, you will need to follow the instructions that your bank, broker, or other nominee provides you. Many banks, brokers, or other nominees also offer the option of submitting voting instructions over the Internet or by telephone, instructions for which would be provided by your bank, broker, or other nominee on your voting instruction form. 
If you hold shares through an account with a broker, the voting of shares by such broker when you do not provide voting instructions is governed by applicable stock exchange rules. These rules allow brokers to vote shares at their discretion on certain matters for which their customers do not provide voting instructions. The ratification of the selection of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal year 2026 (Proposal 3) is a proposal on which your broker is expected to be able to vote even if it does not receive instructions from you, so long as it holds your shares in its name. The election of directors (Proposal 1), the “say-on-pay” advisory vote (Proposal 2), the approval of the Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (Proposal 4), and the shareholder proposal (Proposal 5) are proposals on which your bank, broker, or other nominee may not vote if you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to these proposals. “Broker non-votes” are shares that are held in “street name” by a bank, broker, or other nominee that indicates on its proxy that it does not have or did not exercise discretionary authority to vote on a particular proposal. 
If your shares are held in “street name” as of the record date January 8, 2026, you must bring an account statement or letter from your broker or other nominee, showing that you are the beneficial owner of the shares as of the record date in order to be admitted to the Annual Meeting on March 11, 2026. To be able to vote your shares held in “street name” at the Annual Meeting, you need to obtain a legal proxy from your bank, broker, or other nominee, issued in your name giving the right to vote your shares. 
Q: Can I change my vote or revoke my proxy after I have mailed my proxy card or after I have voted my shares over the Internet or by telephone? 
A: Yes. If you are the “record holder” of your shares, you can revoke your proxy or change your vote at any time before the polls close at the Annual Meeting by doing any one of the following things: 
u voting by proxy over the Internet or by telephone as instructed above (only your latest Internet or telephone vote is counted); 
u signing and returning another proxy card with a later date; 
u giving our Corporate Secretary a written notice before the meeting that you want to revoke your proxy; or 
u attending the Annual Meeting, requesting that your proxy be revoked and voting in person as instructed above. 
Your attendance at the Annual Meeting alone will not revoke your proxy. 
If your shares are held in “street name,” you may submit a new, later-dated voting instruction form or contact your bank, broker, or other nominee. You may also vote in person at the Annual Meeting if you obtain a legal proxy as described in the answer to the question entitled “Can I vote if my shares are held in ‘street name’”? 
Q: What constitutes a quorum? 
A: In order for business to be conducted at the Annual Meeting, a quorum must be present in person or represented by valid proxies. For each of the proposals to be presented at the Annual Meeting, a quorum consists of the holders of a majority of the shares of common stock issued and outstanding on January 8, 2026, the record date, or at least 244,314,298 shares. 
Shares of common stock represented in person or by proxy (including “broker non-votes” and shares that abstain or do not vote with respect to a particular proposal) will be counted for the purpose of determining whether a quorum exists at the Annual Meeting for that proposal. If a quorum is not present, the Annual Meeting will be adjourned until a quorum is obtained. 
Q: What vote is required for each proposal? 
A: Election of directors (Proposal 1). Under our Bylaws, a nominee will be elected to the Board of Directors if the votes cast “for” the nominee’s election exceed the votes cast “against” the nominee’s election, with abstentions and “broker non-votes” not counting as votes “for” or “against.” If the shares you own are held in “street name” by a bank, broker, or other nominee, your bank, broker, or other nominee, as the record holder of your shares, is required to vote your shares according to your instructions. If you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to this proposal, your bank, broker, or other nominee may not vote your shares with respect to the election of directors. If an incumbent director nominee in an uncontested election of directors receives a majority of votes “against” his or her election, the director must tender a resignation from the Board of Directors. The Board of Directors will then decide whether to accept the resignation within 90 days following certification of the shareholder vote (based on the recommendation of a committee of independent directors). We will publicly disclose the Board of Directors’ decision and its reasoning with regard to the offered resignation. 
 
 
94 
Q&A About Annual Meeting and Voting 
“Say-on-Pay” (Proposal 2). Our Board of Directors is seeking a non-binding advisory vote regarding the compensation of our NEOs, as described in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis , executive compensation tables and accompanying narrative disclosures contained in this proxy statement. Under our Bylaws, the affirmative vote of a majority of the total number of votes cast on the proposal is needed to approve this resolution. The vote is advisory and non-binding in nature but our Compensation and Talent Committee will take into account the outcome of the vote when considering future executive compensation arrangements. If you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to this proposal, your bank, broker, or other nominee may not vote your shares with respect to this proposal. 
Ratification of selection of independent registered public accounting firm (Proposal 3). Under our Bylaws, the affirmative vote of a majority of the total number of votes cast on the proposal is needed to ratify the selection of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal year 2026. Even if you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to this proposal, your bank, broker, or other nominee may vote your shares with respect to this proposal. 
Approval of the Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (Proposal 4). Under our Bylaws, the affirmative vote of a majority of the total number of votes cast on the proposal is needed to approve the Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan. If you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to Proposal 4, your bank, broker, or other nominee may not vote your shares with respect to the proposal. 
Shareholder proposal (Proposal 5). Under our Bylaws, the affirmative vote of a majority of the total number of votes cast on the proposal is needed to approve the shareholder proposal. If you do not instruct your bank, broker, or other nominee how to vote with respect to Proposal 5, your bank, broker, or other nominee may not vote your shares with respect to the proposal. 
Q: How will votes be counted? 
A: Each share of common stock will be counted as one vote according to the instructions contained on a properly completed proxy card, whether submitted by mail, over the Internet or by telephone, or on a ballot voted in person at the Annual Meeting. With respect to all proposals, shares will not be voted in favor of the matter, and will not be counted as voting on the matter, if they either (1) abstain from voting on a particular matter, or (2) are “broker non-votes.” Banks, brokers, and other nominees who do not receive instructions with respect to Proposals 1, 2, 4, or 5 will not be allowed to vote these shares, and all such shares will be “broker non-votes” rather than votes “for” or ”against”. Accordingly, assuming the presence of a quorum, abstentions and “broker non-votes” for a particular proposal will not be counted as votes cast to determine the outcome of a particular proposal. 
Q: Who will count the votes? 
A: The votes will be counted, tabulated, and certified by Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. 
Q: Will my vote be kept confidential? 
A: Yes, your vote will be kept confidential and we will not disclose your vote, unless (1) we are required to do so by law (including in connection with the pursuit or defense of a legal or administrative action or proceeding), or (2) there is a contested election for the Board of Directors. The tabulation agent will forward any written comments that you make on the proxy card to management without providing your name unless you expressly request disclosure on your proxy card. 
Q: How does the Board of Directors recommend that I vote on the proposals? 
A: The Board of Directors recommends that you vote: 
FOR the election of each of the 10 nominees to serve as directors on the Board of Directors, each for a term expiring at the next annual meeting of shareholders (Proposal 1); 
FOR the approval, by non-binding “say-on-pay” vote, of the compensation of our NEOs, as described in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis , executive compensation tables and accompanying narrative disclosures contained in this Proxy Statement (Proposal 2); 
FOR the ratification of the selection of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for fiscal year 2026 (Proposal 3); 
FOR the approval of Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan (Proposal 4); and 
AGAINST the shareholder proposal (Proposal 5). 
Q: Will any other matters be voted on at this meeting? 
A: No. Under the laws of Massachusetts, where we are incorporated, an item may not be brought before our shareholders at a meeting unless it appears in the notice of the meeting. Our Bylaws establish the process for a shareholder to bring a matter before a meeting. See “ Additional Information ” below. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
95 
Q: Where can I find the voting results? 
A: We will report the voting results in a Form 8-K filed with the SEC within four business days after the conclusion of the Annual Meeting. 
Q: What are the costs of soliciting these proxies and who will pay? 
A: Our Board of Directors is soliciting proxies for the matters to be voted on, and we will bear the costs of the solicitation. We have engaged Alliance Advisors LLC to assist us with the solicitation of proxies and expect to pay Alliance Advisors approximately $19,000 for their services. In addition to solicitations by mail, Alliance Advisors and our directors, officers and regular employees may solicit proxies by telephone, email, and personal interviews without additional remuneration. We will request brokers, custodians, and fiduciaries to forward proxy soliciting material to the owners of shares of our common stock that they hold in their names. We will reimburse banks and brokers for their reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with the distribution of our proxy materials. 
Q: Why did I receive a “Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials” but no proxy materials? 
A: We are distributing our proxy materials to shareholders via the Internet under the “Notice and Access” approach permitted by the rules of the SEC. This approach expedites shareholders’ receipt of proxy materials while conserving natural resources and reducing our distribution costs. On or about January 23, 2026, we mailed a Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials to participating shareholders containing instructions on how to access the proxy materials on the Internet, and if desired, to request to receive a paper copy of our proxy materials by mail. 
Q: How can I obtain an Annual Report on Form 10-K? 
A: Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 1, 2025 is available on our website at https://investor.analog.com/financial-info/annual-reports. If you would like a copy of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal year 2025 and/or any of its exhibits, we will send you such materials without charge. Please contact: 
Investor Relations Department 
Analog Devices, Inc. 
One Analog Way 
Wilmington, Massachusetts 01887 
Phone: 781-461-3282 
Email: investor.relations@analog.com 
Q: Whom should I contact if I have any questions? 
A: If you have any questions about the Annual Meeting or your ownership of our common stock, please contact our Investor Relations Department, at the address, telephone number or email address listed above. 
 
 
96 
Q&A About Annual Meeting and Voting 
Additional Information 
Other Matters 
Our Board of Directors does not know of any other matters that may come before the Annual Meeting. However, if any other matters are properly presented at the Annual Meeting, it is the intention of the persons named as proxies to vote, or otherwise act, in accordance with their judgment on such matters. 
Shareholder Proposals for Inclusion in Proxy Statement 
If you are interested in submitting a proposal for inclusion in our proxy statement for the 2027 annual meeting of shareholders, you need to follow the procedures outlined in Rule 14a-8 of the Exchange Act. To be eligible for inclusion, we must receive your shareholder proposal for our proxy statement for the 2027 annual meeting of shareholders at our principal corporate offices in Wilmington, Massachusetts at the address below no later than September 25, 2026. 
Shareholder Director Nominations for Inclusion in Proxy Statement 
Our Board of Directors has implemented a proxy access provision in our Bylaws, which allows a shareholder or group of up to 20 shareholders owning in aggregate 3% or more of our outstanding shares of common stock continuously for at least three years to nominate and include in our proxy materials director nominees constituting up to 20% of the number of directors in office or two nominees, whichever is greater, provided the shareholder(s) and nominee(s) satisfy the requirements in the Bylaws. If a shareholder or group of shareholders wishes to nominate one or more director candidates to be included in our proxy statement pursuant to these proxy access provisions in Article I, Section 1.9(c) of our Bylaws, the Corporate Secretary must receive advance written notice at the address noted below not less than 120 days nor more than 150 days before the first anniversary of the preceding year’s annual meeting. However, if the date of our annual meeting of shareholders is advanced by more than 20 days, or delayed by more than 60 days, from the anniversary date, or if no annual meeting was held in the preceding year, then we must receive such notice at the address noted below not earlier than the 150th day before such annual meeting and not later than the close of business on the later of (1) the 120th day prior to such annual meeting and (2) the seventh day after the day on which notice of the meeting date was mailed or public disclosure was made, whichever occurs first. Assuming that the 2027 annual meeting of shareholders is not advanced by more than 20 days nor delayed by more than 60 days from the anniversary date of the Annual Meeting, you would need to give us appropriate notice at the address noted below no earlier than October 12, 2026, and no later than November 11, 2026. 
Shareholder Proposals and Director Nominations Not Included in Proxy Statement 
In addition, our Bylaws require that we be given advance written notice for nominations for election to our Board of Directors and other matters that shareholders wish to present for action at an annual meeting of shareholders other than those to be included in our proxy statement under Rule 14a-8. The Corporate Secretary must receive such notice at the address noted below not less than 90 days or more than 120 days before the first anniversary of the preceding year’s annual meeting of shareholders. However, if the date of our annual meeting of shareholders is advanced by more than 20 days, or delayed by more than

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
nnual Meeting? 
A: At the Annual Meeting, shareholders will consider and vote on the following matters: 
1. The election of the 10 nominees named in this Proxy Statement to our Board of Directors, each for a term expiring at the next annual meeting of shareholders. 
2. The approval, by non-binding “say-on-pay” vote, of the compensation of our NEOs, as described in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis , executive compensation tables, and accompanying narrative disclosures in this Proxy Statement. 
3. The ratification of the selection of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for the fiscal year ending October 31, 2026. 
4. The approval of the Amended and Restated Analog Devices, Inc. 2020 Equity Incentive Plan. 
5. A shareholder proposal, if properly presented at the Annual Meeting. 
The shareholders will also act on any other business that may properly come before the meeting or any postponement, adjournment, rescheduling, or continuation of the Annual Meeting. 
Q: Who can vote? 
A: To be able to vote, you must have been an ADI shareholder of record at the close of business on January 8, 2026. This date is the record date for the Annual Meeting. The number of shares entitled to vote on each proposal at the Annual Meeting is 488,628,595 shares of our common stock. 
Q: How many votes do I have? 
A: Each share of our common stock that you own on the record date entitles you to one vote on each matter that is voted on. 
Q: Is my vote important? 
A: Yes. Your vote is important no matter how many shares you own. Please take the time to vote. Take a moment to read the instructions below. Choose the way to vote that is easiest and most convenient for you and cast your vote as soon as possible. 
Q: How do I vote? 
A: If you are the “record holder” of your shares, meaning that you own your shares in your own name and not through a bank, broker, or other nominee, you may vote in one of four ways. 
1. By Internet. If you have Internet access, you may vote by proxy from any location in the world by going to proxyvote.com and following the Internet voting instructions on the Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials or the proxy card. Proxies submitted via the Internet must be received by 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time on March 10, 2026. 
2. By telephone. You may vote by proxy by calling 1-800-690-6903 toll-free within the United States, U.S. territories and Canada and following the instructions provided by the recorded message. Proxies submitted via telephone must be received by 11:59 p.m. Eastern Time, on March 10, 2026. 
3. By mail. If you received a printed proxy card, you may vote by proxy by completing and signing the proxy card and promptly mailing it in the enclosed postage-prepaid envelope. You do not need to put a stamp on the enclosed envelope if you mail it in the United States. The shares you own will be voted according to your instructions on the proxy card that you mail. If you return the proxy card, but do not give any instructions on a particular matter described in this Proxy Statement, the shares you own will be voted in accordance with the recommendations of our Board of Directors. The Board of Directors recommends that you vote FOR each director nominee, FOR each of Proposals 2, 3, and 4, and AGAINST Proposal 5. 
4. In person. If you attend the Annual Meeting, you may vote by delivering your completed proxy card in person or by completing a ballot. Ballots will be available at the Annual Meeting. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
93 
Q: Can I vote if my shares are held in “street name”? 
A: If the ADI shares that you own are held in “street name” by a bank, broker, or other nominee, your bank, broker, or other nominee is considered, with respect to those shares, the record holder of your shares, and is required to vote your shares according to your instructions. In order to vote your shares, you will need to follow the instructions that your bank, broker, or other nominee provides you. Many banks, brokers, or other nominees also offer the option of submitting voting instructions over the Internet or by telephone, instructions for which would be provided by your bank, broker, or other nominee on your voting instruction form. 
If you hold shares through an account with a broker, the voting of shares by such broker when you do not provide voting instructions is governed by applicable stock exchange rules. These rules allow brokers to vote shares at their discretion on

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions 
Transactions with Related Persons 
There were no related person transactions that would require disclosure under Item 404 of Regulation S-K under the Exchange Act since the beginning of fiscal year 2025 through the date of this Proxy Statement. 
Policies and Procedures for Related Person Transactions 
Our Board of Directors has adopted written policies and procedures for the review of any transaction, arrangement, or relationship in which ADI or any of its subsidiaries is a participant, the amount involved exceeds or is expected to exceed $120,000, and one of our executive officers, directors, director nominees, 5% shareholders, or any of their immediate family members, each of whom we refer to as a related person, has a direct or indirect material interest. 
If a related person proposes to enter into such a transaction, arrangement, or relationship, which we refer to as a related person transaction, the related person must report the proposed related person transaction to our Chief Legal Officer. The policy calls for the proposed related person transaction to be reviewed and, if deemed appropriate, approved by the
