BRISTOL MYERS SQUIBB CO (BMY) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: BRISTOL MYERS SQUIBB CO
Ticker: BMY
CIK: 14272
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-25

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that the independent Directors will designate a Lead Independent Director when the Board Chair is not an independent Director. The independent Directors of the Board have elected Mr. Samuels to serve in that position. The robust duties of the Lead Independent Director, who is selected annually by the Company’s independent Directors, provide for effective, appropriate safeguards and oversight. The role of the Lead Independent Director at the Company is modeled on the role of an independent Board chair, ensuring a strong, independent and active Board. The Lead Independent Director’s responsibilities include: 
• serving as liaison between the independent Directors and the Board Chair and Chief Executive Officer; 
• reviewing and approving meeting agendas and sufficiency of time; 
• calling meetings of the independent Directors; 
• presiding at all meetings of the independent Directors and any Board meeting when the Board Chair and Chief Executive Officer is not present, including executive sessions of the independent Directors; 
• approving the quality, quantity and timeliness of information sent to the Board; 
• serving a key role in Board and Chief Executive Officer evaluations; 
• engaging with, and responding directly to, shareholder and stakeholder questions, as appropriate; 
• providing feedback from executive sessions of the independent Directors to the Board Chair and Chief Executive Officer and other senior management; 
• recommending outside advisors and consultants; and 
• conducting, along with the Committee on Directors and Corporate Governance, an annual assessment of the Board and Committees. 
Several features of our governance structure work together to ensure independent oversight of the Company. 
The Board ensures independent oversight of the company through the Lead Independent Director role and other features of its governance structure, such as providing independent Directors with the ability to effectively oversee the company’s management. Key features of independent oversight include: 
• Director independence: Currently, 10 of the 11 Director nominees are independent. 
• Fully independent Board Committees: All members of the Audit Committee, Compensation and Management Development Committee, Committee on Directors and Corporate Governance and Science and Technology Committee are “independent” in accordance with or as defined in the rules adopted by the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange and the Company’s own Corporate Governance Guidelines. 
• Continued Board refreshment: The Board continually reviews its composition with a focus on refreshing necessary skills sets to oversee management’s execution of the company’s strategy. Over the last five years, the Board has added four new Directors, expanding the depth of experience in the areas of finance, strategic leadership, science and industry knowledge. 
• Regular executive sessions: Executive sessions of the independent Directors of the Board generally take place at every regular Board meeting. In addition, each of the Board’s Committees hold regularly scheduled executive sessions without management present. 
• Independent evaluation of Chief Executive Officer performance: The company’s fully independent Compensation and Management Development Committee is responsible for performing an annual evaluation of the Chief Executive Officer based on his performance objectives. 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 121 
 
 
 Shareholder Proposal 
In summary, the Board believes that the Board’s fiduciary duties are best satisfied by retaining the flexibility to determine a leadership structure that serves the best interests of the Company and its shareholders at any given time and not restricting the Board’s ability to select the individual best suited to serve as Board Chair. The Board annually reviews the Company’s governance structure, and will continue to do so; however, the Board believes the current leadership model, when combined with our independent Board governance structure, strikes the appropriate balance between strong and consistent leadership and independent and effective oversight of the Company’s business and affairs. At the 2024 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, the last meeting in which the Company received a proposal regarding the separation of Board Chair and Chief Executive Officer roles, the proposal received 31.8% support of the votes cast. Given the current needs of the Company and the strong role of the Lead Independent Director, the Board believes that it continues to be in the best interests of the Company and its shareholders to combine the roles of Board Chair and Chief Executive Officer. For these reasons, the Board recommends that you vote against this proposal. 
 
 
 
 
Accordingly, the Board of Directors unanimously recommends a vote “AGAINST” this proposal. 
 
122 Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
Voting Securities and Principal Holders 
At the close of business on March 12, 2026, there were 2,041,735,455 shares of $0.10 par value common stock and 2,246 shares of $2.00 convertible preferred stock outstanding and entitled to vote. 
Common Stock Ownership by Directors and Executive Officers 
The following table sets forth, as of March 12, 2026 (except as otherwise noted), beneficial ownership of shares of our common stock by each Director, each of our Named Executive Officers and all Directors and executive officers as a group, in each case, as of such date. Shares are beneficially owned when an individual has voting and/or investment power over the shares or could obtain voting and/or investment power over the shares within 60 days. Voting power includes the power to direct the voting of the shares and investment power includes the power to direct the disposition of the shares. Unless otherwise noted, shares listed below are owned directly or indirectly with sole voting and investment power. None of our Directors and executive officers, individually or as a group, beneficially owns greater than 1% of our outstanding shares of common or preferred stock. 
 
 Name 
Total Common Shares Owned (1) 
(#) 
Common Shares Underlying Options or Stock Units (2) 
(#) 
Common Shares Underlying Deferred Share Units (3) 
(#) 
 
 P. J. Arduini 70,858 0 70,858 
 
D. L. Bhatt, M.D., M.P.H., M.B.A. 19,242 0 19,242 
 C. Boerner, Ph.D. 146,890 0 0 
 D. V. Elkins 189,539 0 0 
 J. Haller, M.D. 134,991 83,469 37,903 
 M. Hidalgo Medina, M.D., Ph.D. 22,764 0 22,764 
 
S. Hirawat, M.D. (4) 31,925 0 0 
 A. Lenkowsky 29,287 1,374 0 
 
C. Massacesi, M.D. 0 0 0 
 
M. R. McMullen 15,980 0 14,980 
 
G. Meyers 30,361 0 0 
 P. A. Price 25,498 0 25,498 
 D. W. Rice 40,525 0 39,325 
 T. R. Samuels 105,983 0 67,883 
 K. H. Vousden, Ph.D. 41,069 0 41,069 
 P. Yale 43,327 0 43,327 
 
All Directors and Executive Officers as a Group (5) 1,069,153 84,843 382,849 
(1) Consists of direct and indirect ownership of shares, shares credited to the accounts of the executive officers under the Bristol Myers Squibb Savings and Investment Program, stock options that are currently exercisable, restricted stock units that vest within 60 days, the target number of market share units that vest within 60 days, and deferred share units. 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 123 
 
 
 Voting Securities and Principal Holders 
(2) Consists of shares underlying stock options that are currently exercisable, restricted stock units that vest within 60 days, and the target number of market share units that vest within 60 days. None of these shares have any voting rights. 
(3) Consists of deferred share units that are valued according to the market value and shareholder return on equivalent shares of common stock. Deferred share units have no voting rights. 
(4) Dr. Hirawat departed from the Company effective November 1, 2025. Represents shares beneficially owned as of March 17, 2026, as provided by Dr. Hirawat’s broker. 
(5) Includes 25 individuals. 
Principal Holders of Voting Securities 
The following table sets forth, as of March 12, 2026, information regarding beneficial owners of more than 5% of the outstanding shares of our common stock. There are no beneficial owners of more than 5% of the outstanding shares of our preferred stock. 
 
 Name Number of Shares Beneficially Owned
(#) Percent of Class
(%) 
 
 
Vanguard Group Inc. 
100 Vanguard Blvd 
Malvern, PA 19355 198,155,594 
(1) 9.74 % 
(1) 
 
BlackRock, Inc. 
50 Hudson Yards 
New York, NY 10001 143,574,230 
(2) 7.1 % 
(2) 
(1) This information is based on the Schedule 13G/A filed by The Vanguard Group with the SEC on February 13, 2024 reporting beneficial ownership as of December 31, 2023. The reporting person has sole voting power with respect to zero shares, shared voting power with respect to 2,641,512 shares, sole dispositive power with respect to 189,047,539 shares, and shared dispositive power with respect to 9,108,055 shares. 
(2) This information is based on the Schedule 13G/A filed by BlackRock, Inc. with the SEC on April 17, 2025 reporting beneficial ownership as of March 31, 2025. The reporting person has sole voting power with respect to 128,678,276 shares, shared voting power with respect to zero shares, sole dispositive power with respect to 143,574,230 shares, and shared dispositive power with respect to zero shares. 
Insider Trading Policy and Policy on Hedging and Pledging 
Our securities trading policy prohibits all employees, including Directors and executive officers, from engaging in any speculative or hedging transactions. Our securities trading policy also prohibits all employees, including Directors and executive officers, from holding our securities in a margin account or pledging our securities as collateral for a loan except in certain limited circumstances pre-approved by our Corporate Secretary when a person wishes to pledge our securities as collateral for a loan and clearly demonstrates the ability to repay the loan without selling such securities. None of our Directors or executive officers has pledged shares of our stock as collateral for a loan or holds shares of our stock in a margin account. 
124 Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
Other Matters 
Advance Notice Procedures 
As set forth in our Bylaws, if you wish to propose any action, including the nomination of Directors, at next year’s annual meeting, you must deliver notice to BMS containing certain information set forth in our Bylaws, not less than 90 but not more than 120 days before the anniversary of the prior year’s annual meeting. For our 2027 Annual Meeting, we must receive this notice between January 5, 2027 and February 4, 2027. These requirements are separate and distinct from the SEC requirements that a shareholder must meet to have a shareholder proposal included in our proxy statement. For further information on how a shareholder may nominate a candidate to serve as a Director, please see page 9. 
In addition to satisfying the foregoing advance notice requirements under our Bylaws, to comply with the universal proxy rules under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, shareholders who intend to solicit proxies in support of Director nominees other than the company’s nominees must provide notice that sets forth the information required by Rule 14a-19 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, no later than March 6, 2027. 
Our Bylaws are available on our website at https://www.bms.com/about-us/our-company/governance.html. In addition, a copy of the Bylaw provisions discussed above may be obtained by writing to us at our principal executive offices, Bristol- Myers Squibb Company, Route 206 & Province Line Road, Princeton, NJ 08543, Attention: Corporate Secretary. 
2027 Shareholder Proposals 
Shareholder proposals relating to our 2027 Annual Meeting of Shareholders must be received by us at our principal executive offices, Bristol Myers Squibb, Route 206 & Province Line Road, Princeton, NJ 08543, Attention: Corporate Secretary, no later than November 25, 2026. Such proposals must comply with SEC regulations under Rule 14a-8 regarding the inclusion of shareholder proposals in company sponsored proxy materials. Shareholders are encouraged to contact the Office of the Corporate Secretary prior to submitting a shareholder proposal or any time they have a concern. At the direction of the Board of Directors, the Office of the Corporate Secretary acts as corporate governance liaison to shareholders. 
Availability of Corporate Governance Documents 
Our Corporate Governance Guidelines (including the standards of Director independence), Principles of Integrity, Code of Ethics for Senior Financial Officers, Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Directors, additional policies and guidelines, committee charters, and links to Reports of Insider Transactions are available on our corporate governance webpage at https://www.bms.com/about-us/our-company/governance.html and are available to anyone who requests them by writing to: Corporate Secretary, Bristol Myers Squibb, Route 206 & Province Line Road, Princeton, NJ 08543. 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 125 
 
 
 
Frequently Asked Questions 
Why Am I Receiving These Materials? 
This Proxy Statement is being delivered to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on March 12, 2026, in connection with the solicitation of proxies on behalf of the Board of Directors for use at the Annual Meeting of Shareholders on May 5, 2026. We expect our proxy materials, including this Proxy Statement and the Annual Report, to be first made available to shareholders on or about March 25, 2026. Although the Annual Report and Proxy Statement are being delivered together, the Annual Report should not be deemed to be part of the Proxy Statement. 
What Is “Householding” and How Does It Work? 
“Householding” is a procedure we adopted whereby shareholders of record who have the same last name and address and who receive the proxy materials by mail will receive only one copy of the proxy materials unless we have received contrary instructions from one or more of the shareholders. This procedure reduces printing and mailing costs. If you wish to receive a separate copy of the proxy materials, now or in the future, at the same address, or if you are currently receiving multiple copies of the proxy materials at the same address and wish to receive a single copy, you may contact us by writing to Shareholder Services, Bristol Myers Squibb, Route 206 & Province Line Road, Princeton, NJ 08543, Attention: Corporate Secretary or by calling us at (212) 546-3309. If you are a beneficial owner (your shares are held in the name of a bank, broker or other holder of record), the bank, broker or other holder of record may deliver only one copy of the Proxy Statement and Annual Report, or Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials, to shareholders who have the same address unless the bank, broker or other holder 

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
In selecting the goals for inclusion in this metric, the CMDC, in consultation with our Committee on Directors and Corporate Governance, included those across the broad pillars of our strategy. For each goal, the CMDC selected objective and measurable performance metrics linked to the Company’s strategy and long-term initiatives. In particular: 
• employee culture score was set based on internal trend data covering employees’ observations focused on culture evolution, 
• progress on our patient access goals aligns to our external commitment to increase the number of low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs) with access to our medicines, and 
• sustainability goals (i) support our overall climate agenda and in particular the external commitment to net zero emissions by 2050, (ii) align to our external commitment to reduce Scopes 1, 2 and 3 (Category 3) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 54.6% by 2033 and (iii) correspond to our external commitment to have 75% of suppliers adopt science-based or science-aligned GHG emission targets by 2028. 
The selection and evaluation of these metrics were the product of a robust governance process. Namely, the goals and achievements were (i) established by the CMDC, (ii) reviewed by our Committee on Directors and Corporate Governance, which also exercises oversight responsibility for certain components of our SSI strategy, and (iii) were finalized and approved by the CMDC. 
2025 Long-Term Incentive Program Grants 
Long-Term Incentive Program 
Our long-term incentive program employs only performance-based equity for our Named Executive Officers and is designed to promote the creation of sustainable long-term value for shareholders by focusing on strong year-to-year financial and operational performance, and on the development and advancement of our pipeline over the long-term. Additionally, the design of our long-term incentive program promotes organizational alignment with our strategy and serves as a retention lever, through vesting and payout over a three-year period. 
The Committee’s Process for Granting Annual Long-Term Incentive Awards 
Long-term incentive awards are typically approved each year on the date the Committee and full Board meet during the first week of March with a grant effective date of March 10. We believe that consistent timing of equity award grants is good corporate governance and reduces the risk of selecting a grant date with a preferential stock price. 
For 2025, the Committee established annual equity award ranges for our Named Executive Officers, other than the CEO, based on competitive market levels among other factors. The CEO’s long-term incentive award level is assessed by the Committee and the Board annually. Once the grant value is established for each executive, 60% of the value is awarded as PSU grants and 40% is awarded as MSU grants. 
In determining the size of the individual long-term incentives granted to our Named Executive Officers in March 2025, the Committee considered the annual long-term incentive ranges, the executive’s performance as well as ways to motivate our Named Executive Officers to focus on the company’s long-term performance. Given that each year’s awards have an overlapping performance period from the prior year, we believe these awards provide the right balance between short-term and long-term focus. Dr. Boerner’s long-term equity award as CEO is determined annually by the Committee and the Board based on competitive benchmarks and his performance and contributions. Dr. Boerner’s March 2025 award took into account his strong performance during 2024 and a long-term incentive opportunity that was commensurate with his role as CEO and the competitive market pay for that position. 
In 2025, we continued to offer two long-term award vehicles, each of which serving a different purpose: 
• Performance Share Unit Awards : reward the achievement of key three-year end-to-end financial goals (non-GAAP Operating Income and Growth Portfolio Revenue) and the value created for shareholders as measured by relative TSR Compound Annual Growth Rate (“CAGR”) over a three-year period ending in the first quarter of the applicable payout year. 
• Market Share Unit Awards : reward the creation of incremental shareholder value over a three-year period. 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 61 
 
 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
2025 Equity Incentive Program Summary 
 
 Performance Share Unit Awards Market Share Unit Awards 
 
 Proportion of Annual Grant 60% 40% 
 Metrics & Weighting 
• Non-GAAP Operating Income: 25% 
• Growth Portfolio Revenue (Ex-FX): 40% 
• 3-Year Relative TSR CAGR: 35% Stock price appreciation or depreciation, inclusive of the value of dividends accumulated during the performance period, from the grant date (Total Return) 
 
Performance Period 
• Financial Metrics: 3-year (2025-2027) 
• Relative TSR CAGR: 3-year (March 10, 2025 to February 28, 2028) 
3-year (March 10, 2025 to February 28, 2028) 
 
 
Min / Max Payout (% of Target Units) 0% / 200% 0% / 225%* 
 Vesting 
3‑Year Cliff (3rd anniversary of grant date) 
3-Year Cliff (3rd anniversary of grant date) 
* The minimum Total Return achievement required to earn any shares from MSUs is 80% of the grant date stock price. Additionally, relative TSR Floor feature provides a minimum level of payout if BMS stock price declines from the grant date but outperforms our peers based on the TSR percentile rank. The payout factor is the greater of Total Return and rTSR Floor. 
As illustrated below, the design of our LTI program generally magnifies the impact of changes in our stock price and relative TSR CAGR performance. When our stock price declines, the value of MSU awards decreases in two ways: (i) the number of shares earned goes down and (ii) the value of those shares is less due to the lower stock price. Similarly, the value of PSU awards decreases in two ways: (i) the relative TSR CAGR metric reduces the number of shares earned (assuming our stock price declined more than our peers’ did) and (ii) the value of those shares is less due to the lower stock price. The illustration below shows how the decline in our stock price from March 2025 through the end of the year is magnified in the value of our 2025 LTI awards. For purposes of this illustration, we assume (i) year-end closing price is the stock price at the end of each performance period, (ii) target performance for the financial metrics, and (iii) accumulated value of dividends through the end of the year. 
% Change in Stock Price From Grant Date to End of 2025 
Value of 2025 PSU and MSU Awards at the End of 2025 
Notes: 
• Value of PSU and MSU awards reflects actual relative TSR CAGR / Total Return (share price plus accumulated value of dividends) experience from grant date closing price on 3/10/25 of $63.11 through the closing price on 12/31/25 of $53.94. 
• PSU value assumes target performance with respect to financial measures and reflects no payout on the portion of the PSU award that is tied to relative TSR CAGR metric. 
• MSU value assumes a below target payout of 93.8% based on the decline in the 10-day average share price between the grant date ($59.75) and 12/31/25 ($54.16 plus the accumulated value of dividends of $1.86). 
• Note that this is an illustration as of 12/31/25. The number of shares that actually vest may be more or less than described above at the end of the applicable performance periods. 
62 Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
2025 Performance Share Unit Awards 
PSU awards make up 60% of our executives’ target long-term equity incentives.The PSU awards made in 2025 are focused on motivating executives to deliver long-term top-line growth and improved profitability, while also focusing on delivering shareholder value at a rate faster than our industry peers. For the 2025 PSU awards, the following metrics and goals were applied. Payouts are interpolated for performance between threshold, target and maximum. 
2025-2027 PSU Payout Schedule 
 
 2025-2027 Cumulative 
Non-GAAP Operating Income (25%) 2025-2027 Cumulative Growth Portfolio Revenue (Ex-FX) (40%) 3-Year 
Relative TSR CAGR (35%) 
 
 Achievement
(%) Payout
(%) Achievement
(%) Payout
(%) TSR CAGR 
Percentile Payout
(%) 
 
 Maximum 108 200 106 200 10 Percentage Points Above 50%ile 200 
 Target 100 100 100 100 
50%ile 100 
 Threshold 85 50 94 50 10 Percentage Points Below 50%ile 0 
 Below Threshold 
<85% 0 <94% 0 More than 10 Percentage Points Below 50%ile 0 
For the non-GAAP Operating Income and Growth Portfolio Revenue metrics, the targets were set using the Board-approved three-year operating plan. Our Board assessed the rigor of the targets and found that they were appropriate. In addition, our Board assessed the maximum and threshold achievement levels for each of these metrics and found that they were appropriate relative to the intended motivational effect of PSUs. 
2025 Market Share Unit Awards 
MSU awards make up 40% of our executives’ target long-term equity incentives. For 2025, each grant of MSUs vests fully on the third anniversary of the grant date, and the number of shares received by an executive upon vesting increases or decreases depending on the performance of our stock price plus the value of dividends accumulated during the three-year performance period versus the grant date (Total Return). Additionally, MSUs include a relative total shareholder return feature to provide a minimum level of payout if our stock price declines from the grant date but outperforms our peers as described below (relative TSR Floor). The final payout factor is the greater of Total Return and relative TSR Floor. 
2025 MSU Payout Schedule 
 
 3-Year Total Return 3-Year relative TSR Floor 
 
 Total Return Achievement
(%) Payout
(%) relative TSR 
Achievement (%ile) Payout
(%) 
 
 Maximum 225 225 
Greater or Equal to 75%ile 100 
 Target 100 100 
Between 50%ile and 74.99%ile 50 
 Threshold 80 80 
Below 50%ile 0 
 Below Threshold <80 0 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 63 
 
 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Total Return is a ratio of the 10-day average closing stock price on the measurement date, inclusive of the value of accumulated dividends, divided by the 10-day average closing stock price on the grant date (March 10). The measurement date is the February 28 immediately preceding the vesting date. The minimum Total Return performance that must be achieved to earn any payout is 80% of the grant date stock price. The maximum payout factor on Total Return is 225% of target. Payouts are interpolated for performance between threshold, target and maximum. 
Relative TSR Floor performance is based on the TSR percentile rank among our peer companies such that a (i) TSR percentile rank below the 50 th percentile yields a 0% payout, (ii) TSR percentile rank between the 50 th and 74.99 th percentiles yields a 50% payout, and (iii) TSR percentile rank at or above the 75 th percentile yields a 100% payout. TSR Percentile Rank means the ranking of the company’s TSR (stock price appreciation or depreciation plus reinvestment of dividends) versus peer companies, expressed as a percentile ranking. There is no interpolation between these distinct points. 
At vest, a payout factor is applied to the target number of MSUs to determine the total number of units vesting. If our Total Return increases during the performance period, both the number of units and value of shares that vest increases. If our Total Return declines during the performance period, both the number of units and value of shares that vest decreases. If both our Total Return performance is below 80% and relative TSR Floor is below 50 th percentile, then the award will be forfeited. 
Other Elements of 2025 Compensation 
In addition to the components set forth above, our senior executives, including all of our Named Executive Officers, were entitled to participate in the following plans or arrangements in 2025: 
 
 
Other Elements of 2025 NEO Compensation 
 
Post-Employment Benefits 
• Change-in-Control Arrangements 
• Severance Plan 
• Non-Qualified Pension Plan (applicable only to Mr. Lenkowsky). The qualified Pension Plan was terminated on February 1, 2019. 
• Qualified and Non-Qualified Savings Plans 
 Other Compensation 
 
• Financial Planning Support, Executive Physicals, and Executive Security 
Post-Employment Benefits 
We offer certain plans which provide compensation and benefits to employees who have terminated their employment. These plans are periodically reviewed by the Committee to ensure that they are consistent with competitive market practice. The plans offered are intended to enhance our ability to attract and retain key talent. 
Change-in-Control Arrangements 
Prior to January 1, 2026, we maintained change-in-control agreements with certain executive officers, including the CEO and other Named Executive Officers. These agreements were designed to enable management to evaluate and support potential transactions that might be beneficial to shareholders even though the result would be a change-in-control of BMS. Additionally, the agreements provided for continuity of management in the event of a change-in-control. These agreements required a “double-trigger” before any payments would be made to an executive. This means that payments would only be made in the event of a change-in-control and subsequent involuntary termination or termination for good reason by the employee within 24 months after a change-in-control. 
The change-in-control agreements did not provide gross up compensation on excess parachute payments for any of our executives, including our Named Executive Officers. 
64 Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
 
 
 
 
The value of this benefit for our Named Executive Officers is shown in the “Post-Termination Benefits” section beginning on page 90. 
 
Effective on and after January 1, 2026, change-in-control severance benefits are made available to our executive officers under the terms of the Bristol Myers Squibb Severance Benefits Plan (the “Severance Plan”), rather than the change-in-control agreements. 
Severance Plan 
The Severance Plan is intended to provide a competitive level of severance protection for executive officers (including our CEO and Named Executive Officers) and certain other employees to help us attract and retain key talent necessary to run our company. The Severance Plan became effective as of April 15, 2025 and, for our senior executives, replaced the Bristol Myers Squibb Senior Executive Severance Plan with respect to severance benefits outside of a change-in-control. Effective on and after January 1, 2026, senior executives (including our Named Executive Officer) are also eligible for change-in-control severance benefits through the Severance Plan. 
Like the change-in-control agreements, the Severance Plan requires a “double-trigger” before any change-in-control severance benefits are made to an executive. The Severance Plan also does not provide for gross-up compensation on excess parachute payments for any of our executives, including our Named Executive Officers, and it will continue to be our policy on a go-forward basis not to enter into any gross-up arrangements with any of our Named Executive Officers. 
 
 
 
 
The value of this benefit for our Named Executive Officers is shown in the “Post-Termination Benefits” section beginning on page 90. 
 
Savings Plans 
Our savings plans allow employees to receive matching contributions from BMS to supplement their savings and retirement income. The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company Savings and Investment Program (Savings Plan or U.S. SIP) is a tax-qualified 401(k) plan, as defined under IRS regulations, and the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company Benefit Equalization Plan—Savings and Investment Program (BEP-Savings Plan or BEP-SIP) is a non-qualified deferred compensation plan that allows certain eligible employees to defer a portion of their total eligible cash compensation and to receive matching contribution credits from BMS in excess of contributions allowed under the Savings Plan. 
The savings plans are designed to allow employees to accumulate savings for retirement on a tax-advantaged basis. For 2025, the company matching contribution under the Savings Plan equals 100% of the first 6% of eligible compensation (generally, base salary and annual incentive) that an employee contributes to the Savings Plan for each pay period (increasing to 7% for 2026). If an employee is eligible and has timely elected to defer eligible compensation under the BEP-SIP after reaching an applicable IRS limit under the Savings Plan, the employee can receive a matching contribution credit under the BEP-SIP. The Savings Plan also provides for a discretionary employer non-elective contribution known as the annual additional company contribution that is allocated as a percentage of eligible cash compensation. For 2025, the company contribution was set at 3% of a participant’s eligible cash compensation. To the extent that an annual additional company contribution cannot be made to the Savings Plan due to IRS limits on tax-qualified plan contributions, the excess is credited to the employee under the BEP-SIP. 
Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 65 
 
 
 Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
 
 
 
 
The value of annual additional company contributions to the Savings Plan and company contribution credits to the BEP-Savings Plan during 2025 are reflected in the “All Other Compensation” column of the “

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ctations. Key themes throughout 2025 engagement efforts largely related to metrics utilized in our compensation program, as well as updates on performance against key pipeline and SSI initiatives. 
We are encouraged by the strong shareholder support our compensation programs have received in recent say-on-pay votes. Looking ahead, we remain committed to maintaining open channels of communication, incorporating shareholder perspectives in our program design, and providing clear disclosures that make it easy for shareholders to evaluate our approach. 
Looking Ahead with Confidence 
Our management team well-positioned to execute against our strategic objectives. The foundation built over the past two years is solid, and there are significant opportunities ahead to enhance our growth profile. 
Throughout the year, we’ll assess our compensation programs to ensure they keep pace as our operations and external business environment evolve. Performance, as it always has, will be top of mind during this process. Executive pay must be earned by strong results and should be aligned with the long-term interests of shareholders. 
On behalf of the Committee, I want to thank our employees for their unwavering dedication to patients and their contributions to our progress. To our shareholders, thank you for your support and ongoing dialogue. We look forward to your continued input in 2026. 
Peter J. Arduini
Chair, Compensation and Management Development Committee 
42 Bristol Myers Squibb 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion 
and Analysis 
Business Overview 
In 2025, Bristol Myers Squibb made meaningful strategic progress and strengthened our growth profile while navigating a dynamic operating environment and furthering scientific innovation. We enhanced and diversified our portfolio and progressed pipeline assets that will be critical to our success as we navigate an upcoming period of transition, including the loss of exclusivity on multiple products. The Company entered into important collaborations and completed key acquisitions to extend our scientific leadership and advance value creation. Our collective efforts across the organization helped build momentum as we create the foundation for long-term, sustainable growth and strive to become one of the fastest growing biopharmaceutical companies into the next decade. 
Critical to our performance in 2025 was our continued focus on growth, diversification and innovation — enabling us to bring more truly transformational medicines to patients faster. Working together, we furthered our strong financial position and achieved significant regulatory and clinical milestones. Last year, the company received 18 approvals for initial and expanded indications in the United States (U.S.), European Union (E.U.), Japan (JP) and China (CN), including for Breyanzi , Camzyos , and Opdivo. In addition, we also completed several business development transactions to bolster our pipeline, including the acquisition of Orbital Therapeutics and its OTX-201 asset, a preclinical in vivo CAR-T cell therapy currently being studied in autoimmune disease. 
As an organization, our priorities are to (i) focus on transformational medicines where we have a competitive advantage, (ii) drive operational excellence, and (iii) strategically allocate capital for long-term growth and shareholder returns. Our mission is to discover, develop and deliver innovative medicines that help patients prevail over serious diseases in the following core therapeutic areas: oncology and hematology with novel modalities in cell therapies, protein degraders, antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) and radiopharmaceuticals; immunology with a focus on establishing new standards of care in pulmonology, rapidly advancing cell therapy into immunologic diseases and transformational programs to control inflammation, reset immune memory and promote homeostasis in rheumatology; cardiovascular diseases by leveraging deep expertise across thrombotic diseases, heart failures and cardiomyopathies; and neuroscience with a focus on developing new treatments in neuropsychiatry and neurodegeneration. We are working on accelerating our drug development and delivery of our innovative medicines to patients, enhancing our commercial operating model, as well as enhancing flexibility and reliability of our manufacturing network. We remain committed to strategic business development, maintaining a strong investment grade credit rating, dividend

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
(no related-person transactions section separately located)
