COLGATE PALMOLIVE CO (CL) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: COLGATE PALMOLIVE CO
Ticker: CL
CIK: 21665
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-25

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Commitment 
We are a caring, innovative growth company united behind our
purpose to reimagine a healthier future for all people, their pets and our planet. The Board believes that excellence in corporate
governance accompanies and greatly aids our achievement of this purpose, as well as our long-term business success. To achieve
our business and financial objectives and deliver peer-leading performance and total shareholder return, we are focused on driving
organic sales growth; delivering consistent, compounded earnings per share growth; achieving operational efficiencies; and driving
growth in free cash flow along with the efficient use of our balance sheet. The Board has been at the center of these key objectives,
helping to design and implement them across the organization, and seeing that they guide our operations. 
Board Independence, Expertise and Accountability 
Strict Director Independence Standards 
With the exception of Noel Wallace, our Chairman of the Board,
President and Chief Executive Officer (the “CEO”), the Board is comprised entirely of independent directors. All committee
members are independent directors. The Board believes that an independent director should be free of any relationship with the
Company or our senior management that may in fact or in appearance impair the director’s ability to make independent judgments
or compromise the director’s objectivity and loyalty to stockholders. Based on this principle, the Board adopted director
independence standards that outline the types of relationships, both personal and professional, between directors and the Company,
our senior management, other directors and third parties that, if present, would preclude a finding of independence. These standards,
which are stricter than those required by the listing standards of the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”), guide
the Board’s annual affirmative determinations of independence. A copy of the standards is available on our website. For more
information regarding our independence standards and the Board’s determinations of independence, see “Director Independence.” 
Lead Director/Executive Sessions 
The independent directors of the Board meet in executive session,
without any members of management present, at every regularly scheduled Board meeting. The Lead Director chairs these sessions.
The Lead Director serves a three-year term and is selected by the independent directors following nomination by the NGCR Committee.
Lorrie M. Norrington is currently serving as our independent Lead Director. For more information regarding the Board’s leadership
structure and the responsibilities of the Lead Director, see “Board Structure and Responsibilities—Board Leadership
Structure.” 
All Directors Elected Annually by Majority Vote 
The Board is accountable to stockholders through the annual election
of all directors by majority vote. We have never had a staggered board. Under our by-laws, in uncontested elections for directors,
if a nominee for director who is an incumbent director is not re-elected by a majority of the votes cast, the by-laws require the
director to promptly tender their resignation to the Board. The NGCR Committee will then consider the resignation and make a recommendation
to the Board. 
Proxy Access 
Our by-laws permit a group of up to 20 stockholders who have
owned at least three percent of our outstanding Common Stock continuously for at least three years to submit director nominees
(up to the greater of two individuals or 20% of the Board) for inclusion in our proxy statement if the stockholder(s) and the nominee(s)
satisfy the requirements specified in our by-laws. 
Audit Committee Independence and Financial Literacy 
All members of the Audit Committee are independent directors.
The Board has also determined that all members of the Audit Committee are “audit committee financial experts,” as that
term is defined under the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), and that they meet the independence
and financial literacy requirements of the NYSE. 
 6 
 
Table of Contents 
Governance 
Board Experience 
As our present directors exemplify, we value the following attributes
in Board members: 
 
 ● 
 enterprise leadership experience; 
 
 ● 
 experience in one or more of the following areas: digital, technology and innovation; finance; our or a complementary
industry or field; risk management and cybersecurity; and/or sustainability and social responsibility; 
 
 ● 
 international experience; 
 
 ● 
 corporate governance experience; 
 
 ● 
 academic achievement; and 
 
 ● 
 strong moral and ethical character. 
Fifty percent of director nominees are female and/or members
of underrepresented communities. A copy of our criteria for Board membership, entitled “Independent Board Candidate Qualifications,”
is available on our website. 
Board Focused on Key Strategic Priorities 
Strategic Role of Board 
The Board plays an essential role in shaping, guiding and overseeing
our business strategy. During 2025, in addition to overseeing the successful conclusion of our 2025 strategic plan, the Board worked
in close coordination with management to develop our new 2030 strategy. The Board believes that overseeing and monitoring strategy
is a continuous, year-round process. As part of this process, the Board receives detailed briefings at every regular meeting throughout
the year on critical aspects of the implementation of our strategic plan, including reviews of the strategic choices we are making
and the capabilities needed to deliver against our goals, as well as reviews of operating divisions, product categories, consumer
trends and competitive and marketplace dynamics. From time to time, our directors also visit Colgate-Palmolive operations, deepening
their understanding of our business and gaining firsthand knowledge of local execution. In 2025, they visited our Hill’s
Pet Nutrition business and manufacturing operations in Kansas. 
Role of Board in Risk Management 
The Board oversees our risk management process to ensure it is
properly designed, well-functioning and consistent with our overall corporate strategy. Annually, the Board or relevant committee
thereof reviews the top risks identified by management and receives reports more regularly for certain risks to ensure risks are
being adequately managed. See “Board Structure and Responsibilities—Board Role in Risk Oversight” for more information
about our risk management process. 
Oversight of Company Culture 
The Board believes that our culture and our core corporate values
of being Caring, Inclusive and Courageous are critical to our business success. It monitors the ongoing impact of those values
and our culture in various ways, including by visiting our operations and reviewing the results of employee engagement surveys
and related responsive actions. 
Succession Planning 
The Board has extensive involvement in succession planning and
people development, with special focus on CEO succession. It discusses potential successors to key executives, regularly interacts
with key executives and potential successors and examines backgrounds, capabilities and appropriate developmental assignments.
Regular reviews of professional training programs, benefit programs and career development processes assist the Board in guiding
our people development initiatives. 
Cybersecurity 
The Board is focused on cybersecurity. Specific responsibility
for cybersecurity oversight is delegated to the Audit Committee, and four directors have considerable experience in this area.
Our Chief Information Security Officer reports to the Audit Committee on cybersecurity quarterly, or more frequently if circumstances
warrant, including regarding relevant cybersecurity and data incidents impacting the Company and on topics related to information
security, data privacy and cyber risks and mitigation strategies. In addition, outside experts periodically present to the Board
on cybersecurity. For more information about our cybersecurity risk management and governance practices, please see Item 1C of
our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2025. 
AI 
The Board is also focused on AI, which we are integrating across
our enterprise to enhance productivity and drive value. We view AI as a transformative enabler for innovation and growth in addition
to being a tool for efficiency. Given the breadth of AI applicability, oversight for AI resides with the Board, which regularly
discusses the Company’s AI governance, strategy and risk management. 
 2026 Proxy Statement 
 7 
Table of Contents 
Governance 
Sustainability 
Sustainability is critically important to our overall business
and growth strategy. We consider our sustainability strategy a key enabler of our efforts to drive value creation across our business.
We are proud of the progress we made with our 2025 Sustainability & Social Impact Strategy, which was focused on three key
ambitions— Driving Social Impact; Helping Millions of Homes; and Preserving our Environment. As we embark upon our 2030 sustainability
strategy, we remain focused on these key ambitions and working to achieve measurable targets while continuing to take a science-based,
pragmatic and value-driven approach to build resilience and value across our business. As discussed further in our 2025 Climate
Strategy & Transition Plan, these measurable targets include science-based near-term, long-term and net zero carbon by 2040
emissions targets, which have been approved by The Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi). 
The NGCR Committee oversees our sustainability strategy and receives
regular updates from management on sustainability matters, risks and opportunities, including our efforts to accelerate action
on climate change, reduce our environmental footprint and achieve our sustainability targets. Additional information about our
strategy and processes for identifying, assessing and managing climate-related risks and opportunities, including governance, metrics
and targets, can be found in the Sustainability section of our website, including our annual sustainability report and our 2025
Climate Strategy & Transition Plan. References to these reports and our website are for informational purposes only and neither
the reports nor the other information on our website is incorporated by reference into this Proxy Statement. 
Human Capital 
We believe Colgate-Palmolive people are crucial to our ongoing
business success and aim to recruit, develop and retain strong talent with diverse backgrounds and perspectives. Evolving our high-impact,
inclusive culture – where all Colgate-Palmolive people can reach their full potential – is a key focus of our 2030
business strategy. 
As the owner of the world’s most penetrated brand, our
business success relies on our ability to market our brands to customers and consumers around the globe. As a truly global company,
with employees in over 100 countries and products marketed in over 200 countries and territories throughout the world, it is important
that our employees reflect the communities in which we live and work. We believe having a workforce that is able to listen and
speak to our customers and consumers in an authentic manner enables us to increase our household penetration, an important part
of our business strategy. We are committed to fostering a sense of belonging that embodies our purpose and values, which are essential
to how we drive innovation and growth. We celebrate differences, emphasize the importance of inclusion and belonging for everyone
and value the contributions of all Colgate-Palmolive people. At Colgate-Palmolive, we are proud of our collaborative spirit - what
we call The Power of WE. 
We are committed to getting better every day in all that we do,
as individuals and as teams. We seek to foster an inclusive and supportive workplace that promotes the growth and development of
all employees, supported by a robust learning culture that aligns with our business needs. We are also committed to listening to
our employees and seeing how the company is evolving and growing through regular employee engagement surveys. 
Directors are Stockholders

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Introduction 
This CD&A describes our executive compensation philosophy and program,
the compensation decisions made under this program and the specific factors we considered in making those decisions. This CD&A focuses
on the compensation of the executive officers listed in the Summary Compensation Table of this Proxy Statement (the “Named Officers”),
who are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Noel Wallace 
 
 Stanley J. Sutula III 
 
 Jennifer M. Daniels 
 
 Shane Grant 
 
 Panagiotis Tsourapas 
 Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
 Chief Financial Officer 
 
 Chief Legal Officer and Secretary 
 
 Chief Operating Officer, Americas 
 
 Chief Operating Officer, Eur., APac, Afr/Eur, Skin and Global Cust. Dev. 
Executive Summary 
Pay for Performance Overview 
The key principles underlying our compensation philosophy are aligning
pay and performance, driving strong business results and our strategic plan, focusing on long-term shareholder return, motivating and
retaining critical talent and reflecting external market and competitive practices. We use performance measures for our incentive programs
that are tied to our growth strategy, are used to evaluate the success of our business and are highly correlated with long-term shareholder
return and set incentive targets in line with our publicly-announced guidance. Annual and long-term incentive award payments vary based
on our business performance, and long-term incentive award payments and the value of equity awards also vary based on the performance
of our Common Stock. Reflecting these principles, target direct compensation (salary and target annual and long-term incentives) for
the Named Officers is designed to be weighted substantially more heavily towards variable compensation than fixed compensation, as the
following charts demonstrate. 
2025 TARGET DIRECT
COMPENSATION 
 * 
 Mr. Grant’s 2025 base salary, 2025 target annual incentive
and 2026 target long-term incentives are included in the average reflected in the above chart since he joined the Company in June
2025 and will fully participate in our long-term incentive compensation programs starting in 2026. 
2025 Performance at a Glance 
2025 was a challenging year, as global macroeconomic and geopolitical
volatility, slower global category growth rates, consumer uncertainty, tariffs and high raw material inflation impacted sales and profit
growth across the consumer sector. Despite these headwinds, we continued operating with determination and focus in 2025, with a commitment
to brand health, innovation and superior execution of our strategic priorities. We delivered solid results in 2025 that demonstrate the
resilience of our business model. 
 28 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Compensation 
We were particularly pleased to have generated record operating cash
flow to continue investing behind our strategic priorities and scaling our capabilities. We also delivered growth in net sales, organic
sales (a non-GAAP financial measure, defined as net sales excluding foreign exchange, acquisitions and divestments) and adjusted earnings
per share (a non-GAAP financial measure, referred to herein as “Base Business Earnings Per Share”). However, consistent with
the experience of the broader consumer sector, our organic sales growth slowed considerably and our Base Business Earnings Per Share
also grew at a slower rate. Consistent with these financial results and reflecting the impact of our pay-for-performance philosophy,
our annual incentive payments also declined in 2025. 
Our stock price was impacted by the difficult market conditions in
2025, along with the cost headwinds mentioned above, which created a significant impact on the cumulative total shareholder returns on
our Common Stock for the one-year and five-year periods ended December 31, 2025. Despite these challenging conditions, we maintained
our strong balance sheet and the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the quarterly cash dividend, effective in the second quarter
of 2025, as part of our commitment to, and strong record of, returning value to shareholders. 
OPERATING
RESULTS 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2025
ORGANIC SALES GROWTH 
1.4% 
 
 
2025
BASE BUSINESS EARNINGS PER SHARE 2 
$3.69 
 
 
2023-2025
FREE CASH FLOW PRODUCTIVITY 3 
115.7% 
 1 
 Please see Annex A for reconciliations of organic sales growth to net sales growth calculated in accordance
with GAAP, of Base Business Earnings Per Share to Diluted earnings per share calculated in accordance with GAAP and of free cash
flow before dividends to Net cash provided by operations calculated in accordance with GAAP. 
 2 
 For compensation purposes the P&O Committee increased Base Business Earnings Per Share by $0.06 to $3.75 for the impact of
tariffs not yet announced at the time the target range was set, as described on pages 38 to 39. 
 3 
 “Free Cash Flow Productivity” is defined as free cash flow before dividends as a percentage of net income including
non-controlling interests as reported in our audited financial results, which for 2023-2025 was 133.6%. The P&O Committee reduced
our 2023-2025 Free Cash Flow Productivity results for compensation purposes to 115.7%, as described on page 43. 
RETURN TO SHAREHOLDERS 
 
TOTAL
SHAREHOLDER RETURN 
 
 
 
131 
CONSECUTIVE YEARS OF 
DIVIDEND PAYMENTS 
63 
CONSECUTIVE YEARS OF 
DIVIDEND INCREASES 
 
 
 
$2.9
billion 
RETURNED TO SHAREHOLDERS 
Going forward, we remain focused on delivering long-term shareholder
return and building long-term business success through excellence in corporate governance and our focus on driving organic sales growth;
delivering consistent, compounded earnings per share growth; achieving operational efficiencies; and driving growth in free cash flow
along with the efficient use of our balance sheet. Our 2030 strategy is intended to accelerate growth going forward with a focus on leveraging
the global reach and penetration of our brands; building the incremental benefit of superior, science-based innovation supported by an
agile and resilient supply chain; harnessing the power of best-in-class omni-channel demand generation; leading in capabilities such
as data, analytics and AI; and evolving our high-impact, inclusive culture. We intend to continue our practice of tying compensation
to achievement of both annual and long-term business goals to help further those priorities. 
 2026 Proxy Statement 
 29 
Table of Contents 
Executive Compensation 
The P&O Committee annually analyzes the relationship between pay
and performance for our Named Officers. The analysis includes a review of the relationship between the compensation paid to our CEO and
our other Named Officers and Company performance relative to peer companies over the past three years. The review shows a strong link
between Company pay and Company performance over time in terms of various key operating measures. During the three-year period from 2023
to 2025, our total shareholder return, return on sales, adjusted earnings per share growth, organic sales growth, adjusted net income
growth, net sales growth, operating cash flow as a percentage of sales, return on invested capital and CEO total direct compensation
relative to the Comparison Group (as defined on page 36) are as shown to the right. 
COLGATE-PALMOLIVE 2023-2025
PERFORMANCE RELATIVE TO 
COMPARISON GROUP* 
 
 
 
 * 
 Adjusted earnings per share growth, organic sales growth and adjusted net income growth reflect the adjustments
described in Annex A to Colgate-Palmolive’s earnings per share, net sales and net income growth, respectively, and comparable
adjustments to peer companies’ earnings per share, net sales and net income growth. See page 31 for an explanation regarding
the components of “total direct compensation” or “TDC.” 
2025 Compensation Program Highlights 
Impact of Tariffs on 2025 Annual Incentive Program 
When the P&O Committee established annual bonus targets in March
2025, the timing, scope and scale of potential U.S. and reciprocal international tariffs remained highly uncertain, particularly as a
result of the global footprint of the Company’s supply chain. To ensure the annual incentive program remained focused on operational
excellence rather than developments in trade relations outside of the Company’s control, when setting the annual bonus targets
the P&O Committee specifically reserved the right to adjust the calculation of the performance measures for extraordinary events,
including the possible positive or negative impact of tariffs not yet announced when the targets were set. In February 2026, the P&O
Committee, in consultation with its independent compensation consultant, FW Cook, conducted a comprehensive review of the Company’s
performance and determined that it should, consistent with the intent set forth at the beginning of the performance year, exercise discretion
to adjust 2025 Base Business Earnings Per Share when calculating the annual bonus to account for the significant impact of tariffs that
were outside of management’s control and not known at the time the original target was set. See “Compensation Components–Annual
Incentives” below for further detail regarding the P&O Committee’s determination. 
Performance Measures 
The P&O Committee selected the following performance measures in
2025 to assess the performance of the Named Officers in 2025 and in the three-year performance period commencing in 2025: 
 Pay 
Component 
 
 CEO 2025 Target 
Compensation Mix 
 
 Other Named Officer 
Average 2025 Target 
Compensation Mix 
 
 Performance Measures (for Annual Incentives and PBRSUs) 
 
 Performance 
Period 
 
 Form of 
Payment 
 Annual incentive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
Base Business
Earnings Per Share 
● 
Organic sales
growth 
● 
Strategic initiatives 
 
 One year (2025) 
 
 Cash bonus 
 Long-term incentive* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
● 
Organic sales
growth relative to the Comparison Group (defined below) 
● 
Base Business
Net Income (defined below) growth relative to the Comparison Group 
● 
Free Cash Flow
Productivity 
● 
Total shareholder
return relative to the Comparison Group (modifier) 
 
 Three years (2025-2027) 
 
 PBRSUs (vesting in 2028, if earned) 
 * 
 Except for Mr. Grant, percentages shown include the target value of performance-based restricted stock unit
(“PBRSU”) awards for the 2025-2027 performance cycle pursuant to our Growth Performance Plan and the target value of
stock option and time-based restricted stock unit (“RSU”) awards based on salary grade guidelines. For Mr. Grant, the
target value of PBRSU awards he will receive for the 2026-2028 performance cycle and the value of stock option and time-based RSU
awards he will receive in 2026 are included instead since he joined the Company in June 2025 and will fully participate in our long-term
incentive compensation programs starting in 2026. 
 30 
 
Table of Contents 
Executive Compensation 
The P&O Committee selected performance measures in the annual and
long-term incentive programs to drive our growth strategy and focus on sustainable value creation. 
Annual Incentive Awards 
 Measure 
 
 Target Range 
 
 2025 Results 
 
 Outcome 
 
 Comparison vs. Comparison Group* 
 Base Business Earnings Per Share 
 
 $3.63–$3.68 
 
 $3.75 (after tariff adjustment described on page 39) 
 
 93.6% of the assigned award opportunities for each of the Named Officers. 
 
 
● 
Annual bonuses
for the Named Officers (other than Mr. Wallace) were paid at approximately the 63rd to the 89th percentile of annual bonuses for
similar jobs in the Comparison Group. 
● 
Mr. Wallace’s
earned award represented a payout at approximately the 57th percentile of annual bonuses for CEOs in the Comparison Group. 
 Organic Sales
Growth 
 
 3.0%-4.0% 
 
 1.4% 
 
 Strategic Initiatives 
 
 See below description 
 
 * 
 Based on the most recent data available. 
In determining the extent to which the strategic measure was achieved,
the P&O Committee considered achievement against our goals of accelerating innovation, driving superior consumer experience, supporting
our culture of inclusion and progressing our sustainability initiatives. Following this evaluation, the P&O Committee determined
that the strategic measure should pay out at 110% of target, based on our solid performance against those goals as described under “Compensation
Components—Annual Incentives” below. 
Long-Term Incentive Awards 
2025-2027 Long-Term Incentive Awards Performance
Cycle (Growth Performance Plan – 50% of Long-Term Incentives Mix) 
 Measure 
 
 Target 
 
 Status 
 Relative Organic Sales Growth 
 
 Performance at the 50th percentile of the Comparison Group 
 
 
● 
If PBRSUs were to vest solely based on performance achieved through December 31, 2025, payout would be between the target and maximum
levels. Performance over the remaining two years of the performance period will determine the actual number of shares earned, if
any (including applying the total shareholder return modifier). 
● 
PBRSUs will vest, if earned, in 2028. 
 Relative Base Business Net Income Growth 
 
 Performance at the 50th percentile of the Comparison Group 
 Free Cash Flow Productivity 
 
 95% 
 Total Shareholder Return Modifier 
 
 The number of PBRSUs may increase or decrease by up to 25% based on our total shareholder return
relative to the Comparison Group 
Stock Options (30% of Long-Term Incentives Mix)
and Time-Based RSUs (20% of Long-Term Incentives Mix) 
In 2025, the P&O Committee approved annual stock option and time-based
RSU awards for the Named Officers. These awards are granted based on guidelines set for each salary grade, which are established annually
based on a review of market data and share usage. 
CEO Total Direct Compensation* 
 
 
 
10%
vs. 2024 
Primarily due to
a decrease in his annual cash bonus. 
 * 
 For purposes of this CD&A, Mr. Wallace’s total direct compensation or “TDC” for each
year includes his

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ing on each nominee for director, the ratification of the selection of PricewaterhouseCoopers
LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for 2026 and, if properly presented at the meeting by each stockholder
proponent, two stockholder proposals. In addition, you can cast a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation. We will
vote your shares as you direct. 
If any other matters are properly presented for consideration at
the Annual Meeting, the Proxy Committee will have discretion to vote for you on those matters. At the time this Proxy Statement
was printed, we knew of no other matters to be raised at the Annual Meeting. 
 
VOTE BY INTERNET 
 
 To vote your shares via the internet, go to the voting website, www.proxyvote.com. Internet voting
is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. You will have the opportunity to confirm that your instructions have been
properly recorded. The internet voting procedures are designed to authenticate stockholders through individual control numbers.
If you received a proxy card in the mail and choose to vote via the internet, you do not need to return your proxy card. 
 
VOTE BY TELEPHONE 
 
 If you reside in the United States, Canada or Puerto Rico, you can vote your shares by telephone by calling the toll-free
number provided on the voting website (www.proxyvote.com) and on the proxy card. Telephone voting is available 24 hours a
day, seven days a week. Easy-to-follow voice prompts allow you to vote your shares and confirm that your instructions have
been properly recorded. The telephone voting procedures are designed to authenticate stockholders through individual control
numbers. If you received a proxy card in the mail and choose to vote by telephone, you do not need to return your proxy card. 
 
VOTE BY MAIL 
 
 If you received a printed copy of your proxy materials, you can vote your shares by completing and mailing the enclosed
proxy card to us so that we receive it by the deadline. If you received a Notice of Internet Availability, you can request
a printed copy of your proxy materials by following the instructions contained in the notice. If you sign and return your
proxy card but do not specify how to vote, we will vote your shares in favor of each of the Board’s nominees for director,
the ratification of the selection of the independent registered public accounting firm and the advisory vote on executive
compensation, and against the two stockholder proposals. 
 72 
 
Table of Contents 
Questions and Answers About Our Annual Meeting 
 How can I vote my shares during the Annual Meeting? 
As described in more detail below under “How can I participate
in the Annual Meeting?”, this year’s Annual Meeting will be a virtual meeting, conducted on the following website:
www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/CL2026 (the “Annual Meeting Website”). If you would like to vote at the Annual Meeting,
please follow the instructions that will be available on the Annual Meeting Website during the Annual Meeting. If your shares are
held in the name of a bank, broker or other holder of record, you should follow the instructions provided by your bank, broker
or other holder of record to be able to vote electronically at the meeting. Voting by proxy, whether by internet, telephone or
mail, will not limit your right to vote electronically at the Annual Meeting. However, if you vote by proxy and also participate
in the meeting, there is no need to vote electronically at the meeting unless you would like to change your vote. 
 How can I participate in the Annual Meeting? 
Participation in the Annual Meeting is limited to holders of Common Stock on March 9, 2026, the record date for voting at the Annual Meeting. 
Upon consideration of various factors, including the cost savings
and efficiency gains related to annual meetings conducted solely by means of remote communications and the increased accessibility
for stockholders and other stakeholders afforded by a virtual meeting as compared to a physical meeting, we have planned for this
year’s Annual Meeting to be a virtual-only meeting, conducted via live webcast through the Annual Meeting Website. You will
have the same rights and opportunities to participate as you would have at a physical annual meeting, including voting your shares
electronically and submitting questions during the meeting. To participate in the Annual Meeting, you will need the 16-digit control
number found on your Notice of Internet Availabil

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions 
We have a longstanding policy prohibiting our directors, officers
and employees from entering into transactions that present actual or potential conflicts of interest. This policy is reflected
in our Code of Conduct, Business Practices Guidelines and Director Independence Standards. In addition, the Board has adopted
a written policy regarding related person transactions which supplements these policies by establishing additional procedures
for monitoring and reviewing and, if appropriate, approving, these types of transactions. The policy covers any “related
person transaction,” as defined under SEC rules, which generally includes any transaction, arrangement or relationship involving
more than $120,000 in which we or any of our subsidiaries was, is or will be a participant and in which a “related person”
had, has or will have a direct or indirect material interest. “Related persons” means directors and executive officers
and their immediate family members, and stockholders owning five percent or more of our outstanding stock. 
Our Corporate Legal Department, together with the Controller’s
Department, is responsible for monitoring compliance with these policies and procedures. In the rare instance where a related
person transaction is determined to provide a material benefit to the Company and our stockholders, the transaction must be submitted
to the independent directors of the Board for their review. Only the independent directors of the Board may approve the transaction
in accordance with the procedures for review and approval described in the policy. In the course of its review of related person
transactions, the independent directors of the Board will consider all of the relevant facts and circumstances that are available
to them, including but not limited to: (i) the benefits to the Company; (ii) in a transaction involving a director, the impact
on the director’s independence; (iii) the availability of other sources for comparable products or services; (iv) the terms
of the transaction; and (v) whether the transaction is proposed to be on terms more favorable to the Company than terms that could
have been reached with an unrelated third party. 
Based on our review of Company transactions, there were no transactions
considered to be a related person transaction during 2025. 
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider
Participation 
During 2025, the following directors were members of the P&O
Committee: Dr. Harris, Ms. Nelson and Messrs. Bilbrey, Cahillane and Newman. None of the members of the P&O Committee has
been an officer of Colgate-Palmolive and none was an employee of Colgate-Palmolive during 2025, and none had any relationship
with us or any of our subsidiaries during 2025 that would be required to be disclosed as a related person transaction. None of
our executive officers has served on the board of directors or compensation committee of another company at any time during which
an executive officer of such other company served on our Board or the P&O Committee. 
 2026 Proxy Statement 
 19 
Table of Contents 
Governance 
Board Structure and Responsibilities 
Board Leadership Structure 
The NGCR Committee regularly reviews Board leadership trends,
including external practice among similarly situated companies as well as feedback from investors, and has determined that combining
the positions of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer is best for us at this time. Our current
Board leadership structure consists of: 
 
Noel Wallace 
Chairman, President and CEO 
 
 
Lorrie M. Norrington 
Independent Lead Director 
Our Board structure ensures
robust, independent oversight. Our active and independent Board, with our robust Lead Director role and independent
committee chairs and committees, ensures that the Board, and not the Chairman alone, determines the Board’s focus. The Chairman
is guided by these strong independent leaders and having our CEO serve as Chairman creates a bridge to management that helps provide
the Board with the management support it needs. Having a unified leadership structure is particularly beneficial at this time
given the dynamic consumer and retail landscape and rapidly evolving environment in which we compete. Based on these considerations,
the Board believes that this is the best leadership structure for us at this time and that, operating under this structure, the
Board will continue to effectively guide Colgate and represent the interests of our stakeholders. The Board believes its programs
for overseeing risk, as described under “Board Role in Risk Oversight,” would be effective under a variety of leadership
structures and therefore do not materially affect its choice of structure. 
 
Board Effectiveness 
The Board works very effectively together 
 
 
Board Committees 
The Board’s committees are composed solely of,
and chaired by, independent directors 
 
 
 
 
Board Independence 
9 of 10 director nominees 
are independent 
 
 
Executive Sessions 
The independent directors meet at each regularly scheduled
Board meeting in separate executive sessions without any members of management present, chaired by the independent Lead
Director 
We have an independent Lead
Director with significant authority and clear duties. We have long been committed to having an independent Lead
Director, having first established a lead independent director position in 2003. In 2021 and 2023, the Board enhanced the duties
of the independent Lead Director set forth in our corporate governance guidelines in connection with a review of external practices
and in response to stockholder feedback. The role of the independent Lead Director includes the following responsibilities: 
 
 Board Leadership 
 
 
 ● 
 Preside at the executive sessions of the independent directors that occur at every regularly scheduled
Board meeting, any other executive session of the independent directors and any other meeting of the Board at which the Chairman
is not present 
 
 
 ● 
 Serve as interim Chairman if the Chairman is unable to perform their duties 
 
 
 ● 
 Establish agendas for the executive sessions of the independent directors in consultation with the other directors 
 
 
 ● 
 Call meetings of the independent directors 
 
 
 ● 
 Authorize the retention of outside advisors and consultants who report directly to the independent directors on Board
issues 
 20 
 
Table of Contents 
Governance 
 
 Communicating with Management 
 
 
 ●
