COSTCO WHOLESALE CORP /NEW (COST) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: COSTCO WHOLESALE CORP /NEW
Ticker: COST
CIK: 909832
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2025-12-04

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance guidelines, and provide oversight with respect to corporate governance, ethical conduct and environmental and sustainability policies and initiatives. The committee is authorized by its charter to engage its own advisors. The Board is responsible for nominating members for election to the Board and for filling vacancies on the Board that may occur between annual meetings of shareholders. The committee is responsible for identifying, screening and recommending to the Board candidates for Board membership. The committee approved the nomination of the candidates reflected in proposal 1. The committee has been engaged in a review of potential candidates as part of an ongoing refreshment process. Ms. Raimondo, a nominee not currently on the Board, came to the committee's attention through Hamilton James, and is well known by other current directors, Mmes. Foulkes and Wilderotter. When formulating its recommendations, the committee will also consider advice and recommendations from others as it deems appropriate. The members of the committee, which met six times in fiscal 2025, are Mr. Raikes (chair) and Mmes. Foulkes and Wilderotter. 
8 
The committee will consider shareholder recommendations for candidates to serve on the Board. In accordance with section 2.1 of our bylaws, which may be viewed at https://investor.costco.com, the name of any recommended candidate, together with pertinent biographical information, a document indicating the candidate’s willingness to serve if elected, and evidence of the nominating shareholder’s ownership of Company stock should be sent to the Secretary of the Company. The Company may require additional information, as described in our bylaws. Our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that nominees for director will be selected on the basis of, among other things, knowledge, experience, skills, expertise, integrity, diversity, ability to make independent analytical inquiries, and understanding of the Company’s business environment, all in the context of an assessment of the perceived needs of the Board at the time. Nominees must also be willing to devote adequate time and effort to Board responsibilities. The Nominating and Governance Committee does not set specific, minimum qualifications that nominees must meet in order for the committee to recommend them to the Board, but rather believes that each nominee should be evaluated based on individual merit, taking into account the needs of the Company and the composition of the Board. 
We believe that the Company benefits from having directors with a diversity of viewpoints, backgrounds, and experiences. Currently, of the ten directors on the Board and Board nominee, five are women and one is African American. In addition, as discussed above, our directors bring a diversity of viewpoints and experiences as established leaders in important areas of business, government and non-profit service that we believe strengthens the Board’s ability to guide our Company. The Nominating and Governance Committee oversees a self-assessment of the Board’s or its committees performance every year. The assessment seeks to identify specific areas, if any, in need of improvement or strengthening, including with respect to the diversity of our Board in terms of viewpoints, backgrounds and experiences. Since 2014, the Board, led by the Nominating and Governance Committee, has been engaged in a process to refresh its membership; five new independent directors have been added and, as of the 2026 Annual Meeting, ten members have ceased to serve. The refreshment process has also resulted in the nomination of Ms. Raimondo for election to the Board. 
Our bylaws provide for proxy access shareholder nominations for director candidates by eligible shareholders. Shareholder nominations require compliance with section 2.1 of the bylaws. A shareholder who wishes to formally nominate a candidate, whether or not for inclusion in the Company's proxy statement, must follow the procedures described in our bylaws (which includes information required under SEC Rule 14a-19). There is otherwise no formal process prescribed for identifying and evaluating nominees, except as described in the Corporate Governance Guidelines, which may be viewed at https://investor.costco.com. 
Board Structure. The Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that the Board does not require the separation of the offices of the Chairman of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer and shall be free to choose its Chairman in any way that it deems best for the Company at any given point in time. Currently the positions of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer are filled separately. Our Chief Executive Officer has primary responsibility for the operational leadership and strategic direction of the Company, while our non-executive Chairman facilitates our Board’s independent oversight of management, promotes communication between management and the Board, and leads the Board’s consideration of key governance matters. The Board believes that this leadership structure is appropriate for the Company at this time. 
The Role of the Board in Risk Oversight. The Board seeks to ensure that management has processes for dealing appropriately with risk. It is the responsibility of the Company’s senior management to develop and implement the Company’s short- and long-term objectives and to identify, evaluate, manage and mitigate the risks inherent in seeking to achieve those objectives. Management is responsible for identifying risk and risk controls related to significant business activities and Company objectives, and developing programs to determine the sufficiency of risk identification, the balance of potential risk to potential reward, the appropriate manner in which to control risk, and the support of the risk-controlling behavior and the risk to Company strategy. 
The Board implements its risk oversight responsibilities primarily through the Audit Committee, which receives management reports on the potentially significant risks, including (without limitation) cybersecurity matters, that the Company faces and how the Company is seeking to control risk where appropriate. The 
9 
committee also oversees internal control over financial reporting. The Audit Committee reports to the full board on its risk-management tasks, including the enterprise risk management review. In more limited cases, such as with risks of significant new business concepts and substantial entry into new markets, risk oversight is addressed as part of the full Board’s engagement with the Chief Executive Officer and management. Board members also often discuss risk as a part of their review of the ongoing business, financial, and other activities of the Company. The Board also has oversight responsibility for executive-officer succession planning. The Nominating and Governance Committee also exercises oversight regarding risks associated with corporate governance matters and certain issues relating to the Company’s ethics, environmental, social and governance (ESG), and compliance programs. 
COMPENSATION OF DIRECTORS 
For fiscal 2025, each non-employee director earned $37,000 for serving on the Board. Each non-employee director also received a grant of restricted stock units (“RSUs”), with a target value of $270,000. Based on the closing share price at the time of grant, October 22, 2024, each director received 303 RSUs. RSUs vest one-third annually, generally beginning on the first anniversary of the date of grant and are subject to accelerated vesting upon the director’s retirement: 50% and 100% with five and ten years of service, respectively. Stock ownership requirements mandate that within five years of joining the Board a non-executive board member shall own and retain shares of Company common stock worth at least $1 million based on the value at the time of acquisition. All non-executive board members are in compliance. Board members receive a free Costco executive membership and are reimbursed for travel expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
FISCAL 2025

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis below for a further description of the role of the committee. The members of the committee, which met five times during fiscal 2025, are Mr. Stanton (chair) and Mmes. Jewell and Wilderotter. A report of the Compensation Committee is set forth below. 
Nominating and Governance Committee. The functions of the Nominating and Governance Committee are to identify and approve individuals qualified to serve as members of the Board, select director nominees for the annual meeting of shareholders, evaluate the Board’s performance, develop and recommend to the Board corporate governance guidelines, and provide oversight with respect to corporate governance, ethical conduct and environmental and sustainability policies and initiatives. The committee is authorized by its charter to engage its own advisors. The Board is responsible for nominating members for election to the Board and for filling vacancies on the Board that may occur between annual meetings of shareholders. The committee is responsible for identifying, screening and recommending to the Board candidates for Board membership. The committee approved the nomination of the candidates reflected in proposal 1. The committee has been engaged in a review of potential candidates as part of an ongoing refreshment process. Ms. Raimondo, a nominee not currently on the Board, came to the committee's attention through Hamilton James, and is well known by other current directors, Mmes. Foulkes and Wilderotter. When formulating its recommendations, the committee will also consider advice and recommendations from others as it deems appropriate. The members of the committee, which met six times in fiscal 2025, are Mr. Raikes (chair) and Mmes. Foulkes and Wilderotter. 
8 
The committee will consider shareholder recommendations for candidates to serve on the Board. In accordance with section 2.1 of our bylaws, which may be viewed at https://investor.costco.com, the name of any recommended candidate, together with pertinent biographical information, a document indicating the candidate’s willingness to serve if elected, and evidence of the nominating shareholder’s ownership of Company stock should be sent to the Secretary of the Company. The Company may require additional information, as described in our bylaws. Our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that nominees for director will be selected on the basis of, among other things, knowledge, experience, skills, expertise, integrity, diversity, ability to make independent analytical inquiries, and understanding of the Company’s business environment, all in the context of an assessment of the perceived needs of the Board at the time. Nominees must also be willing to devote adequate time and effort to Board responsibilities. The Nominating and Governance Committee does not set specific, minimum qualifications that nominees must meet in order for the committee to recommend them to the Board, but rather believes that each nominee should be evaluated based on individual merit, taking into account the needs of the Company and the composition of the Board. 
We believe that the Company benefits from having directors with a diversity of viewpoints, backgrounds, and experiences. Currently, of the ten directors on the Board and Board nominee, five are women and one is African American. In addition, as discussed above, our directors bring a diversity of viewpoints and experiences as established leaders in important areas of business, government and non-profit service that we believe strengthens the Board’s ability to guide our Company. The Nominating and Governance Committee oversees a self-assessment of the Board’s or its committees performance every year. The assessment seeks to identify specific areas, if any, in need of improvement or strengthening, including with respect to the diversity of our Board in terms of viewpoints, backgrounds and experiences. Since 2014, the Board, led by the Nominating and Governance Committee, has been engaged in a process to refresh its membership; five new independent directors have been added and, as of the 2026 Annual Meeting, ten members have ceased to serve. The refreshment process has also resulted in the nomination of Ms. Raimondo for election to the Board. 
Our bylaws provide for proxy access shareholder nominations for director candidates by eligible shareholders. Shareholder nominations require compliance with section 2.1 of the bylaws. A shareholder who wishes to formally nominate a candidate, whether or not for inclusion in the Company's proxy statement, must follow the procedures described in our bylaws (which includes information required under SEC Rule 14a-19). There is otherwise no formal process prescribed for identifying and evaluating nominees, except as described in the Corporate Governance Guidelines, which may be viewed at https://investor.costco.com. 
Board Structure. The Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that the Board does not require the separation of the offices of the Chairman of the Board and the Chief Executive Officer and shall be free to choose its Chairman in any way that it deems best for the Company at any given point in time. Currently the positions of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer are filled separately. Our Chief Executive Officer has primary responsibility for the operational leadership and strategic direction of the Company, while our non-executive Chairman facilitates our Board’s independent oversight of management, promotes communication between management and the Board, and leads the Board’s consideration of key governance matters. The Board believes that this leadership structure is appropriate for the Company at this time. 
The Role of the Board in Risk Oversight. The Board seeks to ensure that management has processes for dealing appropriately with risk. It is the responsibility of the Company’s senior management to develop and implement the Company’s short- and long-term objectives and to identify, evaluate, manage and mitigate the risks inherent in seeking to achieve those objectives. Management is responsible for identifying risk and risk controls related to significant business activities and Company objectives, and developing programs to determine the sufficiency of risk identification, the balance of potential risk to potential reward, the appropriate manner in which to control risk, and the support of the risk-controlling behavior and the risk to Company strategy. 
The Board implements its risk oversight responsibilities primarily through the Audit Committee, which receives management reports on the potentially significant risks, including (without limitation) cybersecurity matters, that the Company faces and how the Company is seeking to control risk where appropriate. The 
9 
committee also oversees internal control over financial reporting. The Audit Committee reports to the full board on its risk-management tasks, including the enterprise risk management review. In more limited cases, such as with risks of significant new business concepts and substantial entry into new markets, risk oversight is addressed as part of the full Board’s engagement with the Chief Executive Officer and management. Board members also often discuss risk as a part of their review of the ongoing business, financial, and other activities of the Company. The Board also has oversight responsibility for executive-officer succession planning. The Nominating and Governance Committee also exercises oversight regarding risks associated with corporate governance matters and certain issues relating to the Company’s ethics, environmental, social and governance (ESG), and compliance programs. 
COMPENSATION OF DIRECTORS 
For fiscal 2025, each non-employee director earned $37,000 for serving on the Board. Each non-employee director also received a grant of restricted stock units (“RSUs”), with a target value of $270,000. Based on the closing share price at the time of grant, October 22, 2024, each director received 303 RSUs. RSUs vest one-third annually, generally beginning on the first anniversary of the date of grant and are subject to accelerated vesting upon the director’s retirement: 50% and 100% with five and ten years of service, respectively. Stock ownership requirements mandate that within five years of joining the Board a non-executive board member shall own and retain shares of Company common stock worth at least $1 million based on the value at the time of acquisition. All non-executive board members are in compliance. Board members receive a free Costco executive membership and are reimbursed for travel expenses incurred in connection with their duties. 
FISCAL 2025 DIRECTOR COMPENSATION 
The following table summarizes compensation for the non-employee directors of the Company for fiscal 2025. 
 
 Name Fees Earned or
Paid in Cash ($) 
Stock 
Awards ($) 1 Total ($) 
 Hamilton E. James 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 Susan L. Decker 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 Kenneth D. Denman 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 Helena B. Foulkes 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 
W. Craig Jelinek 2 18,500 267,664 286,164 
 Sally Jewell 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 Jeffrey S. Raikes 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 John W. Stanton 37,000 267,664 304,664 
 Mary Agnes (Maggie) Wilderotter 37,000 267,664 304,664 
_______________________ 
(1) Represents the grant-date fair value of the RSUs granted in October 2024. The value is calculated as the market value of the common stock on the grant date less the present value of the expected dividends forgone during the vesting period. These amounts thus do not reflect the amount of compensation actually received during the fiscal year. For a description of the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity awards, see Note 1 of our financial statements in our Form 10-K for the year ended August 31, 2025. 
(2) Craig Jelinek retired from the Board of Directors in January 2025. For fiscal 2025, Mr. Jelinek's account balance in the Company's non-qualified deferred-compensation plan representing amounts deferred when he was serving as an employee of the Company was credited with $332,189. No amounts were credited to Mr. Jelinek's account relating to his service as a director. For additional information, see footnote 5 of the

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
, staff and warehouse management ranks. In addition, in the judgment of the Compensation Committee, the programs have contributed to the financial and competitive success of the Company. Accordingly, the Committee believes it is desirable to continue these programs. 
At the 2025 Annual Meeting, the advisory shareholder vote on executive compensation was 94.70% in favor. The Committee did not determine to make any changes to the compensation programs as a result of the vote. Compensation levels approved by the Committee for the Named Executive Officers for fiscal 2025 did not materially change from those approved for the prior year. Discussions by certain directors and management with a number of shareholders since the 2025 Annual Meeting have not revealed significant concerns about the structure or operation of the Company's compensation programs. 
Role of the Compensation Committee 
The Committee determines the amounts and elements of compensation for our Chief Executive Officer. For other executive officers, it reviews the recommendations of the Chief Executive Officer, with which it generally agrees. The Committee’s function is more fully described under “Committees of the Board — Compensation Committee.” 
During fiscal 2025, the Committee consisted of Mr. Stanton (chair), and Mmes. Jewell and Wilderotter. The Committee has authority under its charter to engage compensation consultants but did not use any. The Committee’s primary activity occurs in the fall, following the close of the fiscal year, when the Committee: (i) approves grants of RSUs, including performance targets for RSUs granted to executive officers for the current fiscal year; (ii) determines whether performance targets have been satisfied for RSUs granted during the prior fiscal year; (iii) approves total compensation levels for executive officers for the fiscal year just concluded, including any salary increases and cash bonuses; and (iv) approves the executive officer cash-bonus program for the current fiscal year. The bonuses concerning environmental and social progress are overseen jointly with the Nominating and Governance Committee. 
Elements of Compensation 
The components of our executive compensation programs are equity compensation (consisting generally of performance-based RSUs), base salary, cash bonuses, and other benefits (primarily consisting of health plans, a 401(k) plan and a deferred compensation plan). The Committee believes that these components are appropriate and are consistent with the Company’s long-standing approach to executive compensation, which has made equity awards the most significant form of compensation. The Committee did not reevaluate for fiscal year 2025 whether there is an optimal mix of equity, salary, bonus and other compensation components for each executive officer. Rather, it relied upon the fact that the current structure has been utilized successfully in years past and gave more particular attention to the incremental changes in the components of the mix and the value of the total compensation packages. 
13 
RSUs. RSU grants represent the largest component of compensation, based on their fair value at the time of grant. The Committee believes that emphasizing this form of compensation helps align the interests of employee-grantees with those of shareholders, both in the shorter term (with one-year performance conditions) and in the longer term (with share ownership requirements and time-based vesting of up to five years, subject to earlier vesting for long service, as described below). All named executive officers received performance-based RSU grants for fiscal 2025. 
Base salary. Base salary is the second largest compensation component. It is consistent with the need for executive officers to have predictable cash compensation, which has been subject generally to modest annual increases. 
Cash bonus. Cash bonuses are based on a variety of metrics. They address short-term incentives and are linked to performance during the fiscal year. Historically, at least some portion of the cash bonuses has been paid each year. For fiscal 2025, the Committee believes that maintaining cash bonuses at or near the current proportion is consistent with preferring long-term equity incentives as being in the greater interest of the Company and its shareholders. Approximately 8,000 employees were eligible for cash bonuses for fiscal 2025. To be eligible for the annual bonus, the individual must be employed by the Compan

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related-person transactions that are required to be disclosed under Item 404(a) of Regulation S-K. There were no transactions required to be reported in this Proxy Statement since the beginning of fiscal 2025 where this policy did not require review, approval or ratification or where this policy was not followed. 
No family members of executive officers or directors are executive officers of the Company. 
28 
REPORT OF THE
