CISCO SYSTEMS, INC. (CSCO) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: CISCO SYSTEMS, INC.
Ticker: CSCO
CIK: 858877
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2025-10-28

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance and risk management practices, board leadership, corporate responsibility initiatives, our executive compensation program, and other matters of stockholder interest. 
Board of Directors 
Our Board is committed to strong corporate governance structures and practices that help Cisco build long-term stockholder value. Our Board believes strongly in the value of an independent board of directors and has established a Lead Independent Director role with broad authority and responsibility, as described further below. Additionally, our Board is composed of skilled and diverse directors. 
Board Leadership Structure 
Board Independence 
Our Board believes strongly in the value of an independent board of directors. Other than Mr. Robbins, our CEO, all members of our Board are independent. Independent Board members have consistently comprised over 75% of the members of our Board. Additionally, all members of our Board committees, including the Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee and the Nomination and Governance Committee, are independent. The independent members of the Board also meet regularly during executive sessions of the Board without management present, and the Lead Independent Director chairs those sessions. Mr. Capellas currently serves as Lead Independent Director, and Mr. Robbins currently serves as Board Chair and CEO. 
Board Chair 
The Board believes it should maintain flexibility to determine the Board leadership structure from time to time. Our policies do not preclude our CEO from also serving as Board Chair. For instance, Mr. Robbins, our CEO, currently serves as Board Chair. The Board believes our current leadership structure, which includes a strong Lead Independent Director, provides appropriate balance and currently is in the best interest of Cisco and our stockholders. The broad authority and oversight given to the Lead Independent Director role, as described in detail below, helps ensure a strong independent and active Board. Additionally, Mr. Robbins’ demonstrated leadership during his tenure at Cisco, and his ability to speak as both Board Chair and CEO, provides a strong unified leadership for Cisco. 
 
 Governance and Board Matters 
7 
 
 
Lead Independent Director 
The Lead Independent Director is elected by and from the independent directors. Each term of service for the Lead Independent Director position is one year, and the Lead Independent Director has the following responsibilities: 
l Authority to call meetings of the independent directors 
l Presides at all meetings of the Board at which the Board Chair is not present, including executive sessions of the independent directors (during which Cisco’s strategy is reviewed and other topics are discussed) 
l Serves as principal liaison between the independent directors and the Chair and CEO 
l Communicates from time to time with the Chair and CEO and disseminates information to the rest of the Board as appropriate 
l Provides leadership to the Board if circumstances arise in which the role of the Board Chair may be, or may be perceived to be, in conflict 
l Reviews and approves agendas and meeting schedules to assure that there is sufficient time for discussion of all agenda items, and information provided to the Board (including the quality, quantity, and timeliness of such information) 
l Being available, as appropriate, for consultation and direct communication with major stockholders and other stakeholders 
l Presides over the annual performance evaluation of the Board, including the performance evaluation of each Board committee and individual Board members 
l Facilitates the Board’s performance evaluation of the CEO in conjunction with the Compensation Committee 
In connection with Mr. Capellas’ appointment as Lead Independent Director, the Board considered his demonstrated leadership during his tenure as a member of the Board, and also his leadership during his tenure as chair of the Nomination and Governance Committee, and as chair of former standing committees, including the Acquisition Committee and the Finance Committee, and believes his ability to act as a strong Lead Independent Director provides balance in Cisco’s leadership structure and is in the best interest of Cisco and its stockholders. 
Board Committees and Meetings 
Cisco currently has four standing committees: the Audit Committee, the Compensation Committee, the Nomination and Governance Committee, and the Public Policy Committee. Each of the standing committees has a written charter approved by the Board. A copy of each charter can be found on the “Committees” web page, which is located in the Corporate Governance section of our Investor Relations website at investor.cisco.com. 
During fiscal 2025, the Board held six meetings. During this period, all of the incumbent directors attended at least 75% of the aggregate of the total number of meetings of the Board and the committees of the Board on which each such director served, during the period for which such director served. Cisco’s directors are strongly encouraged to attend the annual meeting. Nine of Cisco’s directors who were then serving on the Board attended last year’s annual meeting. 
 
 
8 Cisco 2025 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
 
Audit Committee 
12 Meetings 
 
 
 
 
Mark
Garrett (Chair) John D.
Harris II Sarah Rae
Murphy 
Responsibilities and Duties Include: 
l Directly responsible for the appointment, determination of the compensation for, retention, and oversight of the performance of the independent registered public accounting firm 
l Reviews the financial information which will be provided to stockholders and others, including the quarterly and year-end financial results 
l Reviews the system of internal controls which management and the Board have established 
l Reviews the financial and risk management policies (including cybersecurity and data protection, insurance, currency, interest rate and equity risk management policies and programs) 
l Reviews policies and programs for addressing cybersecurity and data protection 
l Oversees accounting and financial reporting processes and the audits of Cisco's financial statements 
l Pre-approves audit and permissible non-audit services provided by the independent registered public accounting firm 
l Reviews the hiring policies for any employees or former employees of the independent registered public accounting firm 
l Oversees and reviews related party transactions 
l Establishes procedures for the receipt, retention, and treatment of complaints received by Cisco regarding accounting, internal accounting controls, or auditing matters, and the confidential, anonymous submission by employees of concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters 
l Reviews annually the responsibilities and activities for the prior and upcoming fiscal year of each of our internal audit and compliance functions, including the internal audit charter, risk-based internal audit plan, and the audit functions’ budget and staffing 
l Reviews activities related to coordinating, developing, and maintaining our enterprise risk management program 
l Meets separately in periodic executive sessions with each of management, the head of our internal audit function, and the independent registered public accounting firm 
l Reviews and approves the global investment policy 
l Reviews Cisco's capital structure and capital allocation strategy, including dividends and the stock repurchase program 
l Reports to the Board on a regular basis on the major events covered by the Audit Committee and makes recommendations to the Board and management concerning these matters 
Composition of the Committee 
l Each member of this committee has been determined by the Board to be an "audit committee financial expert" as defined in Item 407(d) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act") 
l Each member of this committee is an independent director and meets each of the other requirements for audit committee members under applicable Nasdaq listing standards 
The members of the Audit Committee during fiscal 2025 were: Mark Garrett (Chair), John D. Harris II, and Sarah Rae Murphy for all of fiscal 2025; and Ekta-Singh Bushell, a former Board member, until December 2024. 
 
 Governance and Board Matters 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
Compensation
and Management
Development
Committee 
5 Meetings 
 
 
 
 
Daniel H.
Schulman (Chair) Dr. Kristina
M. Johnson 
Marianna
Tessel 
 
Responsibilities and Duties Include: 
l Reviews, annually, and approves corporate goals and objectives relevant to

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Introduction 
The following discussion describes Cisco’s compensation program for its named executive officers. Cisco’s named executive officers for fiscal 2025 are our CEO, our Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), our three most highly compensated executive officers (other than the CEO and CFO) who were serving as executive officers at the end of fiscal 2025, and one former executive officer who was not serving as an executive officer at the end of fiscal 2025. 
The named executive officers are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Charles H. 
Robbins 
Chair and 
Chief Executive 
Officer 
R. Scott Herren 
Former Executive Vice President and 
Chief Financial 
Officer 
Jeetendra (Jeetu) Patel 
President and 
Chief Product Officer 
Deborah (Dev) 
L. Stahlkopf 
Executive Vice 
President and 
Chief Legal 
Officer 
Thimaya 
Subaiya 
Executive 
Vice President, 
Operations 
Gary Steele 
Former President, 
Go-to-Market 
 
The following are performance and compensation highlights for fiscal 2025. 
Executive Summary 
Company Performance 
In fiscal 2025, we delivered strong revenue growth across all geographies demonstrating robust demand for our technologies. Our results for fiscal 2025 include a full year of Splunk's results compared to approximately four months for fiscal 2024. Revenue was $56.7 billion, up 5% year over year. RPO grew 6% year over year to $43.5 billion, providing a strong foundation for our future performance. Total subscription revenue increased 15% to $31.5 billion, accounting for 56% of total revenue, reflecting the strength of our software and services and helping to fuel our strong profitability. The profitable growth of our business continues to produce strong cash flows, enabling us to return significant value to shareholders. In fiscal 2025, we returned a total of $12.4 billion through dividends and share repurchases, representing 94% of our free cash flow (1). We remain focused on making strategic investments in innovation, driving durable, profitable growth, and delivering stockholder value. 
Our fiscal 2025 results compared with fiscal 2024 were as follows (all comparisons year over year): 
l Revenue of $56.7 billion, up 5% 
l Profit Before Taxes (1) of $18.6 billion, flat 
l Operating Income (1) of $19.5 billion, up 6% 
l Product ARR (2) of $17.0 billion, up 8% 
(1) Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. See the Appendix for a definition of this measure and a reconciliation of this measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. In the case of Profit Before Taxes and Operating Income, the measure is calculated differently than the same term used under our annual cash and long-term, equity-based incentive programs, as applicable. Such adjustments are intended to improve comparability by reflecting the impact of the Splunk acquisition in both fiscal years. 
(2) For a definition of this term, see the description thereof contained in the discussion of transformational PRSUs in the CD&A below. 
 
 
40 Cisco 2025 Proxy Statement 
 
Stockholder Returns 
We maintained our historical practice of paying cash dividends and making share repurchases. We returned $12.4 billion to stockholders in fiscal 2025 consisting of: 
l $6.0 billion in share repurchases 
l $6.4 billion in cash dividends 
As of the end of fiscal 2025, our 1-year and 3-year TSR (1) were 47% and 66%, respectively. 
(1) TSR represents cumulative stock price change with dividends reinvested. 1-year and 3-year TSR are measured based on the fiscal year periods ending July 26, 2025. 
Say-On-Pay Support and Engaging with Our Stockholders 
Our Compensation Committee relies on our regular stockholder outreach and engagement activities, as well as more formal channels to communicate with stockholders, including the opportunity for our stockholders to cast a non- binding advisory vote regarding executive compensation at Cisco’s annual meeting of stockholders. See the “ Governance and Board Matters – Corporate Governance – Stockholder Engagement ” section above for a discussion of our fiscal 2025 stockholder outreach and engagement. See also the “ Governance and Board Matters – Corporate Governance – Board of Directors – Stockholder Communications with the Board ” section above. 
The Compensation Committee is interested in the ideas and feedback of our stockholders regarding executive compensation. Last year’s say-on-pay proposal was approved by approximately 77% of stockholder votes, an increase from approximately 75% the prior year. In response to this vote, we continued our robust engagement with stockholders to consider enhancements to our compensation program in fiscal 2025. In fiscal 2025, with the frequent participation of the chair of our Compensation Committee, Cisco engaged with stockholders representing approximately 61% of our outstanding shares at the end of the fiscal year, including 30% of our 30 largest stockholders, on a variety of topics, including our executive compensation program. See below for our response to feedback received from stockholders during these engagements. 
 
 Feedback Received Cisco’s Response 
 
 
Use of multi-year performance goals under the long-term incentive program, rather than annual goals We transitioned from annual performance goals to a multi-year operating goal over the three-year performance period under our long-term equity incentive program with our fiscal 2025 PRSUs, introducing a three-year operating income goal. Additionally, in light of this change, we changed our fiscal 2025 operating goals under the EIP from revenue and operating income to revenue and profit before taxes. 
 
 
 
Settlement of PRSUs below target for negative TSR performance We introduced a cap on our Relative TSR Modifier at target for our fiscal 2025 PRSUs in the event that our absolute TSR during the three-year performance period is negative. 
 
 
 
No increase in the CEO’s target long-term incentive award value during fiscal 2025 The CEO’s annual base salary, variable cash incentive award, and target long-term incentive awards for fiscal 2025 remained at the same levels as fiscal 2024. 
 
 
 Benchmarking with reference to the peer group median While the Compensation Committee does not tie individual compensation to specific target percentiles, beginning with fiscal 2025 compensation decisions, the Compensation Committee references the peer group median as its primary benchmark. 
 
 
 Adoption of a holding requirement During fiscal 2025, we introduced a holding requirement to our stock ownership guidelines, to further align the long-term interests of our executive officers with the creation of long-term stockholder value. 
 
 
 
Establishing performance goals above prior year actual performance levels All financial goals associated with fiscal 2026 incentives have been set at levels above actual fiscal 2025 performance. 
 
 
 
 Compensation Committee Matters 
41 
 
 
In evaluating our compensation practices in fiscal 2025, the Compensation Committee took into account the support our stockholders expressed for Cisco’s philosophy and practice of linking compensation to operational objectives and stockholder value creation. In fiscal 2025, the Compensation Committee continued to monitor our executive compensation programs to ensure compensation is aligned with company performance. 
As in prior years, we continue to set rigorous incentive compensation goals and align pay delivery with performance and achievement of our strategic objectives. We also continue to put executive compensation to an annual advisory stockholder vote and consider the views of our stockholders. The Compensation Committee will continue to seek out and consider stockholder feedback in the future. 
Annual Executive Incentive Plan 
Our revenue and profit before taxes under the EIP resulted in a company performance factor (“CPF”) of 1.44 for fiscal 2025, up from 0.56 in fiscal 2024 (when the CPF was based on revenue and operating income under the EIP), reflecting above target achievement of financial performance goals. The Compensation Committee set the fiscal 2025 target for revenue 4.5% above fiscal 2024 performance and the fiscal 2025 target for profit before taxes 5.0% below fiscal 2024 performance, in each case as measured under the EIP. These targets were set after various considerations, including: the impact of the strategic integration of Splunk into Cisco’s business to drive synergies; a complex operating environment, including industry and market factors such as product shipments returning to normalized levels during the first half of fiscal 2025 from an elevated level of shipments during the first half of fiscal 2024; impacts from regulation and policy changes; and potential performance headwinds related to these considerations. 
 
 Performance Criteria 
 
Fiscal 2025 Goals ($ billions) Pay for Performance Results 
 Threshold Target Maximum 
Fiscal 2025 Results 
($ billions) 
 Revenue 
 
$56.7 
(101 % of target) 
 
Profit Before Taxes 
 
$18.6 
(106 % of target) 
 
 
42 Cisco 2025 Proxy Statement 
 
2023-2025 PRSU Plan 
The payout under our three-year PRSU plan for fiscal 2023-2025 was 138% of target (versus 74% for fiscal 2022-2024), representing achievement of 116% of our operating income, operating cash flow, and EPS goals and 119% for the goal of TSR relative to the component companies of the S&P 500 Index over the three-year period based on Cisco’s TSR at the end of the performance period at the 74 th percentile. 
 
 
Pay-for-Performance Results for Fiscal 2023 Grant 
 Performance Criteria Performance Metric 
Operating Income/ 
Operating Cash 
Flow/ EPS (1) 
Relative TSR (2) 
 
Earned PRSUs = Target PRSUs x 
Average Financial Goal Multiplier x 
Relative TSR Modifier 
Fiscal 2025 
115% (3) 119% 
 
Fiscal 2024 
90% (4) 
 
Fiscal 2023 
144% (5) 
 Three-Year Result 116% 119% 
 PRSUs Earned 
138% of Target 
(1) This is the Financial Goal Multiplier. Operating income, operating cash flow, and EPS are determined pursuant to the PRSUs as set forth in the CD&A below and in the CD&A for fiscal 2024. 
(2) This is the Relative TSR Modifier. 
(3) During fiscal 2025, the Compensation Committee used operating income as the operating goal under the PRSU plan instead of operating cash flow and EPS, which were used during fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023. 
(4) During fiscal 2024, the Compensation Committee modified the adjustments used to determine operating cash flow and diluted EPS under the PRSUs to exclude impacts from the acquisition of Splunk, which was completed earlier than initially anticipated, resulting in a Financial Goal Multiplier of 90%, an increase from a Financial Goal Multiplier of 81% without the modification. 
(5) The Compensation Committee exercised its discretion to reduce the fiscal 2023 portion of the Financial Goal Multiplier from 149% to 144% to reflect the difference between the estimated tax rate for fiscal 2023, which was based in part on the potential legislation change pertaining to the research capitalization requirement enacted in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and used to establish the EPS goals for fiscal 2023, and the lower actual tax rate for fiscal 2023 as the legislation did not pass. 
Fiscal 2025 CEO Pay 
For fiscal 2025, our CEO’s target TDC was $32.8 million, flat from the prior year. When comparing our CEO’s target TDC to the CEOs in our peer group, our CEO’s target TDC was at the median of the CEOs in our peer group. While the Compensation Committee does not tie individual compensation to specific target percentiles, beginning with fiscal 2025 compensation decisions, the Compensation Committee references the peer group median as its primary benchmark. 
Compensation Program Structure 
 
 
 
 Attract and retain key executives with the proper background and experience required to drive our future growth and profitability by offering a total compensation program that flexibly adapts to changing economic, regulatory and social conditions, and takes into consideration the compensation practices of peer companies based on an objective set of criteria. 
Provide a significant portion of compensation through variable, performance-based components that are at- risk and based on Cisco’s achievement of designated financial and non-financial objectives. 
 
 
 
 
 
Compensate for achievement of short-term and long- term company financial and operating goals, and refrain from providing special benefits, “golden parachute” excise tax gross-ups, or accelerated equity vesting except in limited circumstances. Align the interests of our executives with our stockholders by tying a significant portion of total compensation to our overall financial and operating performance and the creation of long-term stockholder value. 
 
 
 Compensation Committee Matters 
43 
 
 
Our Compensation Practices Benefit our Stockholders 
Our executive compensation programs have strong governance components that further strengthen our pay- for- performance compensation philosophy, including the following: 
 
 Compensation Practices 
 
 Independent Compensation Committee Our Compensation Committee consists entirely of independent directors. 
 
 
 Independent Compensation Consultant Our Compensation Committee utilizes an independent compensation consultant, which is retained directly by the Compensation Committee and provides no other services to Cisco’s management. 
 
 
 Risk Assessment Our Compensation Committee performs an annual review of the risks related to our compensation programs. 
 
 
 Pay for Performance 
62% of target annual TDC for the CEO was performance-based and approximately 52% of target annual TDC for the other named executive officers was performance-based. See the “ Compensation Components ” section for a discussion of our named executive officers’ TDC. 
 
 
 Annual Cash Incentive 
Payment is primarily based on Cisco’s achievement of rigorous pre-established revenue and operating income goals (weighted 90%) and secondarily based on a team performance factor scored based on the executive leadership team’s joint execution with respect to certain Purpose goals and initiatives (weighted 10%). 
 
 
 
 Annual Long-Term Equity Incentive 
Approximately 60% of our CEO’s target annual equity award value is in PRSUs and, except for awards granted in connection with promotions, approximately 50% of our other named executive officers’ target annual equity award value is in PRSUs. For fiscal 2025 PRSUs, the PRSUs may be earned based on a pre-established three-year performance goal, namely operating income, modified higher or lower by no more than 20% based on relative TSR performance measured over the same three-year performance period, with earned values paid at the end of the full performance period. The fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023 PRSUs may be earned based on pre-established annual performance goals, namely operating cash flow and EPS, modified higher or lower by no more than 20% based on relative TSR performance measured over a three-year period, with earned values paid at the end of the full performance period. 
 
 
 Caps on Incentive Compensation 
There is a limit on the maximum amount of annual cash incentives and PRSUs that may be paid. For our fiscal 2025 PRSUs, we also cap at target our Relative TSR Modifier in the event that our absolute TSR during the three-year performance period is negative. 
 
 
 No SERP or Pension Plan We do not sponsor a supplemental executive retirement plan or a defined benefit pension plan for our executive officers. 
 
 
 Employment Agreements 
None of our executive officers have employment, severance, or change in control agreements. 
 
 
 
Stock Ownership Guidelines and Holding Requirement 
We have meaningful stock ownership guidelines for our executive officers and non-employee directors. Additionally, during fiscal 2025, we added a holding requirement, which applies until an executive officer satisfies such ownership requirement. 
 
 
 
 
44 Cisco 2025 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 Compensation Practices 
 Recoupment (“Clawback”) Policy We have a long-standing recoupment (“clawback”) policy that is triggered in the event of certain financial restatements. This policy was updated to comply with new SEC rules, expanding its application from qualifying cash awards and PRSUs received prior to October 2, 2023 to include all qualifying cash and equity incentive awards received on or after October 2, 2023. Additionally, our equity plans provide for the forfeiture of awards if an executive officer participates in activities detrimental to Cisco or is terminated for misconduct. 
 
 
 Limited Perquisites We only provide limited perquisites as approved by the Compensation Committee. 
 
 
 No Single-Trigger Change-in-Control Vesting Acceleration Provisions No equity awards are subject to single-trigger change in control vesting. 
 
 
 No Repricing Our 2005 Stock Incentive Plan expressly prohibits repricing or repurchasing equity awards that are underwater without stockholder approval. 
 
 
 No Parachute Excise Tax Gross-Ups We do not provide tax gross-ups in connection with any “golden parachute” excise taxes. 
 
 
 No Hedging Under our insider trading policy, all employees (including officers) and members of the Board are prohibited from engaging in any speculative transactions in Cisco securities, including engaging in short sales, transactions involving put options, call options or other derivative securities, or any other forms of hedging transactions, such as collars or forward sale contracts. 
 
 
 No Pledging Executive officers and members of the Board are prohibited from pledging Cisco securities in margin accounts or as collateral for loans. 
 
 
 No Dividends or Dividend Equivalents Paid or Settled on Unvested Equity Awards We do not provide for payment of dividends or settlement of dividend equivalents on unvested awards. 
 
 
 
Timing of Equity Award Grants 
We do not coordinate grants of equity awards with disclosures of positive or negative information. 
 
Compensation decisions and other details are discussed in the remainder of this CD&A. 
 
 Compensation Committee Matters 
45 
 
 
Compensation Components 
The three major elements of our executive officers’ regular TDC are: (i) base salary, (ii) variable cash incentive awards, and (iii) long-term, equity-based incentive awards. For fiscal 2025, 62% of target annual TDC for the CEO was performance-based and approximately 52% of the target annual TDC for the other named executive officers was performance-based, reflecting Cisco’s pay-for-performance philosophy. 
CEO 
NEOs other than CEO 
Amounts may not sum due to rounding. 
Fiscal 2025 Compensation 
Annual Base Salary 
We provide base salaries to our executive officers to compensate them for their services rendered during the year and to provide them with a stable level of fixed compensation that offers a competitive level of salary as compared to our primary competitors for executive talent. Consistent with our philosophy of linking pay to performance, our executives receive a small percentage of their overall compensation in the form of base salary. 
The Compensation Committee, when establishing base salaries, considers each executive officer’s individual performance, the breadth, scope, and complexity of his or her role, and internal equity, as well as whether his or her base salary is appropriately positioned relative to similarly situated executives in our peer group. Based on the above considerations, as well as Mr. Patel’s promotion to EVP, Chief Product Officer, which was prior to his promotion to President and Chief Product Officer, the fiscal 2025 base salaries for Mr. Patel and Mr. Subaiya increased by 21% and 7%, respectively. The fiscal 2025 base salary of Mr. Robbins was not increased and has not increased since the beginning of fiscal 2020. 
 
 Named Executive Officer Fiscal 2025 Base Salary Fiscal 2024 Base Salary 
 Charles H. Robbins $ 1,390,000 $ 1,390,000 
 R. Scott Herren $ 

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
mpensation Committee Matters 
37 
 
 
 
 
 Advisory Vote to Approve Executive Compensation 
 
 
Under Section 14A of the Exchange Act, Cisco stockholders are entitled to cast an advisory vote to approve the compensation of Cisco’s named executive officers, known as a “Say on Pay” vote. The stockholder vote is an advisory vote only and is not binding on Cisco or its Board of Directors. Although the vote is non-binding, the Board and the Compensation Committee value the opinions of our stockholders and will consider the outcome of the vote when making future compensation decisions for our named executive officers. 
The core of Cisco’s executive compensation philosophy and practice continues to align real pay delivery with performance. Cisco’s executive officers are compensated in a manner consistent with Cisco’s business strategy, competitive practice, sound corporate governance principles, and stockholder interests and concerns. We believe our compensation program is strongly aligned with the long-term interests of our stockholders. We urge you to read the CD&A, the compensation tables, and the narrative discussion set forth on pages 40 to 83 for additional details on Cisco’s executive compensation program. Below are a few highlights of our pay-for-performance philosophy. 
Fiscal 2025 Pay and Performance 
In fiscal 2025, we delivered strong revenue growth across all geographies demonstrating robust demand for our technologies. Our results for fiscal 2025 include a full year of Splunk's results compared to approximately four months for fiscal 2024. Revenue was $56.7 billion, up 5% year over year. Remaining Performance Obligations (“RPO”) grew 6% year over year to $43.5 billion, providing a strong foundation for our future performance. Total subscription revenue increased 15% to $31.5 billion, accounting for 56% of total revenue, reflecting the strength of our software and services and helping to fuel our strong profitability. The profitable growth of our business continues to produce strong cash flows, enabling us to return significant value to shareholders. In fiscal 2025, we returned a total of $12.4 billion through dividends and share repurchases, representing 94% of our free cash flow (1). We remain focused on making strategic investments in innovation, driving durable, profitable growth, and delivering stockholder value. 
Our fiscal 2025 results compared with fiscal 2024 were as follows (all comparisons year over year): 
l Revenue of $56.7 billion, up 5% 
l Profit Before Taxes (1) of $18.6 billion, flat 
l Operating Income (1) of $19.5 billion, up 6% 
l Product ARR (2) of $17.0 billion, up 8% 
(1) Represents a non-GAAP financial measure. See the Appendix for a definition of this measure and a reconciliation of this measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. In the case of Profit Before Taxes and Operating Income, the measure is calculated differently than the same term used under our annual cash and long-term, equity-based incentive programs, as applicable. Such adjustments are intended to improve comparability by reflecting the impact of the Splunk acquisition in both fiscal years. 
(2) For a definition of this term, see the description thereof contained in the discussion of transformational PRSUs in the CD&A below. 
 
 
38 Cisco 2025 Proxy Statement 
 
Long-term incentives continue to be the largest element of named executive officer compensation, consistent with market practice. For Cisco’s CEO, approximately 60% of long-term grant value is comprised of performance shares earned for achievement against rigorous goals for operating income during fiscal 2025, operating cash flow and EPS during fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023, and relative total stockholder return (“TSR”) performance measured over the entire three-year performance period. For Cisco’s other named executive officers, approximately 50% of long-term grant value is comprised of performance shares earned for achievement against the same goals of operating income, operating cash flow, EPS, and relative TSR performance measured over the performance period. Our PRSUs for fiscal 2023 – 2025 were earned at 138% of target, as operating income, operating cash flow, and EPS performance were at 116% of target over the three-year period, while relative TSR for the three-year period was above the target performance level. 
We believe our compensation structure and its resulting realizable pay for ex

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Transactions with Related Persons 
Cisco’s Board has adopted a written related person transactions policy. The Audit Committee (or other committee designated by the Nomination and Governance Committee) reviews transactions that may be “related-person transactions,” which are transactions between Cisco and related persons in which the aggregate amount involved exceeds or may be expected to exceed $120,000 and in which a related person has or will have a direct or indirect material interest. For purposes of the policy, a related person is a director, executive officer, nominee for director, or a greater than 5% beneficial owner of Cisco’s common stock, in each case since the beginning of the last fiscal year, and their immediate family members. 
This policy provides that, barring special facts or circumstances, a related person does not have a direct or indirect material interest in the following categories of transactions: 
l employment-related compensation to executive officers that is determined by the Compensation Committee; 
l compensation to non-employee directors that is reported in Cisco’s proxy statement; 
l transactions with another company at which: 
l the related person’s only relationship is as a beneficial owner of less than 10% of that company’s shares or as a limited partner holding interests of less than 10% in such partnership; 
l the related person is an employee (other than an executive officer) and/or a director, if the aggregate amount involved in a Cisco fiscal year does not exceed the greater of $1 million or 2% of that company’s total annual revenues; or 
l the related person is the beneficial owner of less than a majority interest in that company (if the related person is solely related to Cisco because of its beneficial ownership of greater than 5% of Cisco’s common stock); 
l charitable contributions, grants or endowments to the Cisco Foundation or by Cisco or the Cisco Foundation to a charitable organization, foundation, or university at which the related person’s only relationship is as an employee (or at which the related person is a trustee, director or executive officer if the aggregate amount involved in a Cisco fiscal year does not exceed $300,000), or any non-discretionary matching contribution, grant, or endowment made pursuant to a matching gift program; 
l transactions where the related person’s interest arises solely from the ownership of publicly traded securities issued by Cisco and all holders of such securities receive proportional benefits; 
l transactions involving services as a bank depositary of funds, transfer agent, registrar, trustee under a trust indenture, or similar services; 
l transactions where the rates or charges involved are determined by competitive bids; 
l transaction involving the rendering of services as a common or contract carrier, or public utility, at rates or charges fixed in conformity with law or governmental authority; 
l ordinary course business travel and expenses, advances and reimbursements; and 
l payments made pursuant to (i) directors and officers insurance policies, (ii) Cisco’s certificate of incorporation or bylaws, and/or (iii) any policy, agreement or instrument previously approved by Cisco’s Board, such as indemnification agreements. 
When transactions involving related persons do not fall into one of the above categories, they are reviewed by Cisco’s disclosure committee. The disclosure committee determines whether a related person could have a significant interest in such a transaction, and any such transaction is referred to the
