GENERAL MILLS INC (GIS) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: GENERAL MILLS INC
Ticker: GIS
CIK: 40704
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2025-08-11

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance committee and full board review our board leadership structure
on an annual basis in connection with the appointment of the Independent Lead Director. This review includes a discussion on the
effectiveness of the current board leadership structure, the qualifications and experiences of the Chairman and Independent Lead
Director and board and shareholder feedback on the structure. The independent directors believe that our current board leadership
structure is optimal for the company at this time and continues to deliver strong performance and robust independent board oversight. 
Mr. Harmening serves as the company’s Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer, providing the organization with clear, consistent leadership, strategic vision and management accountability. 
Mr. Harmening has more than 25 years of leadership experience with General
Mills and possesses a deep understanding of our businesses and markets. As Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Harmening is
in the best position to apply his experience and expertise in assessing industry dynamics and guiding the board’s discussions
of strategy and business performance. 
Ms. Henry was appointed by the independent directors to serve as the
board’s Independent Lead Director in September 2023, with her appointment ratified again in September 2024. She provides strong
leadership for the independent directors and ensures independent oversight of management and the affairs of the company. The board’s
current leadership structure was unanimously adopted and approved by the board’s independent directors. 
The board believes that the critical oversight provided by an independent
board and strong Independent Lead Director, combined with the organizational leadership of the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
best serves the interests of the company and our shareholders. This arrangement creates an environment in which the board works collaboratively
with management, while ensuring that the independent directors can effectively oversee performance and hold senior leaders accountable.
In recognition of the large, complex, and global nature of our business, the board recognizes that a combined Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer provides clear leadership and accountability throughout the organization and best ensures alignment between the
board and management on issues of strategy, priorities, and accountability. 
 
 
CURRENT
LEADERSHIP STRUCTURE 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 33 
 
 Back to Contents 
Independent Lead Director 
The board recognizes the importance of appointing an Independent Lead Director
to maintain a strong independent board leadership structure that functions collaboratively with management, while maintaining independent
oversight. Therefore, the position of Independent Lead Director comes with a clear mandate and significant authority and responsibilities.
At any time when the board determines that the same individual should hold the positions of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, and
at any time when the Chairman is not independent, the independent directors elect an Independent Lead Director. 
 
Considerations in Selecting
the Independent Lead Director 
Ms. Henry has served as the Independent Lead Director since
September 2023. Ms. Henry was appointed by the independent directors of the board based on a comprehensive succession process led by our
former Independent Lead Director, Steve Odland. Ms. Henry’s service as the board’s Independent Lead Director has provided
leadership for the independent directors and ensured independent oversight of management and the affairs of the company. 
Ms. Henry draws on her business leadership, corporate strategic
planning, and governance expertise to provide strong, independent board leadership and to ensure board effectiveness by fostering active
discussion and collaboration among the independent directors on the board and serving as an effective liaison with management. 
Our Independent Lead Director is elected by the independent
directors to serve for a three-year term, with the appointment ratified annually. The Independent Lead Director’s term may be extended
by one-year under certain circumstances. Ms. Henry’s term will expire at the 2026 Annual Meeting and based on a thorough succession
process, the board will appoint a new Independent Lead Director or extend Ms. Henry’s term at that time. 
Primary Responsibilities of the Independent Lead
Director 
 • 
 Reviews and approves board meeting schedules and agendas and approves the types of information sent
to the board; 
 • 
 Presides at all board meetings at which the Chairman is not present, including executive sessions
of the independent directors (held at each board meeting), and informs the Chairman of issues considered and decisions reached during
those sessions; 
 • 
 Facilitates effective and candid board discussions and communications to optimize board performance;
 • 
 Meets regularly with the Chairman, serves as a liaison between the Chairman and the independent directors,
and facilitates communications between the board and senior management; 
 • 
 Leads the board in setting forth and enforcing its expectations of ethical standards at the board
and senior leadership levels; 
 • 
 Oversees board evaluations and leads the board’s process for selecting his or her successor;
 • 
 Advises the Chairman of the board’s informational needs and approves the types of information
sent to the board; 
 • 
 Calls meetings of the independent directors, as needed, and sets agendas for executive sessions;
 • 
 Monitors and coordinates with the Chairman and chair of the corporate governance committee on governance
issues; and 
 • 
 Serves as a board representative for consultation and direct communication with major shareholders when appropriate. 
 34 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Board Committees and Their Functions 
The board has five standing committees that are each composed entirely of
independent directors. A copy of each committee’s charter may be found on our website at www.generalmills.com
in the Investors section under “Governance”. Assignments are rotated periodically to ensure that each committee
has an appropriate mix of tenure and experience. 
 Audit
Committee 
 
 Members: 
 Number of meetings in fiscal
2025: Seven 
 Eric D. Sprunk (Chair) 
 
 Benno O. Dorer 
 
 Elizabeth C. Lempres 
 
 John
G. Morikis 
 
Functions: 
 • 
 Oversees integrity, adequacy, and effectiveness of internal control, audit, and financial reporting
processes; 
 • 
 Assesses and ensures the independence, qualifications, and performance of our independent registered
public accounting firm, selects the independent registered public accounting firm for the annual audit and pre-approves the independent
registered public accounting firm’s services and fees; 
 • 
 Meets with the independent registered public accounting firm, without management present, to consult
with and review the results of the firm’s audit; 
 • 
 Oversees the company’s ethics and compliance program to ensure compliance with applicable laws,
corporate policies, and the company’s Employee Code of Conduct; 
 • 
 Reviews and discusses with management the company’s annual risk assessment and the enterprise
risk management program for identifying, assessing, and managing key strategic and operational risks, and ensures that those risks
have been assigned to the appropriate board committee or full board for oversight; 
 • 
 Reviews and approves our annual audited financial statements before issuance, subject to the board
of directors’ approval; 
 • 
 Reviews and discusses with management the Audit Committee Report and approves its inclusion in the
proxy statement; and 
 • 
 Reviews the performance of the internal audit function. 
Financial Experts: 
The board of directors has unanimously determined that (i)
all audit committee members are financially literate under the NYSE listing standards and (ii) Mr. Dorer, Mr. Morikis, and Mr. Sprunk qualify
as “audit committee financial experts” within the meaning of SEC regulations and have accounting or related financial management
expertise as required by the NYSE listing standards. Each member also met the independence standards for audit committee membership under
the rules of the SEC during fiscal 2025. 
 Compensation
and Talent Committee 
 Members: 
 Number of meetings in fiscal 2025: Four 
 Elizabeth C. Lempres (Chair) 
 
 C. Kim Goodwin 
 
 Maria A. Sastre 
 
 Jorge A. Uribe 
 
Functions: 
 • 
 Reviews compensation policies for executive officers and employees to ensure they align with our
compensation philosophy and provide appropriate motivation for company performance and increased shareholder value; 
 • 
 Reviews our culture, talent management, and championing belonging policies and practices to ensure
that they are appropriately designed to engage and inspire our teams; 
 • 
 Reviews and approves goals and objectives for the Chief Executive Officer and conducts performance
reviews against those goals and objectives; 
 • 
 Recommends to the board compensation and equity awards for the Chief Executive Officer and approves
them for other executive officers; 
 • 
 Recommends to the board the compensation and equity awards for the independent directors; 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 35 
 
 Back to Contents 
 • 
 Reviews and discusses with management an annual risk assessment of the compensation policies for
executive officers and employees; and 
 • 
 Reviews and discusses with management the Compensation and Talent Committee Report and approves its inclusion in the proxy statement. 
Each member met the independence standards for compensation and talent committee
membership under the listing standards of the NYSE during fiscal 2025. 
 Corporate
Governance Committee 
 
 Members: 
 Number of meetings in fiscal 2025: Four 
 Maria A. Sastre (Chair) 
 
 Benno O. Dorer 
 
 Maria G. Henry 
 
 Jo Ann Jenkins 
 
 Eric D. Sprunk 
 
Functions: 
 • 
 Monitors and recommends changes in the organization, procedures, and policies of the board, including
committee appointments and corporate governance policies and practices; 
 • 
 Develops policy on composition, participation, and size of the board as well as tenure and retirement
of directors; 
 • 
 Recommends candidates for election to the board and evaluates continuing service of incumbent directors;
 • 
 Oversees the annual board self-evaluation process; and 
 • 
 Reviews and approves transactions between General Mills and related persons. 
 
 
 Finance
Committee 
 
 Members: 
 Number of meetings in fiscal 2025: Four 
 Diane L. Neal (Chair) 
 
 C. Kim Goodwin 
 
 John G. Morikis 
 
 Steve Odland 
 
Functions: 
 • 
 Reviews financial policies and objectives, including capital allocation and dividend policy; 
 • 
 Reviews changes in our capital structure, including debt issuances, common stock sales, share repurchases,
and stock splits; 
 • 
 Reviews significant capital investments, acquisitions, and divestitures; 
 • 
 Reviews the annual business plan and related financing implications; and 
 • 
 Reviews financial risk management strategies, including the use of derivatives. 
 
 
 Public
Responsibility Committee 
 
 Members: 
 Number of meetings in fiscal
2025: Three 
 Jorge A. Uribe (Chair) 
 
 Maria G. Henry 
 
 Jo Ann Jenkins 
 
 Diane L. Neal 
 
 Steve
Odland 
 
Functions: 
 • 
 Reviews policies and procedures related to food and human safety; 
 • 
 Oversees public policy issues affecting General Mills, including nutrition, marketing, and advertising; 
 • 
 Monitors our corporate social responsibility, sustainability, environmental and climate strategies, plans, and objectives; 
 • 
 Evaluates our relationships with external constituencies and stakeholders, and oversees the reputation and standing of our corporate
brand; 
 • 
 Reviews our policies governing political contributions and our record of contributions; and 
 • 
 Monitors our charitable giving and volunteer work. 
 36 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Director Attendance 
Directors are expected to attend all board and committee meetings, as well
as the annual meetings of shareholders, absent exigent circumstances. All of our then serving directors attended the 2024 Annual Meeting
of Shareholders. During fiscal 2025, the board of directors met eight times and various committees of the board met a total of 22 times.
All directors attended at least 75% of the aggregate total meetings of the board and board committees on which they served during fiscal
2025. 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 37 
 
 Back to Contents 
Annual Board and Committee Evaluation Process 
The board recognizes that a robust and constructive evaluation process is
an essential part of good corporate governance and board effectiveness. The evaluation processes utilized by the board are designed to
assess board and committee effectiveness as well as individual director performance and contribution levels. The corporate governance
committee considers the results of the annual evaluations in connection with its review of director nominees to ensure the board continues
to operate effectively. The evaluation results are also used to provide feedback to individual directors. In keeping with our robust evaluation
process, in fiscal 2025, in addition to written board and committee evaluations, our Independent Lead Director conducted individual director
interviews. These interviews yielded valuable information for the Chairman and corporate governance committee to consider during the board
evaluation process and on a go-forward basis to enhance board effectiveness. 
 
 
 Performed
By 
 Frequency 
 Process 
 Results 
 
 
 All Directors 
 Annual 
 Board Questionnaire : Board members complete written board self-evaluations which: (a) provide for quantitative ratings of key board priorities and the operation of the board and (b) seek subjective feedback on areas for improvement. 
 
• 
The Chairman, Independent Lead Director and corporate governance committee chair review and discuss the results. 
• 
The Chairman, Independent
Lead Director and corporate governance committee chair review a summary of the results with the full board, and enhancements are implemented
as appropriate. 
• 
For third-party reviews, the Chairman, Independent Lead Director and corporate governance committee chair review and discuss the results with the independent consultant to identify feedback to the board on how it can enhance its effectiveness. 
• 
The corporate governance
committee reviews any concerns or issues regarding individual director performance and takes appropriate action as necessary. 
 
 
 Senior Management 
 Annual 
 Management Survey : Senior management members who regularly interact with the board and/or its committees complete a written survey to provide input and perspective on the operation of the board. 
 
 
 All Directors

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
This section provides an overview of our compensation philosophy, the key
elements of our executive compensation program and the compensation actions for our named executive officers (“NEOs”)
in the context of our company strategy and our fiscal 2025 performance. 
Executive Compensation At-A-Glance 
Fiscal 2025 Named Executive Officers 
 Jeffrey L. Harmening 
 
 Kofi A. Bruce 
 
 Dana McNabb 
 
 Jaime Montemayor 
 
 Jonathan J. Nudi 
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
 
 Chief Financial Officer 
 
 Group President, North America Retail and North America Pet (1) 
 
 Chief Digital and Technology Officer 
 
 Former Group President, North America Pet, International and North America Foodservice (2) 
Fiscal 2025 Performance Overview 
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate top-tier returns for our shareholders
over the long term. We believe achieving that goal requires us to generate a consistent balance of net sales growth, margin expansion,
cash conversion, and cash return to shareholders over time. Our executive compensation program and the compensation decisions of
the compensation and talent committee are closely aligned with the company’s business strategies, priorities, and long-term
growth objectives. In particular, the annual incentive targets we set at the beginning of the year are based on financial objectives
and priorities approved by the board and communicated to investors. 
In fiscal 2025, the operating environment was characterized by significant
volatility and uncertainty, resulting in value-seeking behaviors by consumers that were deeper and more prolonged than we expected.
As a result, we made important changes to adapt to the evolving environment and put our business on a path back to growth. We increased
investment to bring consumers greater value, which strengthened our volume performance as we exited the year. While the level of
incremental investment resulted in fiscal 2025 financial results below our targeted ranges, we expect the improved volume and household
penetration trends will translate into stronger top- and bottom-line performance over the long term. Our fiscal 2025 performance
and resulting below-target incentive payouts reflect results that are in line with the challenging environment we navigated throughout
the year. 
 (1) 
 Dana McNabb was promoted from Group President, North America Retail to Group President, North
America Retail and North America Pet effective as of June 1, 2025. 
 (2) 
 Jonathan J. Nudi retired from his role as Group President, North America Pet, International
and North America Foodservice effective as of June 30, 2025. 
 44 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Fiscal Year Financial Highlights that Align with
Our Pay for Performance Principles 
F25 Key Priorities 
In fiscal 2025, we continued to take strategic actions
to adapt to the changing marketplace and more challenging consumer sentiment. Our fiscal 2025 results reflected the decision we made during
the year to step up investment in response to more prolonged value-seeking consumer behaviors and greater volatility in the operating
environment. 
 
 In a challenging consumer and operating environment, we competed more effectively,
increased product innovation, and reinvested into our business. Our efforts to strengthen our brand building, innovation
and in store execution helped drive improved volume and market share trends in the second half of fiscal 2025. We launched new product
offerings to meet consumer demands, including Cheerios Protein cereal, Old El Paso soup, and new varieties of Totino’s Pizza
Rolls and Chex Mix snacks with bolder flavors. 
 
 We created fuel for investment. We accelerated our HMM cost savings to five percent
of cost of goods sold, which was higher than historical levels and helped us fund investments in remarkability and innovation. We
also launched transformation initiatives to free up our teams to focus on growth. 
 
 We maintained our capital allocation discipline. We exceeded our free cash
flow conversion target in fiscal 2025, generating approximately $2.3 billion of free cash flow at a 97 percent conversion
rate. We continued to reshape our portfolio, including acquisitions and divestitures that further improved our
portfolio’s ability to generate profitable growth over the long term. And, we were able to return $2.5 billion to
shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. 
 
F25
Financial Targets 
Net sales
totaled 
$19.5 billion 
and organic net sales decreased 2% compared to year-ago levels*. 
 
Operating
profit 
totaled 
$3.3 billion 
and adjusted operating profit of $3.4 billion decreased 7% on
a constant-currency basis*. 
 
Diluted
EPS 
totaled 
$4.10 
and adjusted diluted EPS of $4.21 decreased 7% on a constant-currency
basis*. 
 
Net
cash provided by 
operations totalled 
$2.9 billion 
This cash generation supported capital investments totaling $625
million and our resulting free cash flow was approximately $2.3 billion*. 
 * 
 Organic net sales, adjusted operating profit (on a constant-currency basis), adjusted diluted EPS (on a constant-currency basis) and free cash flow and conversion rate are non-GAAP measures. For more information on the use of non-GAAP measures in the Proxy Statement, and a reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, see Appendix A. 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 45 
 
 Back to Contents 
 
 
 Compensation
Policies and Practices 
 
 
 Robust 
Compensation 
Program 
Governance 
 
• Clawback policies 
• Tally sheets
reviewed in connection with compensation decision making 
• Annual risk
assessment of pay programs 
• Double-trigger
change in control vesting provisions 
• Fully independent
compensation consultant 
• Executive session
at each compensation and talent committee meeting 
• No employment
contracts for NEOs 
• No excise tax
gross ups 
 
 
 Alignment 
between Pay and 
Performance 
 
• PSUs granted
to all NEOs and other company officers 
• Significant
percentage of executive compensation is variable based on company performance 
• Challenging
quantitative company performance measures aligned with strategic priorities 
 
 
 Stock 
Ownership 
Best Practices 
 
• Rigorous stock
ownership requirements 
• No officer or
director hedging or pledging of company stock 
• No payment of
dividend equivalents on unvested equity awards 
• No repricing
or back dating of options 
 
 
 Shareholder 
Accountability 
 
• Annual say-on-pay
vote 
• Direct engagement
with shareholders 
Market Trends and Shareholder Feedback 
Management and the compensation and talent committee’s independent
consultant discuss market trends, investor expectations and shareholder feedback on executive compensation matters with the compensation
and talent committee on a regular basis. With these regular discussions, the company is positioned to refine our compensation programs
as needed to ensure they continue to meet the ongoing needs of the business and deliver shareholder expectations. 
Compensation Philosophy 
Our compensation program is designed to attract, motivate, reward, and
retain superior leaders who consistently pursue initiatives and execute strategies that contribute to strong company performance and total
return to shareholders that are in the top tier of our industry. The compensation and talent committee bases its compensation decisions
on the following core principles: 
 • 
 Compensation design supports our business strategy: Our compensation
program is closely aligned with our long-term growth model and strategic priorities. Incentive performance measures closely track
our externally communicated financial objectives, and long-term incentives create significant alignment between the interests of
our executives and those of our shareholders. 
 • 
 Pay is performance-based: A significant percentage of our NEOs’
compensation is at risk and variable based on the annual and long-term performance of the company. 
 • 
 Compensation opportunities are competitive: Given that the competition
for talent in the consumer packaged goods industry is intense, the compensation opportunities for each NEO have been designed to
ensure that they are competitive with our industry peer group. 
 46 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Executive Compensation Program Design 
Elements of Total Direct Compensation and Alignment
with Performance Measures 
Our executive compensation program is designed to incent our NEOs to
pursue strategies and execute priorities that promote growth and deliver strong returns to shareholders. The core elements of our NEOs’
total direct compensation consist of base salary, annual incentive and long-term incentive. Target total direct compensation for each
NEO is benchmarked within a reasonable range of the median of our industry peer group. Each element of annual and long-term incentive
compensation is tied to performance and closely linked to our strategy, long-term growth model, financial objectives, and ultimately to
TSR and continued value creation for our shareholders. 
 Percentage 
Of CEO Target
Compensation 
 
 Total
Direct 
Compensation 
Element 
 
 Pay
Element 
 
 Performance
Measure 
 
 Strategy
and 
Performance Alignment 
 
 
 BASE 
SALARY 
 
 Cash 
 
 • Individual performance and contributions based on scope and complexity
of role 
 
 • Positioned within a reasonable range of market median based on individual
performance and contributions 
 
 
 ANNUAL INCENTIVE 
 
 Cash-based award 
 
 
Company Performance (80%) 
• Organic net sales growth* 
• Adjusted operating profit growth* 
Individual Performance (20%) 
 
 
• Rewards and recognizes annual accomplishment
of key financial objectives 
• Corporate performance measures aligned with
long-term growth model 
 
 
 LONG-TERM INCENTIVE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PSUs 
 
 
Three-year cliff vesting (with one-year additional holding period required) and Three-year measurement
period 
• Organic net sales growth* (CAGR) 
• Cumulative operating cash flow* 
• +/- 25% Relative TSR Modifier 
 
 • Performance metrics align with key elements for delivering growth
and creating value for shareholders 
 
 
 
 
 Stock Options 
 
 Four-year graded vesting 
 
 • Ultimate value tied to stock price appreciation 
 
 
 
 
 RSUs 
 
 Four-year graded vesting 
 
 • Ultimate value tied to TSR 
 * 
 Non-GAAP measures. For more information on the use of non-GAAP measures in the Proxy Statement, and a reconciliation
of non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, see Appendix A. 
Significant Percentage of Executive Pay is At-Risk 
Since executive compensation is paid principally in the form of annual
and long-term incentive awards, a significant percentage of executive pay is at risk and variable based on the annual and long-term performance
of the company. PSUs, which comprise 50% of the long-term incentive award, will only be paid at the end of the three-year performance
period if three-year financial targets are achieved and are further subject to a 25% adjustment up or down based on the company’s
TSR relative to the TSR of the companies in our compensation peer group. Stock options and RSUs, which comprise the remaining 50% of the
long-term incentive award, derive their value directly from the company’s common stock price appreciation, which in the long term
reflect company performance and is directly linked to shareholder returns. 
 • 
 Performance Share Units: Can be rendered worthless if company performance for any three-year measurement
period is below threshold. 
 • 
 Stock Options: Have no value if the company’s common stock price does not appreciate prior to expiration of the
stock options. 
 • 
 Restricted Stock Units: Value can decline significantly from the grant date if the company performs poorly and its common
stock price falls. 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 47 
 
 Back to Contents 
For our NEOs to earn their intended target compensation from these
awards, the company must show sustained competitive performance on annual and three-year company performance measures and must achieve
strong shareholder returns. 
 
CEO
PAY MIX AT TARGET 
 
OTHER
NEO PAY MIX AT TARGET (Averaged) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90% 
PERFORMANCE-BASED
COMPENSATION 
 
 
81% 
PERFORMANCE-BASED
COMPENSATION 
The pay mix represented above is based on target total direct compensation
opportunities. 
Base Salary 
Base salaries provide fixed income based on the size, scope, and complexity
of each individual’s role and their individual performance and contribution levels. The only fixed element of total direct compensation,
base salary, is set within a reasonable range of median levels for similarly situated officers within the industry peer group and is based
on current and historical performance. With the guidance of the independent compensation consultant, the board (for the CEO) and the compensation
and talent committee (for the other NEOs), annually review potential adjustments to base salary to ensure continuous alignment with the
market and to account for changes in responsibilities. 
Annual Incentive Award 
Our annual incentive plan rewards the achievement of annual company and
individual performance objectives. Each NEO’s target opportunity for an annual incentive award is a percentage of their base salary,
which is expressed as a target incentive percentage. Annual incentive awards can vary greatly from year to year based on achievement of
the annual company performance measures, business segment results and individual performance ratings. Annual incentive awards range from
0% to 200% of target, with a 100% of target award for on-target performance. 
How We Establish Target Opportunities 
In establishing the target incentive percentage opportunities for the
NEOs, our compensation and talent committee and the board consider a number of factors, including the NEO’s level of responsibility,
size and complexity of role, a reasonable range of median levels for similarly situated officers within the industry peer group, and other
factors related to the scope of the NEO’s responsibilities. 
How We Select Performance Measures 
Achievement on the annual company performance measures and, as applicable,
business segment results account for 80% of each NEO’s annual incentive award payout. For the annual company performance measures,
the assessment of company performance for each year is based on goals set forth in the annual corporate operating plan that is approved
by the board before the start of the fiscal year in May. The annual corporate operating plan aligns with our corporate strategy, long-term
commitment to shareholders and expected peer and industry performance. This in turn ensures that our annual incentive awards drive results
that support the company’s business strategy and remains consistent with the objectives communicated to investors. Annual company
performance measures for fiscal 2025 consisted of two equally weighted measures: organic net sales growth and adjusted operating profit
growth. 
How We Set Goals 
For fiscal 2025, the compensation and talent committee approved the performance
goals for target payout noted in the table below, as well as for threshold and maximum incentive payout. The goals were set at levels
appropriate to incent and reward management for achievement of the results relative to our annual plans and strategic priorities. To ensure
that the annual company performance goals are appropriately challenging, the compensation and talent committee tests and evaluates the
goals in the context of several factors, including: 
 • 
 Financial performance goals that are consistent with the achievement of our long-term goals for delivering
top-tier shareholder returns; 
 • 
 The likelihood and probability of achieving various levels of performance based on historical results and expected peer and industry
performance. The board and committee devote significant time to discussing, understanding and anticipating the current operating
environment, including potential input cost inflation and supply chain disruptions as well as the financial health of our consumers; 
 • 
 The annual incentive metrics, program design, and financial performance of peer companies; and 
 • 
 Our expected performance relative to peer companies. 
 48 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Fiscal 2025 Goals and Performance 
For fiscal 2025, the compensation and talent committee once again set
annual performance goals in line with our annual corporate operating plan. The fiscal 2025 plan was calibrated considering achievability,
shareholder expectations and competitiveness in an uncertain operating environment. 
In particular, the fiscal 2025 operating plan was based on the following
key assumptions: 
 • 
 Gross margin expansion, driven by strong HMM cost savings, would fuel increased consumer investment to drive
topline growth; 
 • 
 Our consumer news and innovation would result in steadily improving market share performance amid a gradually improving consumer
backdrop; and 
 • 
 Our continued disciplined focus on cash would enable us to generate strong free cash-flow conversion. 
The board and compensation and talent committee set a challenging fiscal
2025 goal for organic net sales growth that reflected expectations consistent with our annual corporate operating plan amid an uncertain
macroeconomic backdrop for consumers. The fiscal 2025 goal for constant-currency adjusted operating profit growth also challenged management
to maintain profitability while continuing to invest in brand building. 
Our fiscal 2025 performance and resulting incentive payout were consistent
with the challenging environment we navigated throughout the year. 
FISCAL 2025 PERFORMANCE AGAINST ANNUAL PERFORMANCE
GOALS 
 Annual Performance Measure and Weighting 
 
 Target 
 
 Actual
Performance (2) 
 
 Award
Achievement % 
 Organic Net Sales Growth (50%) (1) 
 
 2.0% 
 
 -1.8% 
 
 24% 
 Adjusted Operating Profit Growth (50%) (1) 
 
 1.0% 
 
 -7.9% 
 
 29% 
 Business Achievement Percentage 
 
 
 
 
 
 27% 
 (1) 
 The annual company performance measures are non-GAAP measures. For more information on the use of non-GAAP
measures in the Proxy Statement and a reconciliation of non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, see
Appendix A. 
 (2) 
 Incentive performance is measured on a comparable basis and excludes certain items affecting comparability, including the impact
of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, acquisitions and divestitures, and other corporate adjustments. 
How We Evaluate Individual Performance Achievement 
Individual Achievement Percentages for our NEOs account for 20% of each
NEO’s annual incentive award payout. The Individual Achievement Percentages range from 0% to 200% and are based on the achievement
of specific annual priorities set at the beginning of the fiscal year, which include quantitative business performance measures for the
business segments and qualitative goals such as completion of strategic initiatives, quality of business plans, organizational development
progress, and employee development and fulfillment of leadership expectations. The CEO establishes annual priorities for each of the NEOs,
and the board approves the annual priorities for the CEO. The board approves the individual performance rating for the CEO and the compensation
and talent committee approves the performance ratings for all other NEOs. The evaluation of the CEO’s individual performance is
discussed under Fiscal 2025 CEO Compensation Actions on page 52. 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 49 
 
 Back to Contents 
How We Calculate the Annual Incentive Award 
The annual incentive award is subject to the terms of our Executive Incentive
Plan and calculated according to the formula below for all NEOs. For fiscal 2025, our NEOs received annual incentive awards ranging from
37% to 45% of their ann

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ar-end, each independent director had 2,441 unvested RSUs. 
 (3) 
 Mr. Clark served on the board until September 24, 2024, but did not stand for re-election at the company’s 2024
Annual Meeting of Shareholders. 
 42 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
PROPOSAL NUMBER 2: 
Approval of Advisory Vote on Executive Compensation 
 
 
THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS UNANIMOUSLY RECOMMENDS A VOTE FOR THE RESOLUTION APPROVING, ON AN ADVISORY BASIS, THE COMPENSATION OF OUR NAMED EXECUTIVE OFFICERS. 
 
 
We provide our shareholders with an annual advisory vote on the compensation
of our named executive officers, as required pursuant to Section 14A of the Exchange Act. At the 2024 Annual Meeting, approximately
93% of the votes cast supported our executive compensation program. 
Our compensation and talent committee reviewed the results of the advisory
vote and also considered feedback from several of our largest shareholders on our executive compensation program. The compensation
and talent committee recognizes that effective practices evolve and will continue to consider changes as needed to keep our executive
compensation program competitive and tightly linked to performance. 
Consistent with our shareholders’ preference and prevailing demand,
we expect to hold an advisory vote on executive compensation every year. This year, we are asking shareholders to approve the following
resolution: 
RESOLVED, that the shareholders approve the compensation paid to the company’s
named executive officers, as disclosed pursuant to Item 402 of Regulation S-K, including in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis
section, and the compensation tables and related narrative in the Executive Compensation section, of the Proxy Statement for the
2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders. 
The advisory vote will not be binding on the compensation and talent committee
or the board. However, they will carefully consider the outcome of the vote and take into consideration any specific concerns raised
by investors when determining future compensation arrangements. 
 Notice of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 43 
 
 Back to Contents 
Executive Compensation 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
This section provides an overview of our compensation philosophy, the key
elements of our executive compensation program and the compensation actions for our named executive officers (“NEOs”)
in the context of our company strategy and our fiscal 2025 performance. 
Executive Compensation At-A-Glance 
Fiscal 2025 Named Executive Officers 
 Jeffrey L. Harmening 
 
 Kofi A. Bruce 
 
 Dana McNabb 
 
 Jaime Montemayor 
 
 Jonathan J. Nudi 
 Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
 
 Chief Financial Officer 
 
 Group President, North America Retail and North America Pet (1) 
 
 Chief Digital and Technology Officer 
 
 Former Group President, North America Pet, International and North America Foodservice (2) 
Fiscal 2025 Performance Overview 
Our fundamental financial goal is to generate top-tier returns for our shareholders
over the long term. We believe achieving that goal requires us to generate a consistent balance of net sales growth, margin expansion,
cash conversion, and cash return to shareholders over time. Our executive compensation program and the compensation decisions of
the compensation and talent committee are closely aligned with the company’s business strategies, priorities, and long-term
growth objectives. In particular, the annual incentive targets we set at the beginning of the year are based on financial objectives
and priorities approved by the board and communicated to investors. 
In fiscal 2025, the operating environment was characterized by significant
volatility and uncertainty, resulting in value-seeking behaviors by consumers that were deeper and more prolonged than we expected.
As a result, we made important changes to adapt to the evolving environment and put our business on a path back to growth. We increased
investment to bring consumers greater value, which strengthened our volume performance as we exited the year. While the level of
incremental investment resulted in fiscal 2025 financial results below our targeted ranges, we expect the improved volume and household
penetration trends will translate into stronger top- and bottom-line performance over the long term. Our fiscal 2025 performance
and resulting below-target incentive payouts reflect results that are in line with the challenging environment we nav

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Related Person Transactions on page 39. 
Our directors are elected annually by a majority of votes cast to enhance their accountability to shareholders. If an incumbent
director is not reelected, the director must promptly offer his or her resignation to the board. The corporate governance
committee will recommend to the board whether to accept or reject the resignation, and the board will disclose its decision
and the rationale behind it within 90 days from the certification of the election results. If there are more director nominees
than the number of directors to be elected, the directors will be elected by a plurality of the votes cast. 
Each of the director nominees currently serves on the board and was elected by our shareholders at the 2024 Annual Meeting. 
If elected, each director will hold office until the 2026 Annual Meeting and until his or her successor is elected and qualified.
We have no reason to believe that any of the nominees will be unable or unwilling to serve if elected. However, if any nominee
should become unable for any reason or unwilling for good cause to serve, proxies may be voted for another person nominated
as a substitute by the board, or the board may reduce the number of directors. 
Included in each director nominee’s biography is a description of the top five key qualifications and experiences of
such nominee based on the skills and qualifications described on page
18. The board and the corporate governance committee believe that the combination of the various qualifications and experiences
of the director nominees will contribute to an effective and well-functioning board and that the director nominees possess
the necessary qualifications and capacity to provide effective oversight of the business and counsel to the company’s
management to advance our long-term strategy and oversee the interests of our shareholders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 14 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
 
 
2025
Director 
Nominees 
At-A-Glance 
 
 
Five of our ten independent director nominees are female and three are ethnically diverse. 
 Notice
of 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders 
 15 
 
 Back to Contents 
Director Nomination Process 
Our board follows an annual director nomination process that promotes thoughtful and in-depth review of overall board composition
and director nominees throughout the year. At the beginning of the process, the corporate governance committee reviews current
board composition and considers search priorities for any new director candidates. The skills and experiences of our directors
are reviewed annually to confirm that our board possesses the traits, attributes and qualifications to successfully guide
and oversee the company’s long-term strategy and priorities and continue to promote effective board performance. The
corporate governance committee reviews incumbent director candidates, evaluates any changes in circumstances that may impact
their candidacy, and considers information from the board evaluation process to ensure the board continues to operate effectively.
Upon a recommendation from the corporate governance committee, the board of directors approves the nomination of director
candidates for election at the Annual Meeting. 
The corporate governance committee identifies potential new director candidates using a search firm that is paid a fee for
its services, together with referrals and suggestions from board members and shareholders. The corporate governance committee
interviews potential director candidates to confirm their qualifications, interest, and availability for board service. 
Board Refreshment and Director Succession
Planning 
We plan thoughtfully for director succession and board refreshment. By developing and following a long-term
succession plan, the board has an ongoing opportunity to: 
 • 
 Evaluate the depth and diversity of experience of our board; 
 • 
 Expand and replace key skills and experience that support our strategies; and 
 • 
 Maintain a balanced mix of tenures. 
In selecting directors, the board evaluates characteristics such as independence, integrity, experience, and
sound judgment in areas relevant to our businesses, a proven record of accomplishment, willingness to speak one’s mind and
commit sufficient time to the board, appreciation for the long-term interests of shareholders, and the ability to challenge and
stimulate management and to work well with fellow directors. 
Each newly appointed director follows a well-developed and comprehensive onboarding program, which, among
other things, includes meetings with board members and senior company leaders. This helps ensure directors become well-acclimated
to the board in a timely manner. 
The corporate governance committee also plans for the orderly succession of the Independent Lead Director
and the chairs for the board’s five committees, providing for their identification, development, and transition of responsibilities. 
 16 
 General Mills, Inc. 
 
 Back to Contents 
Other Board Service 
Board members are expected to devote sufficient time and attention to carrying out their director duties and
responsibilities and ensure that their other responsibilities, including service on other boards, do not materially interfere with
their responsibilities as directors of the company. The board will take into account the nature and extent of a director’s
other commitments when determining whether it is appropriate to nominate that individual for re-election. 
In no event shall a director serve on more than four total public company boards (including the company’s
board). A director who is an active public company CEO or executive officer shall not serve on more than two total public company
boards (including their own board and the company’s board). Subject to a determination by the board that additional service
will not impair the ability of a director to serve effectively on the company’s
