HOME DEPOT, INC. (HD) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: HOME DEPOT, INC.
Ticker: HD
CIK: 354950
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-04-07

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance trends, regulatory changes, and recognized best practices. The following sections provide an overview of our corporate governance structure, policies, and processes, including key aspects of our Board operations. 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
Our Board currently has 12 members: Gerard J. Arpey, Ari Bousbib, Jeffery H. Boyd, Gregory D. Brenneman, J. Frank Brown, Edward P. Decker, Wayne M. Hewett, Manuel Kadre, Stephanie C. Linnartz, Paula A. Santilli, Caryn Seidman-Becker, and Asha Sharma. With the exception of Mr. Decker, our Chair, President and CEO, each director was independent throughout Fiscal 2025, and continues to be independent. 
BOARD LEADERSHIP 
 
 
On at least an annual basis, our Board assesses its leadership structure, including the appointment of the Chair of the Board. Our Lead Director is annually elected by the independent members of the Board. The Board believes that, given the Company’s present circumstances, having a combined Chair and CEO, a strong independent Lead Director, and Board committees composed entirely of independent directors currently provides the best Board leadership structure for the Company. This structure, together with our other robust corporate governance practices, provides strong independent oversight of management while ensuring clear strategic alignment throughout the Company. 
Our Chair, with input from our Lead Director, proposes strategic priorities to the Board and communicates the Board’s guidance to management, which is ultimately responsible for implementing the Company’s strategy. Gregory D. Brenneman currently serves as our Lead Director and brings to the role a high level of energy, engagement and oversight. He has broad and varied business experience, including in various CEO roles; has served on our Board through multiple business cycles; and as Lead Director, has guided a number of successful leadership transitions and management changes. The Board recognizes that Mr. Brenneman’s tenure provides a unique long-term perspective on the Company’s strategy and, rather than diminishing his independence, gives him the deep institutional knowledge to challenge management and provide rigorous oversight. Our Lead Director: 
• Chairs Board meetings when the Chair is not present, including presiding at executive sessions of the Board (without management present) on at least a quarterly basis; 
• Approves Board meeting agendas, schedules and other information provided to the Board; 
• Works with management to determine the information and materials provided to Board members; 
• Consults regularly with the Chair on other matters that are pertinent to the Board and the Company; 
• Has the authority to call meetings of the independent directors; 
• Is available for communication and consultation with major shareholders upon request; 
• Serves as liaison between the Chair and the independent directors; and 
• Conducts annual interviews with each independent director as part of the annual evaluation process. 
To maximize the effectiveness of the Lead Director role, our Lead Director does not serve on any standing Board committees but regularly attends and participates in meetings of our Board committees, and generally serves as a resource for the committees as needed. 
ATTENDANCE AT BOARD, COMMITTEE AND ANNUAL SHAREHOLDER MEETINGS 
 
 
Directors are expected to attend all Board meetings and meetings of the Committees of the Board on which they serve. Directors are also expected to attend the annual meeting of shareholders, absent extraordinary circumstances. The Board met 12 times during Fiscal 2025. Each director attended at least 75% of the meetings of the Board and of the committees of which he or she was a member during his or her service on 
 
 
The Home Depot 2026 Proxy Statement 
1 
Table of Contents 
the Board in Fiscal 2025, and also attended the 2025 annual meeting. All director nominees are expected to attend the Meeting. 
COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
The Board periodically evaluates the effectiveness of its committee structure and currently has standing Audit, LDC, NCG, and Finance Committees. The charter for each committee is available on the Company’s Investor Relations website at https://ir.homedepot.com under “Corporate Governance > Committee Members & Charters.” The current members of our committees, the principal functions of each committee and the number of meetings held in Fiscal 2025 are shown below. Each member of each committee during Fiscal 2025 was, and each current member continues to be, independent under our Director Independence Standards, as well as applicable SEC rules and NYSE listing standards. 
 
 
Committee 
Committee Functions 
 
Audit: 
J. Frank Brown, Chair 
Ari Bousbib 
Wayne M. Hewett 
Manuel Kadre 
Stephanie C. Linnartz 
Asha Sharma 
Number of Meetings: 
9 
• Oversees the Company’s accounting and financial reporting process, as well as the integrity of the Company’s consolidated financial statements and its internal control over financial reporting, including the audits thereof 
 
• 
Has primary responsibility for overseeing risk assessment and risk management 
 
• Has primary responsibility for overseeing data protection, cybersecurity and privacy risks 
 
• 
Reviews the Company’s compliance with legal and regulatory requirements, including the FCPA and other anti-bribery laws 
 
• Reviews the qualifications, performance and independence of the Company’s independent registered public accounting firm and appoints such firm on an annual basis 
 
• 
Oversees the performance of the Company’s internal audit function 
 
• Reviews the Company’s compliance programs, including the whistleblower program, and the Company’s monitoring of such programs 
 
Leadership Development and Compensation: 
Wayne M. Hewett, Chair 
Stephanie C. Linnartz 
Caryn Seidman-Becker 
Asha Sharma 
Number of Meetings: 
6 
• 
Reviews and evaluates the performance of executive officers 
 
• Reviews and recommends compensation of directors and the CEO and approves compensation of other executive officers, as well as oversees compliance with, and administration of, the Company’s

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis above. Upon termination of employment without cause within 12 months following a change in control, the executive would be entitled to a pro rata portion of performance shares based on actual performance for the portion of the performance period before a change in control, plus a pro rata portion of the target performance shares for the portion of the performance period after a change in control. 
In the event of death, disability or termination of employment at or after age 60 with at least five years of continuous service other than for cause (“retirement”), the executive or his or her estate will be entitled to receive any performance shares ultimately earned, and in the event of death or disability before retirement, a pro rata portion of any shares ultimately earned. Mr. Decker and Ms. Campbell are each “retirement eligible” and their performance share awards are non-forfeitable, although payout, if any, is based on achievement of the performance goals. Dividend equivalents accrue on performance share awards (as reinvested shares) and are paid only upon the payout of the award based on the actual number of shares earned. 
 
Performance-Based Restricted Stock (PBRS) 
For Fiscal 2025, 30% of the equity grant provided to the NEOs was in the form of performance-based restricted stock, which was forfeitable if Fiscal 2025 operating profit was less than 90% of the MIP target for Fiscal 2025. If the performance condition is met, as it was for Fiscal 2025 , t he awards are then subject to time-based vesting. The restricted stock grants vest 50% on each of the 30-month and 60-month anniversaries of the grant date, subject to continued employment through the vesting date, or upon termination due to death, disability or termination without cause within 12 months following a change in control. 
In addition, once the executive becomes retirement eligible, the restricted stock becomes non-forfeitable, provide d the performance condition is met, but it is not transferable before the time-based vesting dates. Dividends on the restricted stock are accrued (as cash dividends) and paid to executive officers only if the performance condition is met. Once the performance condition is met, cash dividends are paid on the shares of restricted stock. Mr. Decker and Ms. Campbell are both retirement eligible. 
 
 
The Home Depot 2026 Proxy Statement 
75 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Award Type Award Terms 
 
Stock Options 
For Fiscal 2025, 20% of the equity grant provided to the NEOs was in the form of nonqualified stock options. The stock option awards vest 25% per year on the second, third, fourth and fifth anniversaries of the grant date, subject to continued employment through the vesting date, or upon termination due to death, disability or termination without cause within 12 months following a change in control. In addition, the stock option awards become non-forfeitable once the executive becomes retirement eligible but are not exercisable before the time-based vesting dates. Generally, stock options may be exercised, once vested, over the remainder of the ten-year option term, subject to continued employment or meeting the retirement eligibility requirements. Because Mr. Decker and Ms. Campbell are each retirement eligible, their option awards are non-forfeitable but are not exercisable until the time-based vesting dates. 
 
Fiscal 2025 MIP 
Each of the NEOs serving at the end of Fiscal 2025 participated in the Fiscal 2025 MIP. The Fiscal 2025 MIP payout was based upon achievement of pre-established performance goals, as described under “—Elements of Our Compensation Programs—Annual Cash Incentive” in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis starting on page 62 above. 
The LDC Committee established the following threshold, target and maximum payout levels for Fiscal 2025 for the NEOs under the MIP. The threshold, target and maximum potential payouts under the MIP for these NEOs reflect the following percentages of base salary at the end of Fiscal 2025: 
 
 Percentage of Base Salary 
 Name Threshold Target Maximum 
 Edward P. Decker 30 % 200 % 380 % 
 Richard V. McPhail 15 % 100 % 190 % 
 Ann-Marie Campbell 19 % 125 % 238 % 
 
William D. Bastek 15 % 100 % 190 % 
 
Jordan Broggi 15 % 100 % 190 % 
 
 
Because the operating profit threshold must be met for any payout to occur, the threshold percentage above reflects the minimum possible payout based upon assumed achievement of that threshold. In addition, once an executive becomes retirement eligible, if the executive retires prior to the MIP payment date, the executive receives a payout that is prorated based on the time the executive served in his or her role during the fiscal year. Pursuant to Mr. Padilla’s separation agreement, the potential payout for Mr. Padilla is prorated based on the number of months he served during Fiscal 2025 with the following payout levels: threshold – 15%; target – 100%; and maximum – 190%. Mr. Siddiqui did not participate in the Fiscal 2025 MIP. The actual amounts earned by the eligible NEOs based on achievement of Fiscal 2025 MIP performance goals are reported in the “Non-Equity Incentive Plan Compensation” column of the

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
the Meeting. 
The proponents of the shareholder proposals to be voted on at the Meeting will be provided with the opportunity to present their proposals by remote communications or similar means. 
The Board recommends that you vote “For” each of the director nominees, the ratification of KPMG, the Say-on-Pay vote, and each of the two Company proposals to approve amendments to the Charter. 
The Board recommends that you vote “Against” each of the shareholder proposals. 
 
 
The Home Depot 2026 Proxy Statement 
97 
Table of Contents 
WHO IS ENTITLED TO VOTE? 
Holders of record of shares of the Company’s common stock as of the close of business on March 23, 2026, the record date for the Meeting, are entitled to vote. Each share of common stock is entitled to one vote on each matter presented for a vote of the shareholders. As of March 23, 2026, we had 996,027,658 shares of common stock outstanding. 
HOW MANY SHARES MUST BE PRESENT TO HOLD THE MEETING? 
In order for us to conduct the Meeting, the holders of a majority of our outstanding shares of common stock entitled to vote at the Meeting must be present in person or by proxy. This is referred to as a quorum. Your shares are counted as present if you attend the Meeting , or if you properly submit a proxy or voting instruction form over the Internet, by phone, by mail or by using your mobile device, as explained in more detail below. Abstentions and broker non-votes (as defined below) will be counted for purposes of establishing a quorum. If a quorum is not present at the Meeting, the Meeting may be adjourned from time to time until a quorum is present. 
CAN I ASK QUESTIONS AT THE MEETING? 
Yes. As part of the Meeting, consistent with our past practice, we will hold a question and answer session for holders of shares of the Company’s common stock as of the close of business on the record date for the Meeting, which will include questions submitted both live and prior to the Meeting. You may submit a question until the day before the Meeting at www.proxyvote.com after logging in with your 16-digit control number. Alternatively, you will be able to submit questions live during the Meeting by accessing the Meeting at www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/HD2026 using your 16-digit control number. 
Questions will be read at the Meeting by one of our representatives. Questions and answers may be grouped by topic and substantially similar questions may be answered once to avoid repetition. To promote fairness and efficient use of resources, only one question may be asked per shareholder. Shareholder questions or comments are welcome, but we will only answer questions pertinent to Meeting matters, subject to time constraints. Questions regarding personal matters, including those related to employment, product or service issues, or suggestions for product innovations, are not pertinent to Meeting matters and therefore will not be answered at the Meeting. Statements of advocacy that are not questions or do not relate to the business of the Meeting will not be addressed. In addition, we will not address comments or questions that are derogatory to individuals or otherwise in bad taste; related to personal grievances; related to matters of individual concern that are not of interest to shareholders generally; or otherwise not suitable for the conduct of the Meeting as determined by the Chair or the Corporate Secretary in such person’s reasonable judgment. Additionally, we will not consider questions or comments relating to proposals that were not previously submitted under Rule 14a-8 under the Exchange Act or in accordance with the Company’s advance notice By-Law provisions. 
If we are unable to answer your question during the Meeting due to time constraints, you are encouraged to contact The Home Depot Investor Relations department at investor_relations@homedepot.com. 
WHO IS SOLICITING MY VOTE? 
The Company is providing this Proxy Statement in connection with the solicitation by the Board of proxies to be voted at the Meeting and at any reconvened or rescheduled meeting following any adjournment or postponement of the Meeting. 
HOW DO I VOTE BEFORE THE MEETING? 
If you are a registered shareholder, which means you hold your shares in certificate form or through an account with our transfer agent, Computershare Trust Company, N.A., you have four options for submitting proxies to have your shares voted at the Meeting: 
• Over the Internet, at www.proxyvote.com, by follo

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Related person transactions • 
Tax strategy 
 
• Company political activity, including oversight of the Political Activity Policy, political spending and payments to trade associations 
While the Board and its committees are responsible for risk oversight, management is charged with managing risk within the Company’s defined risk appetite. As part of our risk assessment process, the Board and each committee receive presentations from management throughout the year regarding specific potential risks and trends relevant to their allocated areas of oversight. Our Chair has frequent opportunities to discuss matters of particular importance or concern in director-only sessions, including any significant, evolving or emerging risks that may be of concern to the Board or the Company. Our Lead Director also presides over regular executive sessions of our independent directors, during which risks faced by the Company may be discussed. Additionally, during the Board-level review of the Company’s strategy, as discussed in more detail above, the Board considers significant risks facing the Company, emerging risks and current trends, and their potential impact. We believe that the practices described above, along with our current leadership structure, facilitate effective Board oversight of key risks. 
Further detail on Board- and management-level oversight of enterprise risk management and specified risk areas is provided below. 
Enterprise Risk Management 
In accordance with NYSE requirements and our
