HP INC (HPQ) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: HP INC
Ticker: HPQ
CIK: 47217
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-02-25

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance by bringing impartiality, objective oversight, and external experience expertise to board decisions, mitigating conflicts of interest, enhancing transparency, and boosting shareholder confidence. 
This detached perspective allows the chairman to focus on shareholder interests, strengthen management accountability, and provide critical checks and balances, ultimately contributing to long-term sustainability and credibility. 
This may be a particularly good time to consider the merits of this proposal. HP stock was at $41 in 2022 and fell to $27 in late 2025 despite a robust stock market. 
In the first quarter of 2025, HP missed its earnings and EBITDA expectations, and subsequently lowered its full-year earnings per share guidance. HP's stock experienced a significant drop following the announcement. 
HP's stock has faced significant volatility during 2025, primarily due to the mixed financial results. In late May, following the Q2 report, HP's stock dropped 12%. 
HP cited higher-than-expected costs due to U.S. tariffs on goods manufactured outside the country. While HP is shifting production to other countries like Vietnam and Mexico, the full benefit of these measures will take time to materialize. 
Throughout 2025, the Printing segment experienced persistent weakness. In both Q1 and Q3, Printing revenue declined year-over-year. The company's highest-margin products, such as ink supplies, have also seen reduced sales. 
In March 2025, HP faced consumer backlash after a firmware update rendered some of its LaserJet printers unable to use HP-brand toner cartridges 
In April 2025, HP agreed to a settlement in a suit alleging that HP deceptively advertised discounts by inflating a product's original price and then marking it down. 
In late 2022, HP announced laying off between 4,000 and 6,000 employees by the end of its 2025 fiscal year. This served as unfavorable updates about the company's stability. There is an ongoing lawsuit alleging that HP misused forfeited funds from employee 401(k) accounts. 
Please vote yes: Proposal No. 5 - Independent Board Chairman 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
109 
Board response and recommendation 
Our Board reviewed this proposal and recommends a vote AGAINST it for the following reasons: 
▪ HP has robust polices and practices on governance and board leadership supporting independent oversight. 
▪ Our current Board leadership structure promotes independent oversight while preserving flexibility. 
▪ A rigid policy would not reflect past votes by our stockholders or market norms. 
HP has robust policies and practices on governance and board leadership supporting independent oversight. 
As further discussed in the section entitled “About our corporate governance” above, our Board has adopted policies and practices that provide our stockholders with meaningful rights and further promote Board independence and effective oversight of management. For example, our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that the Board’s preferred governance structure is to separate the roles of Chair and CEO, and we have had an independent Chair since 2017. However, if the Board determines it is in the best interests of HP’s stockholders to combine the positions of Chair and CEO, or to otherwise designate a Chair who is not an independent Director, our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that the independent Directors will annually, upon recommendation of the NGSR Committee, designate a Lead Independent Director. In addition, our Corporate Governance Guidelines require that a substantial majority of the Board be independent, that no more than three Directors may be non-independent, and impose independence standards that are consistent with, and in some respects more stringent than, NYSE standards. 
The Board’s committees also play a critical role in providing strong independent leadership, as all members of our current standing committees are independent. For example, the NGSR Committee, which is required to be comprised of all independent Directors, is responsible for, among other things: 
▪ establishing criteria for Board membership, identifying individuals qualified to serve as Directors, and recommending to the Board candidates to be elected or nominated for election as Directors, as well as Director succession planning; 
▪ overseeing and reviewing the size, composition, operation, and calendar of the Board and recommending assignments of Directors to Board committees and chairs of Board committees; 
▪ periodically reviewing the Board’s leadership structure and recommending changes to the Board as appropriate; and 
▪ overseeing and reviewing our governance practices, including our Certificate of Incorporation, Bylaws, Corporate Governance Guidelines and related policies, governance structures, and Director-led engagements with HP’s stakeholders concerning such matters. 
The NGSR Committee also conducts an annual corporate governance review, in which our corporate governance policies and practices are evaluated for potential improvements. 
To help ensure our Board remains robust and engaged, we have ongoing Board refreshment reviews and an annual self-evaluation process to determine whether the Board and its committees are functioning effectively. 
In addition to our robust governance policies and practices, HP and our Board are committed to consistently engaging with stockholders regarding our corporate governance. Each year, the Board (including our independent Chair and the Chair of the NGSR Committee) engages with stockholders, which includes seeking and encouraging feedback from stockholders about our corporate governance practices. During fiscal 2025, we spoke with or received responses from stockholders that hold approximately 35% of our outstanding stock. This regular engagement with stockholders helps ensure that a forum exists for them to express concerns about our Board leadership structure or other corporate governance practices outside of the annual shareholder meeting. 
Our current Board leadership structure promotes independent oversight while preserving flexibility. 
Our Directors have a fiduciary duty to regularly evaluate and determine the most appropriate Board leadership structure for HP and our stockholders in light of HP’s specific and evolving circumstances. To this end, as noted above, our Corporate Governance Guidelines state that HP prefers a leadership structure which separates the roles of Chair and CEO, while preserving the flexibility to determine the optimal leadership structure for HP, including, when and if appropriate, combining the positions of Chair and CEO. Our Board believes that our current structure, with an independent Chair who is well-versed in the needs of a complex business and has strong, well-defined governance duties, gives our Board a strong leadership and corporate governance structure that best serves the needs of HP and our stockholders. 
Our Board has established a robust, well-defined and transparent mandate for the role of our independent Chair. Specifically, our independent Chair has a broad set of powers and responsibilities as outlined below: 
 
 
110 
 
Stockholder proposal 
▪ oversees the planning of the annual Board calendar; 
▪ in consultation with the CEO and the other Directors, schedules, approves and sets the agenda for meetings of the Board and chairs and leads the discussion at such meetings; 
▪ chairs HP’s annual meeting of stockholders; 
▪ is available in appropriate circumstances to speak on behalf of the Board and for consultation and direct communication with stockholders; 
▪ provides guidance and oversight to management; 
▪ helps with the formulation and implementation of HP’s strategic plan; 
▪ serves as the Board liaison to management; 
▪ has the authority to call meetings of the independent Directors and schedules, sets the agenda for, and presides at executive sessions of the independent Directors; 
▪ advises on information sent to the Board; 
▪ works with the HRC Committee to coordinate the annual performance evaluation of the CEO; 
▪ works with the NGSR Committee to oversee the Board and committee evaluations; and 
▪ performs such other functions and responsibilities as set forth in the Corporate Governance Guidelines or as requested by the Board from time to time. 
The adoption of a policy requiring that the Chair of the Board always be an independent Director would limit the Board’s ability to choose the person best suited for the role at a particular time and deprive the Board of the ability to act in the best interests of HP and all stockholders as circumstances warrant. Unlike the proposed inflexible mandate of the stockholder proposal, the existing preference set forth in the Corporate Governance Guidelines does not limit the Board’s discretion to act in the best interests of HP and our stockholders by selecting the best possible board leadership structure based on the relevant facts, circumstances and criteria as they exist at the time. Our Board believes that this flexibility benefits HP and our stockholders because the Board is in the best position to determine our leadership structure given its knowledge of HP’s leadership team, strategic goals, opportunities, and challenges. For example, Meg Whitman served as our CEO from 2011-2015 and as our Chair from 2015-2017, prior to the appointment of Mr. Bergh as Chair. As a non-independent Chair with historical knowledge as well as wide-ranging business experience, Ms. Whitman’s appointment was key to HP’s immediate transition after its spin-off of Hewlett Packard Enterprise Company in 2015. Following that critical transition period, HP entered a new phase and the Board determined that Mr. Bergh’s deep experience in a variety of consumer goods businesses and his independent acumen would provide vital contributions to the Board leadership. 
Importantly, regardless of what leadership structure the Board may determine to adopt in the future, our Corporate Governance Guidelines provide for the annual designation of a Lead Independent Director in situations where the Chair of the Board is not independent, as noted above. As such, the Board prioritizes independent Board oversight at all times and believes that eliminating flexibility in the structure of Board leadership as facts and circumstances change and evolve, as the proponent requests, is unnecessarily rigid and could adversely impact the Company’s ability to respond to new challenges. 
A rigid policy would not reflect past votes by our stockholders or market norms. 
In 2007 and again in 2019, HP received stockholder proposals to require the Chair to be an independent Director. The 2019 proposal received only 24.1% support from our stockholders, while the 2007 proposal received only 17.1% from our stockholders. Moreover, during recent engagements with stockholders, we have received no adverse feedback regarding the lack of a requirement for the Chair to be an independent Director. We believe this indicates that our stockholders favor our current board leadership structure. More broadly, according to the Spencer Stuart 2025 Board Index, 42% of S&P 500 companies have an independent chair, while 39% of S&P 500 companies have a combined Chair/CEO structure and approximately 20% have an executive chair or other non-independent chair. The prevalence of non-independent directors among the world’s leading companies underscores the utility of preserving flexibility as business needs and challenges evolve. 
For all the above reasons, the Board believes that this proposal is not in the best interest of our stockholders and recommends a vote AGAINST this proposal. 
Vote required 
Approval of this stockholder proposal requires the affirmative vote of a majority of the shares of HP common stock present in person or represented by proxy and entitled to vote on the proposal at the annual meeting. 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
111 
 
 
Other 
matters 
 
Questions and answers 
Proxy materials 
1. Why am I receiving these materials? 
We have made these materials available to you or delivered paper copies to you by mail in connection with our annual meeting, which will take place online on April 16, 2026. As a stockholder, you are invited to participate in the annual meeting via live audio webcast and vote on the business items described in this proxy statement. This proxy statement includes information that we are required to provide to you under the SEC rules and that is designed to assist you in voting your shares. The information in this proxy statement relates to the proposals to be voted on at the annual meeting, the voting process, the Board and its committees, the compensation of our Directors and certain executive officers for fiscal 2025 and other required information. See Questions 16 and 17 below for information regarding how you can vote your shares at the annual meeting or by proxy (without attending the annual meeting). 
2. What is included in the proxy materials? 
The proxy materials include: 
▪ our proxy statement for the 2026 annual meeting; and 
▪ our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2025. 
If you received a paper copy of these materials by mail, the proxy materials also include a proxy card or a voting instruction card for the annual meeting. If you received a notice of the Internet availability of the proxy materials instead of a paper copy of the proxy materials, see Questions 16 and 17 below for information regarding how you can vote your shares. 
3. Why did I receive a notice in the mail regarding the Internet availability of the proxy materials instead of a paper copy of the full set of proxy materials? 
We use SEC rule that allows companies to furnish their proxy materials over the Internet. As a result, we are mailing to many of our stockholders a notice of the Internet availability of the proxy materials instead of a paper copy of the proxy materials. All stockholders receiving the notice will have the ability to access the proxy materials over the Internet and request to receive a paper copy of the proxy materials by mail, should they so desire. Instructions on how to access the proxy materials over the Internet or to request a paper copy may be found in the notice of the Internet availability of the proxy materials. In addition, the notice contains instructions on how you may request access to proxy materials in printed form by mail or electronically on an ongoing basis. 
4. Why didn’t I receive a notice in the mail about the Internet availability of the proxy materials? 
We are providing some of our stockholders, including stockholders who have previously requested to receive paper copies of the proxy materials and some of our stockholders who are living outside of the U.S., with paper copies of the proxy materials instead of a notice of the Internet availability of the proxy materials. 
In addition, we are providing proxy materials or notice of the Internet ava

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation discussion and analysis describes our executive compensation philosophy and program, the compensation decisions the HRC Committee has made under the program, and the considerations in making those decisions in fiscal 2025. 
Named executive officers (NEOs) 
Our NEOs for fiscal 2025 are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enrique J. Lores 
Former President and CEO* 
Karen Parkhill 
Chief Financial Officer 
Alex Cho 
Former President, Personal Systems** 
David McQuarrie 
Chief Commercial Officer 
Julie Jacobs 
Chief Legal Officer and General Counsel 
 
 
* Mr. Lores stepped down from his position as President and CEO effective as of the end of the day on February 2, 2026. Bruce Broussard was appointed as Interim CEO in connection with Mr. Lores's departure. References to compensation for our President & CEO in fiscal 2025 reflect compensation for Mr. Lores who served in that role for all of fiscal 2025. 
** Mr. Cho stepped down from his position as President, Personal Systems effective November 1, 2025. 
 
 
Table of contents 
 
 
Introduction 
51 
 
 
Executive Summary 
52 
 
 
Executive compensation decision-making process 
57 
 
 
Determination of fiscal 2025 executive compensation 
60 
 
 
Fiscal 2026 compensation program 
70 
 
 
Other compensation-related matters 
71 
 
 
Executive compensation policies 
73 
 
 
 
 
52 
 Executive compensation 
Executive summary 
Compensation philosophy 
 
 
 
Philosophy 
HP’s executive compensation program is aligned with a strong pay-for-performance philosophy that provides the foundation for compensation decisions. We emphasize variable pay programs designed to reward governance, actions and behaviors that directly support shareholder value and company goals. Key program objectives include: 
▪ Attracting and retaining highly qualified executives 
▪ Aligning pay with performance through a combination of short-term and long-term incentives 
▪ Focusing executives on critical short-term and long-term actions that drive our strategy and create shareholder value 
▪ Designing and delivering executive compensation with the highest standards of corporate governance 
 
Fiscal 2025 compensation highlights 
For fiscal 2025, the HRC Committee made no material changes from our fiscal 2024 incentive designs. We believe our executive compensation programs effectively align real pay delivery with critical financial and strategic non-financial goals and reinforce our commitment to year-over-year improvement and a growth-oriented strategy. It also provides a stable and consistent message to both stockholders and participants, offering an attractive pay-for-performance incentive that encourages retention and leadership engagement. 
We provide competitive target compensation opportunities, with the amounts and mix of pay consistent with peers. 
Target Total Direct Compensation (“TDC”) was set within a competitive range of the market with variations based on each executive’s experience, individual performance and skills, advancement potential and consideration of internal equity. TDC consists of base salary, target annual incentives expressed as a percentage of base salary, and the target value of long-term incentives. 
Our short-term incentive plan aligns with core financial metrics and MBOs, which are critical value drivers for stockholders to maximize the value of their investments. 
For fiscal 2025, NEOs earned annual incentives averaging 67.3% of target. Individual bonuses varied from 64.8% to 71.1% of target with HP’s President & CEO’s bonus equal to 64.8% of target. These results reflected performance after adjusting for the significant impact of tariffs on our business in fiscal 2025, as discussed in more detail on page 62. With the adjustments, t he Company achieved below target results with respect to GAAP net revenue, adjusted non-GAAP operating profit, and non-GAAP free cash flow. In addition to adjustments for the impact of tariffs, the HRC Committee exercised its discretion to reduce the financial performance factor in order to create parity with the bonus plan for the broader group of employees within the Company. 
Finally, twenty-five percent of target annual incentives are contingent upon the achievement of individualized qualitative objectives that we believe will contribute to HP’s long-term success including Leadership and Culture, People, and Sustainable Impact. NEOs successfully delivered progress against their MBOs as detailed on pages 63 - 64. 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
53 
Our long-term incentive program aligns actual pay with performance with a significant portion of variable compensation at risk to support our growth-oriented strategy. 
For fiscal 2025, the performance-based equity portion of long-term incentive grant value remained weighted at 70% for HP’s President & CEO and remained weighted at 60% for the rest of the NEOs. 
The remaining 30% or 40%, as applicable, of long-term incentive grant value was delivered in the form of RSUs primarily intended to increase stock ownership among our NEOs, while also supporting retention and incentivizing NEOs to maximize value for our stockholders. The value of RSUs is tied to stock price and reinvested dividend equivalents. 
For the 2023-2025 performance period, NEOs received payouts for fiscal 2023 PARSUs of 80.2%. The average PARSU EPS payout was below target at 80.2% after adjustment due to tariff impacts, while the fiscal 2023-2025 TSR modifier approximated the 35th percentile of the S&P 500, resulting in no additional payout. 
The second tranche of fiscal 2023 PCSOs vested in fiscal 2025 upon meeting both the stock price hurdle and service conditions. The second tranche of fiscal 2022 PCSOs was forfeited in early fiscal 2026 due to not meeting the stock price hurdle within the 4- year performance period. 
We continued our strong compensation governance practices. 
We periodically review our executive compensation program for peer group alignment and strategic relevance as part of a long-standing compensation governance process that includes stockholder engagement. At the annual meeting in 2025, our say-on-pay proposal was approved by over 93% of the voted shares, indicating significant stockholder support and reinforcing our decision to make only limited changes to the program. No changes were made to the program as a result of the 2025 say-on-pay vote. 
 
 
54 
 Executive compensation 
Components of compensation 
Elements of compensation 
Our executive compensation program consists primarily of performance-based components. The table below identifies each major pay component, its role and applicable factors for determining the amount. Percentages are the averages of pay components at target for the NEOs, including the CEO. 
 
 Pay component Role Determination factors 
 
 
Base salary 
10% 
▪ Provides a fixed portion of annual cash income 
▪ Value of role in the competitive marketplace 
▪ Value of role to the Company 
▪ Skills, experience and individual performance compared to the market as well as others in the Company 
 
 
 
Annual incentive 
13% 
Payments to executives for annual incentive purposes, made under the HP Inc. 2004 Stock Incentive Plan, as amended and restated (the “2004 Stock Incentive Plan”) 
▪ Provides a variable and performance-based portion of annual cash income 
▪ Focuses executives on annual objectives that support our long-term strategy and the creation of value 
▪ Target awards are based on the competitive marketplace, position level, and the executive’s skills and performance 
▪ 75% of actual awards are based on performance against annual corporate business unit financial metrics and individual goals as set and approved by the HRC Committee. Financial metrics are: 
— GAAP net revenue 
— Adjusted non-GAAP operating profit 
— Non-GAAP free cash flow 
▪ 25% of actual awards are based on performance against individualized MBOs relating to Leadership and Culture, People, and Sustainable Impact 
 
 
 
Long-term incentive 
▪ PARSUs 
▪ RSUs 
77% 
▪ Supports long-term sustained performance and growth-oriented strategy 
▪ Performance goals align interests of executives and stockholders, reflecting the time-horizon and risk to investors 
▪ Focuses executives on critical long-term performance goals 
▪ Encourages equity ownership, further aligning interests of executives and stockholders 
▪ Retains key employees 
▪ Target awards are based on the competitive marketplace, position level, and the executive’s skills and performance 
▪ Actual earned values are based on performance against a corporate KGA revenue goal, EPS goals, relative TSR performance and stock price performance 
 
 
 
All others 
▪ Benefits 
▪ Limited perquisites 
▪ Severance protection 
▪ Supports the health and security of our executives and their ability to save on a tax-deferred basis 
▪ Enhances executive productivity 
▪ Competitive market practices for similar roles 
▪ Level of executive 
▪ Standards of best-in-class compensation governance 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
55 
2025 NEO TDC (based on target) at a glance 
CEO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6% 
Base salary 
 
 
 
12% 
Annual incentive 
 
 
 
82% 
Long-term incentive 
 
 
 
Other NEOs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11% 
Base salary 
 
 
 
13% 
Annual incentive 
 
 
 
76% 
Long-term incentive 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual say-on-pay vote and stockholder engagement 
 
 
At the annual meeting in 2025, our say-on-pay proposal was approved by over 93% of the voted shares, indicating significant stockholder support and reinforcing our decision to make limited changes to the program. 
>93% 
2025 
say-on-pay vote 
~93% 
Five-year average 
say-on-pay vote 
 
 
 
56 
 Executive compensation 
Alignment with stockholders and compensation best practices 
 
 
 
 
Pay-for-performance 
 
Compensation governance 
 
 
 
Majority of executives’ target total direct compensation is performance and equity-based to align the executives’ rewards with sustained stockholder value creation. 
Total direct compensation within a competitive range of our peer group, ensuring that it is appropriate and aligned with the position level, experience and the executive’s skills and performance. 
Actual realized total direct compensation and pay positioning fluctuate based on both annual and long-term performance, reflecting company-wide and individual results. 
Incentive awards depend heavily upon our stock performance and are measured against objective financial metrics that we believe link directly or indirectly to stockholder value. 25% of our target annual incentives are based on individualized qualitative objectives that we believe will contribute to our long-term success. 
Balance cash flow, revenue and profit objectives, as well as short- and long-term objectives, to reward for overall performance that does not over-emphasize a singular focus on a particular metric or time period (see beginning page 58 ). 
Significant portion of long-term incentives are delivered through PARSUs with 3-year cliff vesting based on performance against goals: (i) 80% based on achievement of annual EPS goals which roll into a 3-year average, adjusted by 3-year TSR versus the S&P 500, and (ii) 20% based on achievement of a revenue goal for KGAs. 
Payouts under annual incentive awards and under PARSUs are capped at 200% of bonus target and 3x target shares, respectively. 
Pay-for-performance relationship validated on an annual basis and our HRC Committee reviews and approves performance goals under our incentive plans. 
The compensation practices of objectively identified peer companies based on industry and size criteria are considered to ensure that pay levels and program design for the NEOs are appropriate and competitive. 
Ongoing, year-round proactive stockholder outreach program to inform program decisions and pay practices. 
Disclosure of our corporate performance goals and achievements relative to these goals. 
No fixed-term executive employment contracts for senior executives. 
Significant attention to management succession planning and leadership development efforts. 
Consistent market-aligned severance policy for executives and a change in control policy requiring a double trigger for compensation or benefits. 
Use of an independent compensation consultant. 
Clawback policies that enable the Board to recoup compensation in the event of a financial restatement or misconduct, see “Policies for recoupment of compensation” section on page 75. 
Strong stock ownership guidelines for executive officers and non-employee Directors. 
No hedging or similar transactions by employees or Directors involving HP securities, no holding HP securities in margin accounts and no pledging stock as collateral for loans in a manner that could create compensation-related risk for the Company. 
No excessive perquisites to our executive officers. 
Executives do not participate in the determination of their own compensation. 
No 280G tax gross ups in the event of a change in control. 
No repricing of underwater stock options without prior stockholder approval. 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
57 
Executive compensation decision-making process 
Executive compensation program oversight and authority 
Roles and responsibilities 
 
 
 
HRC committee 
 
 
 
The HRC Committee: 
▪ makes recommendations regarding the CEO’s compensation to the independent members of the Board for approval; and 
▪ reviews and approves the compensation of the remaining Section 16 officers, including our NEOs. 
The HRC Committee considered market competitiveness, business results, experience, and individual performance and skills when evaluating fiscal 2025 NEO compensation and the overall compensation structure. The HRC Committee met seven times in fiscal 2025, and all of these meetings included an executive session. 
Each HRC Committee member is an independent non-employee Director with significant experience in executive compensation matters. 
 
 
 
 
Advisor to the HRC committee 
 
 
 
The HRC Committee continued to retain Semler Brossy as its independent consultant during fiscal 2025 and worked with them and management on all aspects of our compensation program for senior executives. 
Semler Brossy: 
▪ provides analyses and recommendations that inform the HRC Committee’s decisions; 
▪ identifies peer group companies for competitive market comparisons; 
▪ evaluates market pay data and competitive-position benchmarking; 
▪ provides analyses and inputs on program structure, performance measures, and goals; 
▪ provides updates on market trends and the regulatory environment as it relates to executive compensation; 
▪ advises the HRC Committee on best practices in governance and oversight of human capital management; 
▪ conducts an independent compensation risk assessment; 
▪ reviews various management proposals presented to the HRC Committee related to executive and Director compensation; and 
▪ works with the HRC Committee to validate and strengthen the pay-for-performance relationship and alignment with stockholder interests. 
Semler Brossy does not perform other services for HP and will not do so without the prior consent of the HRC Committee chair. Semler Brossy meets with the HRC Committee chair and the HRC Committee outside the presence of management while in executive session. The HRC Committee has assessed the independence of Semler Brossy pursuant to the applicable rules and determined that its engagement does not raise any conflict of interest. Semler Brossy participated in all HRC Committee meetings and, when requested by the HRC Committee chair, in the preparatory meetings and executive sessions. 
 
 
 
58 
 Executive compensation 
 
 
 
Management and the CEO 
 
 
 
The CEO recommends compensation for non-CEO Section 16 officers for approval by the HRC Committee. During fiscal 2025, Mr. Lores: 
▪ provided input to the HRC Committee regarding performance metrics and the setting of appropriate performance targets for his direct reports; and 
▪ recommended MBOs for the NEOs and the other senior executives who report directly to him. 
The Chief People Officer and other members of our executive compensation team, together with the CFO and members of our legal organization and the input of the HRC Committee’s independent consultant: 
▪ work with the CEO to design and develop the compensation program; 
▪ recommend changes to existing program components applicable to NEOs and other senior executives; 
▪ develop financial and other targets to be achieved under applicable components of the program; 
▪ prepare analyses of financial data, peer comparisons and other briefing materials to assist the HRC Committee in making its decisions; and 
▪ implement the decisions of the HRC Committee. 
Mr. Lores was subject to the same financial performance goals as the executives who lead global functions and the businesses, and Mr. Lores’ MBOs and compensation were established by the HRC Committee and recommended to the independent members of the Board for approval. Mr. Lores was not present at the portion of any Board meeting during which his own compensation was discussed and considered. 
 
Process for setting and awarding executive compensation 
The factors considered when determining pay opportunities for our NEOs are market competitiveness, experience, individual performance and skills, advancement potential and internal equitability. The weight given to each factor is not formulaic and may differ from year to year or by individual NEO. 
The HRC Committee spends significant time determining the appropriate goals for our annual and long-term incentive programs, which make up the majority of NEO compensation. Management makes an initial recommendation of the goals, which is then assessed by the HRC Committee’s independent compensation consultant and discussed and approved by the HRC Committee. Major factors considered in setting financial goals for each fiscal year are business results from the most recently completed fiscal year, budgets and strategic plans, macroeconomic factors, announced guidance and analyst expectations, industry performance and trends and strategic initiatives. The Committee also allows for adjustments to performance results for extraordinary factors that are hard to predict or control, such as material changes to foreign exchange rates or unexpected changes in tax rates or tariffs. MBOs link individual executive performance on focus areas such as Leadership and Culture, People, and Sustainable Impact. 
Following the close of the fiscal year, the HRC Committee reviews actual financial results and MBO performance against the goals that it had set for that year, with payouts under the programs determined based on performance against the established goals. The HRC Committee meets in executive session to review the MBO performance of the CEO and to determine a recommendation for his annual incentive award to be approved by the independent members of the Board. See “2025 Annual incentives” below for a further description of our results and corresponding incentive payouts. 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
59 
Use of comparative compensation data 
The HRC Committee reviews the compensation of our Section 16 officers in comparison to that of executives in similar positions at our peer group companies. Our peer group includes companies we compete with for executive talent due to our geographical proximity and technology industry overlap. The HRC Committee uses this information to evaluate how our pay levels and practices compare to market practices. 
When determining the peer group, the following characteristics were considered with exceptions made based on the HRC Committee’s determination with respect to labor-market relevance: 
▪ Direct talent market peers. 
▪ U.S.-based companies in the technology sector (excluding distributors, contract manufacturers and outsourced services/IT consulting) with revenues or market cap between 20% and 500% that of HP. 
▪ Select general industry companies (industrials and consumer products) generall

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
pecific instructions, your shares will be voted in accordance with the recommendations of the Board (FOR all of our nominees to the Board, FOR ratification of the appointment of our Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, FOR the approval of the compensation of our named executive officers (“say on pay” vote), FOR the approval of the Fifth Amended and Restated HP Inc. 2004 Stock Incentive Plan, and AGAINST the stockholder proposal regarding an independent Board Chairman. 
For any shares you hold in the HP 401(k) Plan, if your voting instructions are not received by 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on April 13, 2026, your shares will be voted in proportion to the way the shares held by the other HP 401(k) Plan participants are voted, except as may be otherwise required by law. 
Broker non-votes differ from abstentions. For the effect of abstentions on the matters to be voted on at the annual meeting, please refer to Question 11 above. 
13. Is cumulative voting permitted for the election of Directors? 
No, you may not cumulate your votes in the election of Directors. At the 2016 annual meeting, our stockholders approved an amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation eliminating cumulative voting. Therefore, cumulative voting is no longer available to our stockholders. 
 
 
2026 Proxy statement 
115 
14. What is the difference between holding shares as a stockholder of record and as a beneficial owner? 
▪ Stockholder of Record—If your shares are registered directly in your name with our transfer agent, you are considered, with respect to those shares, the “stockholder of record.” As the stockholder of record, you have the right to grant your voting proxy directly to HP or to a third party, or to vote your shares during the annual meeting. 
▪ Beneficial Owner—If your shares are held in a brokerage account, by a trustee, or by another nominee (that is, in “street name”), you are considered the “beneficial owner” of those shares. As the beneficial owner of those shares, you have the right to direct your broker, trustee, or nominee how to vote, or to vote your shares during the annual meeting (other than shares held in the HP 401(k) Plan, which must be voted prior to the annual meeting). 
Most of our stockholders hold their shares through a broker, trustee, or other nominee rather than directly in their own name. 
15. Who is entitled to vote and how many shares can I vote? 
Each holder of shares of HP common stock issued and outstanding as of the close of business on February 17, 2026, the record date for the annual meeting, is entitled to cast one vote per share on all items being voted upon at the annual meeting. You may vote all shares owned by you as of this time, including (1) shares held directly in your name as the stockholder of record, including shares purchased through our dividend reinvestment program and employee stock purchase plans, and shares held through our Direct Registration Service; and (2) shares held for you as the beneficial owner through a broker, trustee, or other nominee. 
On the record date, HP had approximately 915,385,666 shares of common stock issued and outstanding. 
16. How can I vote my shares during the annual meeting? 
This year’s annual meeting will be held entirely online to allow greater participation. Stockholders may participate in the annual meeting by visiting the following website: 
www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/HPQ2026 
To participate in the annual meeting, you will need the 16-digit control number included on your notice of Internet availability of the proxy materials, on your proxy card or on the instructions that accompanied your proxy materials. If you have any questions about your control number, please contact the bank, broker or other nominee that holds your shares. Shares held in your name as the stockholder of record may be voted electronically during the annual meeting. Shares for which you are the beneficial owner but not the stockholder of record may also be voted electronically during the annual meeting. 
Please note that shares held in the HP 401(k) Plan cannot be voted electronically during the annual meeting. If you hold shares in the HP 401(k) Plan, your voting instructions must be received by 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, on April 13, 2026 for the trustee to vote your shares. However, holders of shares in the HP 401(k) Plan will still be able to view the annual meeting webcast and ask questions during the annual meeting. 
Even if you plan to parti

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related-person transactions 
We enter into commercial transactions in the ordinary course of our business with organizations for which our executive officers or non-employee Directors, or one of their respective immediate family members, serve as non-employee Directors and/or employees, as well as with entities affiliated with beneficial owners of more than 5% of HP’s stock. Except as disclosed below, we do not believe that any of our executive officers, Directors, or 5% beneficial owners (or any of their respective immediate family members) had a direct or indirect material interest in such commercial transactions. In fiscal 2025, HP entered into an arms’-length transaction with Greenwave Holdings Inc. (“Greenwave”), an entity in which our director, Richard L. Clemmer, holds a 30% equity interest, to adopt certain Greenwave technology for use in HP products and services over a five-year period (subject to extension). The amount involved in the transaction was approximately $2.15 million in fiscal 2025. 
 
 
44 
 
Corporate governance and Board of Directors 
How we are compensated 
Director compensation and stock ownership guidelines 
Non-employee Director compensation is determined annually by the independent members of the Board acting on the recommendation of the HRC Committee. In formulating its recommendation, the HRC Committee considers market data for our peer group and input from the independent compensation consultant retained by the HRC Committee. Our non-employee Director compensation program was reviewed in fiscal 2025 and the HRC Committee determined that in order to remain competitive with similar programs maintained by our peers, the annual cash retainer should be increased from $105,000 to $115,000, the annual equity retainer increased from $220,000 to $230,000, and each of the annual Committee Chair fees increased by $5,000 (as noted below), and recommended such adjustments to the Board, which the Board then approved. Mr. Lores, as an employee of the Company, did not receive separate compensation for his Board service. Following his appointment as Interim Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Broussard does not receive separate compensation for his Board service. 
 
 
 
Each non-employee Director receives an annual cash retainer for services during the period that begins on or around the date of the annual meeting, when non-employee Directors stand for election, and ends on or around the day prior to the next annual meeting (each such period, a “Board Year”). For the 2025 Board Year, which began March 1, 2025, each non-employee Director was entitled to receive an annual cash retainer of $115,000. 
Each non-employee Director also received an annual equity retainer of $230,000 for service during the 2025 Board Year, with grants made on the date of the annual meeting. Equity grants to non-employee Directors are intended to strengthen alignment with stockholder interests and to reinforce a long-term ownership view of the Company and its value. Retention is not the focus of equity grants for non-employee Directors, which is why such equity grants are not subject to service-related vesting. 
The Chair receives an additional $200,000 annual cash retainer in recognition of the greater duties and commitment that the position requires. 
In addition to the regular annual cash and equity retainers, and the Chair retainer described above, the non-employee Directors who served as chairs of standing committees during fiscal 2025 received additional cash retainers for such service. 
* Each non-employee Director also receives $2,000 for each Board meeting attended in excess of a total of ten meetings per Board Year, and $2,000 for each committee meeting attended in excess of a total of ten meetings of each committee per Board Year. 
Annual Director compensation 
 
 
 
 
$115,000 Annual Cash Retainer 
 
 
$230,000 Annual Equity Retainer 
 
 
Additional cash compensation * 
 
 Chair of the Board $ 200,000 
 Committee Chair Fees
