INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP (IBM) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORP
Ticker: IBM
CIK: 51143
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-10

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Awards. This process ensures that the full Board and each committee conduct an assessment of their performance and solicit feedback for enhancement and improvement, with action items tracked to completion, and a retrospective to assess how their time was spent, and what focus areas should be emphasized in the coming year. From time to time, this process also incorporates a third-party review of the Board’s process and evaluation criteria. 
 
 
 1 
Full Board 
self-evaluation 
The Lead Director leads the Board in conducting an annual self-evaluation to review the effectiveness of the Board and its committees. In this comprehensive review, the self- evaluation focuses on: 
• The composition and performance of the Board, including each director's individual performance and feedback related thereto, the size of the Board, mix of skills and experience and director refreshment practices; 
• The quality and scope of the materials distributed in advance of meetings; 
• The Board’s access to Company executives and operations; 
• The promotion of rigorous decision making by the Board and its committees; 
• The effectiveness of the Board and committee evaluation processes; and 
• The overall functioning of the Board and its committees. 
 
 
 2 
Committee 
self- evaluations 
Each committee also performs a self-evaluation in executive session on an annual basis. The Audit Committee’s evaluation, for example, includes individual, one-on-one interviews between IBM’s internal Chief Auditor and each member of the Committee. 
 
 
 3 
Individual 
interviews with 
the Chairman of 
the Board and 
Lead Director The Lead Director, together with the Chairman, interviews each IBM director individually to obtain his or her candid assessment of director performance, Board dynamics and the effectiveness of the Board and its committees. 
 
 
 4 
Presentation of 
feedback The Lead Director shares insights from each of these meetings with the full Board. 
 
 
 5 
Results 
discussion The Board meets in executive session to discuss the results of the evaluation and any other issues that the directors may want to raise. 
 
 
 6 Follow-ups 
Self-evaluation items requiring follow-up and execution are tracked on an ongoing basis by the Board, each of the committees, and by IBM management. Outcomes are reported back to the Board by the Lead Director. For example, in the 2024 Board self- evaluation, Board members expressed interest in having more external speakers to provide perspectives on various relevant topics. In turn, throughout 2025, Board agendas included external speakers in order to be responsive to that request. While this formal self- evaluation is conducted on an annual basis, the evaluation process is an ongoing process throughout the year. At each meeting, the Chairman actively solicits feedback from each individual director and directors continuously share their perspectives and suggestions. 
 
 
 
24 IBM 
Governance and the board 
Risk oversight 
 
 
 
At IBM, we believe that innovation and leadership are impossible without taking risks. We also recognize that imprudent acceptance of risk or the failure to appropriately identify and mitigate risk could negatively impact stockholder value. Oversight of IBM’s risk management processes is a shared responsibility: 
 
 
 
The Board of Directors and its Committees have responsibility for oversight of IBM’s risk management processes and controls and regularly receive reports from management on salient risks and mitigation strategies. The Committees regularly provide reports to the full Board on the risk areas they are responsible for and other risks that may emerge. 
The Company’s management is responsible for the day-to-day implementation and execution of risk management processes and controls, and for managing and addressing the risks identified through IBM’s comprehensive annual enterprise risk review. 
 
 
 
IBM has a multi-faceted approach to identifying, managing and addressing risks 
A key component of IBM’s risk management strategy is the annual risk review conducted by the IBM Chief Risk Office. Our risk professionals rigorously analyze enterprise risks, incorporating both internal and external perspectives and data analytics into a comprehensive annual enterprise risk review that identifies the most salient risks facing IBM. Those risks include both market risks (such as cybersecurity, geopolitical tensions and trade, external economic and financial conditions) and business risks (such as hybrid cloud adoption, AI differentiation, talent management, and ecosystem adoption of IBM technology). Management participates in monthly emerging risk reviews to proactively identify and respond to changes in the business environment, and the Board is briefed on those risks. 
The management team or teams responsible for managing and addressing the risks identified through IBM’s comprehensive annual enterprise risk review regularly report to the Board and its Committees that have been delegated oversight responsibility to give visibility to the most salient risks facing the company, the impact they may have, and the company’s strategy to manage them. IBM’s risk professionals, including the Chief Risk Officer, work closely with senior management to integrate risk assessment into Board and Committee briefings on topics of strategic importance. For example: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The IBM Chief Information Security Officer, whose team is responsible for leading enterprise-wide information security strategy, policy, standards, architecture and processes, and other senior leaders regularly report to the Audit Committee and the Board on threat intelligence, cyber risk areas, cybersecurity incidents, and ongoing cybersecurity initiatives. 
The Chief Human Resources Officer regularly reports to the

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation discussion and analysis 
The calculation for the 2023-2025 program is shown in the table below. Based on the leveraged performance and the ROIC modifier result, the final score is 113. 
 
 
2023-2025 
Financial metrics Target Results % Attainment 
Incentive 
score (1) Weight 
Total score (prior to ROIC modifier (2) ) 
ROIC modifier (2) 
adjustment 
Final score 
 
Revenue (3) 
$196.9B 
$195.5B 99 % 98 % 40% 113 
+/- 0 
= 113 
 
Operating EPS (4) 
$30.75 
$31.70 103 % 108 % 30% 
 
Free cash flow (4) 
$33.8B 
$38.7B 115 % 138 % 30% 
(1) Based on PSU payout levels displayed below. 
(2) Non-GAAP financial metric. See Appendix A for information on how we calculate this performance metric. 
(3) 2023-2025 revenue as reported, adjusted for fluctuations in foreign currency. 
(4) Non-GAAP financial metrics. Operating EPS includes immaterial share adjustments in all three years. For 2023-2025, free cash flow amounts are on a consolidated basis. See Appendix A for information on how we calculate these performance metrics. 
2023-2025 PSUs: Threshold, Target, and Max Attainment % and Payout %: 
 
 
 
Threshold 
 
Target 
 
Max 
 
Financial metrics 
Attainment % / Payout % 
 
Attainment % / Payout % 
 
Attainment % / Payout % 
 
Revenue (40%) 
70% / 25% 
 
100% / 100% 
 
120% / 150% 
 
Operating EPS (30%) (1) 
70% / 25% 
 
100% / 100% 
 
120% / 150% 
 
Free cash flow (30%) (1) 
70% / 25% 
 
100% / 100% 
 
120% / 150% 
(1) Non-GAAP financial metrics. See Appendix A for information on how we calculate these performance metrics. 
Relative Total Shareholder Return Modifier (rTSR) - New for 2025 
Beginning with the 2025-2027 performance cycle, we have replaced the ROIC modifier with a relative Total Shareholder Return (rTSR) modifier. This change reflects our commitment to aligning executive compensation more directly with shareholder outcomes and market performance. rTSR measures the Company’s total shareholder return, stock price appreciation plus reinvested dividends, over the three-year performance period, ranked against the companies in the S&P 500 Index. TSR is calculated using the average closing share price over the 30 trading days immediately preceding the start and end of the performance period to reduce the impact of short-term market fluctuations. 
After determining the payout based on internal financial targets, which are leveraged up or down from 0% to 200%, the rTSR modifier can adjust the award upward or downward by up to 20 points depending on our percentile ranking relative to the S&P 500 Index. If our ranking falls between the 40th and 60th percentile, no adjustment is made. For rankings above the 60th percentile, the payout is increased point-for-point by up to 20 points, capped at the 80th percentile. For rankings below the 40th percentile, the payout is reduced point-for-point by up to 20 points, capped at the 20th percentile. If revenue, operating EPS, and free cash flow result in a 0% leveraged payout, the rTSR modifier does not apply. 
rTSR Modifier 
 
 2026 Notice of Annual Meeting & Proxy Statement 
39 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
Section 2: Compensation program governance 
Stockholder engagement provides important feedback for the committee 
IBM continually reviews and enhances its corporate governance and executive compensation programs. As part of this review, it is IBM’s longstanding practice to meet with a significant number of our largest investors during both the proxy season and the off-season to solicit their feedback on a variety of topics. 
Stockholder feedback from engagement efforts is shared with the Committee and helps to inform the Board's decisions and our compensation policies, practices and disclosures. Our stockholder discussions and formal 2025 Say on Pay vote reaffirmed investor support of our pay practices with 92% approval. Previous investor feedback has highlighted the importance of relative performance measures in incentive plan design. We agree, and after careful consideration by the Committee, we introduced a relative Total Shareholder Return (rTSR) modifier to our long-term incentive plan in 2025. This enhancement reinforces IBM's commitment to sustained strategic growth and underscores our high-value business model by directly linking executive incentives to long-term stockholder outcomes. 
This in-depth engagement process provides valuable feedback to the Compensation Committee on an ongoing basis. Our stockholders have shared that they are strongly supportive of the Company's compensation practices and overall program design, which focuses on long-term financial performance that drives stockholder value creation. 
Compensation practices 
Overall, IBM’s compensation policies and decisions, explained in detail in this Compensation Discussion and Analysis, continue to be focused on long-term financial performance to drive stockholder value. 
The table below highlights practices that IBM embraces in support of strong governance practices. 
 
 
 
What we do 
 
 
 Tie a significant portion of pay to Company performance 
 
 Mitigate risk taking by emphasizing long-term equity incentives, placing caps on potential payments, and maintaining robust clawback provisions 
 
 Require significant share ownership by the Chairman, President and CEO, Vice Chairman and Senior Vice Presidents 
 
 Utilize noncompetition and nonsolicitation agreements for senior executives 
 
 Remove impact of share repurchase on executive incentives 
 
 
 
What we don’t do 
 
 
 No individual severance or change-in-control agreements for executive officers 
 
 No excise tax gross-ups for executive officers 
 
 No dividend equivalents on unearned RSUs/PSUs 
 
 No hedging/pledging of IBM stock 
 
 No stock option repricing, exchanges or stock options granted below market value 
 
 No guaranteed incentive payouts for executive officers 
 
 No accelerated vesting of equity awards for executive officers 
 
 No above-market returns on deferred compensation plans 
 
 
40 IBM 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
Personal stake in IBM’s future through stock ownership requirements 
Investors want the leaders of their companies to act like owners. That alignment, we believe, works best when senior leaders have meaningful portions of their personal holdings invested in the stock of their company. This is why IBM sets significant stock ownership requirements for IBM’s Chairman, President and CEO, Vice Chairman, and Senior Vice Presidents (SVPs). Within 5 years of hire or promotion, each is required to own a minimum number of IBM shares or equivalents that is equal to a multiple of salary at the time of hire, promotion, or election as an executive officer. The minimum multiple of salary required is in excess of standard market practice. 
Stock ownership requirements 
 
 
 
 
IBM Minimum requirement 
as a multiple of salary 
 
Median peer group minimum requirement 
as a multiple of salary 
 
CEO 
 10 
 7 
 
Other NEOs 
 7 
 4 
Mr. Krishna owns common stock and stock-based holdings above his ownership requirement (over 86 times his base salary) as of December 31, 2025. More information on Mr. Krishna’s holdings can be found in the Common Stock and Stock-Based Holdings of Directors and Executive Officers Table. As a group, the Chairman, President and CEO, Vice Chairman and SVPs, inclusive of the NEOs, owned shares or equivalents valued at over $282 million as of December 31, 2025; as of that date, this group held, on average, over 20 times their base salary, and are all on track to meet or exceed their ownership goal within 5 years of hire or promotion. 
The following table illustrates which equity holdings count towards stock ownership requirements: 
 
 
 
What counts 
 
 
 
IBM shares owned personally or by members of the officer’s immediate family sharing the same household 
 
 Holdings in the IBM Stock Fund of the 401(k) Plan and the Excess Savings Plan 
 
 Shares of IBM stock deferred under the Excess Savings Plan 
 
 
 
What does not count 
 
 
 Unvested equity awards 
 
 Unexercised stock options 
Stock ownership continues beyond retirement 
Finally, our programs are designed to ensure alignment with IBM’s long-term interests past the retirement date for our Chairman, President and CEO, Vice Chairman and SVPs. Share price performance and long-term goal achievement continue to impact the Long-Term Incentive Plan for these retired executives for at least two and a half years post retirement. For example, shares for Mr. Krishna that remained restricted and subject to IBM performance represent more than 200% of his share ownership requirement as of December 31, 2025, assuming future performance at target. 
Compensation Committee consultant 
The Committee enters into a consulting agreement with its outside compensation consultant on a biennial basis. In 2025, the Committee retained Semler Brossy as its compensation consultant to advise the Committee on market practices and specific IBM policies and programs. Semler Brossy reports directly to the Compensation Committee Chair and takes direction from the Committee. The consultant’s work for the Committee includes data analyses, market assessments and preparation of related reports. From time to time, the Committee seeks the views of the consultant on items such as incentive program design and market practices. The work done by Semler Brossy for the Committee is documented in a formal agreement which is executed by the consultant and the Committee. Semler Brossy does not perform any other work for IBM, other than services provided to IBM’s Directors and Corporate Governance Committee. The Committee determined that there is no conflict of interest with regard to Semler Brossy. 
 
 2026 Notice of Annual Meeting & Proxy Statement 
41 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
How compensation decisions are made 
At any level, compensation reflects an employee’s value to the business — market value of skills, individual contribution and business results. To be sure we appropriately assess the value of senior executives, IBM follows an evaluation process, described here in some detail: 
1. Making annual performance commitments 
All IBM employees, including the Chairman, President and CEO, Vice Chairman and SVPs, develop goals, both qualitative and quantitative, that they seek to achieve in a particular year in support of the business. The Board of Directors reviews and approves the Chairman, President and CEO’s performance goals and formally reviews progress and outcomes. As part of this process, many factors are considered, including an understanding of the business risks associated with the performance goals. 
2. Determining annual incentive payouts 
Evaluation of Chairman, President and CEO results by the Compensation Committee 
The Chair of the Compensation Committee works directly with the Committee’s compensation consultant to provide a decision-making framework for use by the Committee in determining annual incentive payouts for the Chairman, President and CEO. This framework considers the Chairman, President and CEO’s self-assessment of performance against commitments in the year, both qualitative and quantitative, and also considers progress against strategic objectives, an analysis of IBM’s total performance over the year and the overall Company incentive score. The Committee considers all of this information in developing its recommendations, which are then presented to the independent members of the IBM Board of Directors for further review, discussion, and final approval. 
Evaluation of Vice Chairman and SVP results by the Chairman, President and CEO and the Compensation Committee 
Executives work with their managers throughout the year to update their own results against their stated goals. The self-assessments of the Vice Chairman and SVPs are reviewed by the Senior Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer and the Chairman, President and CEO. 
Following this in-depth review and taking into account the Company incentive score, the Chairman, President and CEO makes compensation recommendations to the Compensation Committee based on an evaluation of the Vice Chairman and each SVP’s performance for the year, and the Committee decides whether to approve or adjust the Chairman, President and CEO’s recommendations for the Vice Chairman and SVPs. The Committee then presents the compensation decisions for the Chief Financial Officer to the independent members of the IBM Board of Directors for ratification. 
3. Setting competitive target pay 
Approach to benchmarking 
IBM participates in several executive compensation surveys that provide general trend information and details on levels of salary, target annual incentives and long-term incentives, the relative mix of short- and long-term incentives, and mix of cash and stock-based pay. Given the battle for talent that exists in our industry, the benchmark companies that are used by the Compensation Committee to guide its decision making have included a broad range of key information technology companies, to help us identify trends in the industry. We also include companies outside our industry, with stature, size, and complexity that approximate our own, in recognition of the flow of executive talent in and out of IBM from other industries. The surveys and benchmark data are supplemented by input from the Compensation Committee’s outside consultant on factors such as recent market trends. The Committee reviews and approves this list annually. 
 
 
42 IBM 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
For 2025 compensation decisions, the Committee utilized the following benchmark group criteria: 
• Companies in the technology industry with revenue that exceeds $10 billion, plus 
• Additional companies in other industries, with revenue that exceeds $30 billion, and that have a global complexity similar to IBM, and whose business strategy results in substantial competition for senior leadership talent. For 2025 compensation decisions, the Committee approved the following benchmark group using the criteria above, which achieves a balance between prominent technology competitors and large-scale companies of similar size to IBM. In consideration of size and complexity, IBM’s philosophy is to generally target the 50 th percentile of the market for cash and total compensation. Executives in new roles are typically positioned below and brought up to median with sustained performance, while high performing executives may have an above median target total pay opportunity driven by long-term incentives to retain executive skills and support strong succession plans. 
Benchmark group 
 
 
 
Accenture 
 
Boeing 
 
Intel 
 
Salesforce 
 
Adobe 
 
Broadcom 
 
Microsoft 
 
UPS 
 
Alphabet 
 
Cisco Systems 
 
Oracle 
 
Verizon 
 
Amazon.com 
 
Elevance Health 
 
PepsiCo 
 
Visa 
 
AT&T 
 
Hewlett Packard Enterprise 
 
Qualcomm 
 
 
 
Bank of America 
 
Honeywell 
 
RTX 
 
 
 
Approach to determining individual compensation 
For individual compensation decisions, the benchmark information is used together with an internal view of individual performance relative to other executives and recognizing that the skills and experience of our senior executives are highly sought after by other companies and, in particular, by IBM’s competitors. Because factors such as performance and retention, as well as size and complexity of the job role, are considered when compensation decisions are made, the cash and total compensation for an individual named executive officer may be higher or lower than the target reference point of the benchmark group. 
Evaluation of Chairman, President and CEO target pay by the Compensation Committee 
The Chair of the Compensation Committee works directly with the Committee’s compensation consultant to provide a decision-making framework for use by the Committee in setting target compensation for the Chairman, President and CEO. The independent members of the IBM Board of Directors review and provide final approval. 
Evaluation of Vice Chairman and SVP target pay by the Chairman, President and CEO and the Compensation Committee 
The Chairman, President and CEO makes compensation recommendations on the Vice Chairman and SVPs’ target compensation to the Compensation Committee. The Committee evaluates all of the factors considered by the Chairman, President and CEO and reviews compensation summaries that tally the dollar value of compensation related items, including salary, target annual incentive, and long-term compensation. The Committee decides whether to approve or adjust the Chairman, President and CEO’s recommendations for the Vice Chairman and SVPs. The Committee then presents the compensation decisions for the Chief Financial Officer to the independent members of the IBM Board of Directors for ratification. 
 
 2026 Notice of Annual Meeting & Proxy Statement 
43 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
Section 3: Compensation decisions for the Chairman, President and CEO and named executive officers 
2025 Annual incentive payment decision for the Chairman, President and CEO 
For 2025 performance, the Board approved an annual incentive payment of $5,250,000, which represented 150% of Mr. Krishna’s target opportunity and was in line with the Company's pool funding score. 
In addition to overall IBM 2025 revenue performance of $67.5 billion and $13.2 billion cash from operations, the Compensation Committee noted the following achievements for Mr. Krishna, which have positioned IBM for sustained growth going forward: 
 
 
 
 
Business results 
• Software revenue grew 9% year-to-year and Consulting revenue flat year-to-year at constant currency* 
• Continued shift toward higher growth revenue, with more than 75% of revenue now in Software and Consulting 
• Free cash flow* generation of $14.7 billion (+$2 billion year over year) 
 
 
 
 
Leadership in 
innovation 
• Delivered strong advancements across AI, Quantum, and Infrastructure, reinforcing leadership in next-generation technologies 
• Achieved cumulative GenAI book of business** over $12.5 billion inception-to-date, of which Software is more than $2 billion and Consulting is more than $10.5 billion 
• Surpassed $1 billion in inception-to-date*** signings in Quantum, with 89 systems deployed, maintaining a strong lead over the nearest competitor 
• Successfully launched zMetis/Telum II, marking the strongest start to a mainframe cycle on record with z17 outperforming z16 
 
 
 
 
Portfolio and 
investment 
• Closed 10 strategic acquisitions in 2025 and invested over $8 billion in Research and Development expense, focused on expanding hybrid cloud and AI capabilities 
• Sustained revenue growth for fourth consecutive year 
 
 
 
 
Talent development 
and leadership 
• Focused on growing expertise levels in key skills (AI and hybrid cloud) 
• Fostered a high-performance culture by retaining top talent 
• Continued best in class employee engagement 
 
* Non-GAAP financial metrics. See Appendix A for information on how we calculate these performance metrics. 
** See Appendix A for additional information on GenAI book of business. 
*** Inception-to-date defined as 1Q17-4Q25. 
 
 
44 IBM 
2025 Compensation discussion and analysis 
2025 Annual incentive decisions for Mr. Kavanaugh, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Cohn, and Ms. Robinson 
The Compensation Committee also made decisions for the following named executive officers (NEOs), based on overall corporate performance as described in the Business Highlights and Executive Summary and an assessment of their individual contributions, some of which are summarized below: 
 
 
 
James J. Kavanaugh 
Senior Vice President, Finance & Operations & Chief Financial Officer 
• Optimized portfolio and drove productivity initiatives resulting in 100 basis points of operating pre-tax income margin expansion* in 2025. Achieved $4.5 billion in annual run-rate savings since 2023. 
• Delivered free cash flow* of $14.7 billion

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ficant time commitment and expense, and distract from management’s focus on operational execution, financial reporting and internal controls. 
 
 2026 Notice of Annual Meeting & Proxy Statement 
73 
 
 3 
Advisory vote on executive compensation
(Say on Pay) 
 
 
 
 
Board’s Recommendation: Vote FOR this proposal. 
Vote Required: Approval by a majority of the voting power of the shares present in person or by proxy and entitled to vote on the proposal. 
 
 
 
IBM is asking that you APPROVE the compensation of the named executive officers as disclosed in this Proxy Statement. 
IBM delivered $67.5 billion in revenue and $13.2 billion cash from operations. Revenue increased for the third consecutive year, growing 6% at constant currency (1). The Company’s portfolio mix reinforces our high value business model, as IBM shifted to higher growth areas, with over 75% of our business mix in Software and Consulting. The Company also returned more than $6 billion to stockholders through dividends, and ended the year with a solid investment grade balance sheet that continues to provide financial flexibility to support our strategic priorities and long-term value creation. 
IBM continues to demonstrate significant advancements in hybrid cloud and AI, reflecting actions we have taken to strategically position IBM as a high value growth company. 
In 2025, we once again engaged in a robust program to gather investor feedback. IBM’s Chairman, President and CEO, and independent Lead Director, participated in this engagement along with members of IBM’s senior management. IBM offered to engage with investors representing more than 75% of the shares that voted on Say on Pay at its 2025 Annual Meeting. Through our discussions with investors and our formal Say on Pay vote results, investors reaffirmed their support for the Company’s compensation policies and programs, which focus on long-term financial performance that drives stockholder value. 
In the context of investor feedback, pay decisions continued to be made based on our financial performance relative to our goals, while taking into consideration the significant reshaping of IBM’s portfolio as a hybrid cloud and AI company. After careful consideration by the Committee, we introduced a relative Total Shareholder Return (rTSR) modifier to our long-term incentive plan in 2025. This enhancement reinforces IBM's commitment to sustained strategic growth and underscores our high-value business model by directly linking executive incentives to long-term stockholder outcomes. 
IBM’s named executive officers are identified in the 2025 Summary Compensation Table, and pages 33 - 69 describe the compensation of these officers. In 2025, approximately 95% of target pay for the Chairman, President and CEO, and 91% of target pay for the other named executive officers, was at risk and subject to rigorous performance targets and stock price growth. 
For 2025 performance, the Board approved an annual incentive payment of $5.25 million for Mr. Krishna, which was 150% of target and in line with the Company annual incentive score. In making this award, the Committee also considered Mr. Krishna’s overall performance against his objectives, which included strong free cash flow generation, sustainable revenue generation (at constant currency), and the continued optimization of the Company’s portfolio, with a strong mix of software and consulting revenue. In addition, the Committee considered Mr. Krishna’s personal leadership in AI and quantum computing, driving IBM’s high performance culture, as well as continued best in class employee engagement. 
For the reasons expressed above and discussed in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis, the Executive Compensation and Management Resources Committee and the IBM Board of Directors believe that our compensation policies and programs are aligned with the interests of our stockholders and designed to reward for performance. 
We are therefore requesting your nonbinding vote on the following resolution: 
“Resolved, that the compensation of the Company’s named executive officers as disclosed in this Proxy Statement pursuant to the compensation disclosure rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the Compensation Discussion and Analysis, the executive compensation tables and the narrative discussion, is approved.” 
(1) Non-GAAP financial metric. See

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related person transactions policy, information about transactions involving related persons is assessed by the independent directors on IBM’s Board. Related persons include IBM directors and executive officers, as well as immediate family members of directors and executive officers, and beneficial owners of more than five percent of IBM’s common stock. If the determination is made that a related person has a material interest in any IBM transaction, then IBM’s independent directors would review, approve or ratify it, and the transaction would be required to be disclosed in accordance with the SEC rules. If the related person at issue is a director of IBM, or a family member of a director, then that director would not participate in those discussions. In general, IBM is of the view that the following transactions with related persons are not significant to investors because they take place under IBM’s standard policies and procedures: the sale or purchase of products or services in the ordinary course of business and on an arm’s-length basis; employment by IBM where the compensation and other terms of employment are determined on a basis consistent with IBM’s human resources policies; and any grants or contributions made by IBM under one of its grant programs and in accordance with IBM’s corporate contributions guidelines. 
Corporate governance 
IBM’s Corporate governance principles 
IBM’s Board of Directors has long adhered to governance principles designed to ensure the continued vitality of the Board and excellence in the execution of its duties. For more than 25 years, the Board has had in place a set of governance guidelines reflecting these principles, including the Board’s policy of requiring a majority of the Board to be comprised of independent directors, the importance of equity compensation to align the interests of directors and stockholders, and the practice of regularly scheduled executive sessions, including sessions of non-management directors without members of management led by IBM’s independent Lead Director. The IBM Board Corporate Governance Guidelines reflect IBM’s principles on corporate governance matters, including a director overboarding policy. Compliance with this policy is subject to an annual review by the Directors and Corporate Governance Committee and the Board. The IBM Board Corporate Governance Guidelines are available at https://www.ibm.com/investor/att/pdf/IBM-Board-Corporate-Governance-Guidelines.pdf. 
IBM is committed to promoting high standards of ethical business conduct and compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. We have a code of ethics for directors, executive officers, and employees. The Business Conduct Guidelines are available at https://www.ibm.com/businessconductguidelines. Any amendment to, or waiver of, the Business Conduct Guidelines that applies to one of our directors or executive officers may be made only by the Board or a Board committee, and would be disclosed on IBM’s website. It is also the Company's policy to comply with applicable insider trading laws, rules and regulations, and any exchange listing standards when engaging in transactions in Company securities. IBM has an insider trading policy that governs purchases, sales and/or dispositions of IBM securities by our directors, executive officers and employees that we believe is reasonably designed to promote compliance with insider trading laws, rules and regulations and NYSE listing standards. This policy is included as Exhibit 19 to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2025. 
The process by which stockholders and other interested parties may communicate with the Board or non-management directors of IBM is available at https://www.ibm.com/investor/governance/contact-the-board. 
 
 2026 Notice of Annual Meeting & Proxy Statement 
21 
Governance and the board 
Independent board 
 
 
Under the IBM Board Corporate Governance Guidelines, the Directors and Corporate Governance Committee and the full Board annually review the financial and other relationships between the independent directors and IBM as part of the assessment of director independence. The Directors and Corporate Governance Committee makes recommendations to the Board about the independence of non-management directors, and the Board determines whether those directors are independent. In addition to this annual assessment, director independence is monitored by the Directors and Corporate Governance Committee and the full Board on an ongoing basis. 
92% 
12 of our 13 director nominees are independent 
The independence criteria established by the Board in accordance with NYSE requirements and used by the Directors and Corporate Governance Committee and the Board in their assessment of the independence of directors is available at https:// www.ibm.com/investor/att/pdf/Independence_Standards.pdf. 
Applying those standards to IBM’s non-management director nominees and those directors who served in 2025 but not standing for election, the Committee and the Board have determined that each of the following has met the independence standards: M.C. Brown, T. Buberl, D.N. Farr, A. Gorsky, M.J. Howard, R. Laguarta, A.N. Liveris, M. Miebach, F.W. McNabb III, M.E. Pollack, P.R. Voser, F.H. Waddell, and A.W. Zollar. 
Director attendance 
In 2025, the Board held 7 meetings and the committees collectively met 17 times. The Board and the Directors and Corporate Governance Committee recognize the importance of director attendance at Board and committee meetings. In 2025: 
• Overall attendance at Board and committee meetings was over 97%; and 
• Attendance was at least 75% for each director. 
All directors attended IBM’s 2025 Annual Meeting of Stockholders. IBM’s policy with regard to Board members’ attendance at annual meetings of stockholders is available at https://www.ibm.com/investor/governance/director-attendance-at-annual-meeting-of-stockholders. 
 
 
22 IBM 
Governance and the board 
Independent leadership structure 
The Directors and Corporate Governance Committee is responsible for the continuing review of the governance structure of the Board, and for recommending to the Board those structures and practices best suited to IBM and its stockholders. The Committee and the Board recognize that different structures may be appropriate under different circumstances. 
Mr. Krishna serves as IBM’s Chairman, President and CEO and Mr. Gorsky serves as IBM’s independent Lead Direct
