INTEL CORP (INTC) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: INTEL CORP
Ticker: INTC
CIK: 50863
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-23

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Guidelines establish a general policy that the positions of chair and CEO be separate. Consistent with this policy, for well more than a decade we have not had a current or former CEO serve as Board Chair. In circumstances warranting a non-independent director serving as Board Chair, the guidelines provide that the independent directors will appoint a lead independent director to help ensure continued independent leadership and oversight. In addition, the guidelines delineate robust responsibilities for the lead independent director role. 
Consistent with this policy, Frank D. Yeary, an independent director, currently serves as our Board Chair. The Board has benefitted from having an independent chair. This structure has facilitated relations between the Board, the CEO and other senior management, assisted the Board in reaching consensus on strategies and policies, fostered a robust evaluation process and supported oversight by the independent directors. 
The Board should be able to adapt its leadership structure as appropriate to address changing circumstances. 
The proposal’s request for an “enduring” independent chair policy is fundamentally at odds with a core tenet of Delaware corporate law—a board must act in the best interests of the company and its stockholders. This includes when making decisions on board leadership. Consistent with this, under our Corporate Governance Guidelines, the Board retains flexibility to evaluate and adapt its leadership structure in light of changing circumstances. 
This flexibility has been particularly important for us during times of leadership transition. For example, in December 2024, following our prior CEO’s departure, the Board appointed interim co-CEOs to run the business until a permanent CEO successor was appointed. To facilitate more active Board oversight of the business and the interim co-CEOs during that period while preserving independent Board leadership, the Board appointed Mr. Yeary as Interim Executive Chair. Consistent with its existing policy, the Board simultaneously appointed Ms. Henry as Lead Independent Director. Upon the appointment of the company’s new CEO in March 2025, Mr. Yeary returned to serving as independent Board Chair. 
Given Intel’s existing policy providing for an independent Board Chair, and the need for and appropriateness of preserving the Board’s flexibility to adapt to changing circumstances, the Board believes the proposal is unnecessary, is inappropriate and is not in stockholders’ best interests. 
 
 
 Stockholder Proposals 
99 
Additional Information 
2026 Annual Meeting 
How Will the 2026 Annual Meeting Be Conducted? 
We are pleased this year to again conduct the 2026 Annual Meeting online via the Internet through a live webcast and online stockholder tools. We continue to use the virtual annual meeting format to facilitate stockholder attendance and participation by leveraging technology to communicate more effectively and efficiently with our stockholders. This format empowers stockholders to participate fully around the world, at no cost. We have designed the virtual format to enhance stockholder access and participation and protect stockholder rights. For example: 
▪ We Encourage Questions. Our stockholders have multiple opportunities to submit questions for the meeting. Stockholders may submit a question online in advance or live during the meeting, following the instructions below. During the meeting, we will answer as many stockholder-submitted questions as time permits. 
▪ We Believe in Transparency. Although participation in the live webcast (i.e., ability to vote and ask questions) is available only to stockholders as of the record date, anyone (whether or not a stockholder) can view the live webcast and, following completion of the 2026 Annual Meeting, a webcast replay, including the Q&A session, and the final report of the inspector of election will be posted to our Investor Relations website at www.intc.com and will remain posted for at least one year. 
▪ We Proactively Take Steps to Facilitate Your Participation. During the Annual Meeting, proponents of the stockholder proposals included in this proxy statement will have a dedicated call-in line designed to facilitate their ability to present their proposals. In addition, we offer live technical support for all stockholders attending the meeting. 
How Do I Attend the Meeting? 
The 2026 Annual Meeting website is www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/Intel26. If you were an Intel stockholder as of the close of business on March 16, 2026 or if you hold a valid proxy for the Annual Meeting, you may attend and participate in the Annual Meeting. Other persons may still view, but not participate in, the meeting through the same meeting website. If you plan to attend and participate in the meeting, please see below for what you will need to gain admission. 
 
 
 
Stockholders of Record 
If you are a stockholder of record, you will need to use your control number on your Notice of Internet Availability or proxy card to log into www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/Intel26. 
Stockholders of record —those holding shares directly with Computershare Trust Company, N.A.—will be on a list maintained by the inspector of elections. 
Beneficial Stockholder 
If you are a beneficial stockholder and your voting instruction form or Notice of Internet Availability indicates that you may vote those shares through the www.proxyvote.com website, then you may access, participate in, and vote at the Annual Meeting with the 16-digit access code indicated on that voting instruction form or notice. Otherwise, beneficial stockholders who do not have a control number or access code should contact their bank, broker, or other nominee (preferably at least five days before the Annual Meeting) and obtain a "legal proxy" in order to be able to attend, participate in, or vote at the Annual Meeting. 
“Beneficial” or “street name” stockholders —those holding shares through a broker, bank, or other nominee. 
 
If you encounter any difficulties accessing the virtual annual meeting during the check-in or meeting time, please call the technical support number that will be posted on the virtual annual meeting login page. 
Asking Questions. Stockholders have multiple opportunities to submit questions to Intel for the Annual Meeting. Stockholders who wish to submit a question in advance may do so at either www.proxyvote.com or on our Annual Meeting website, www.virtualshareholdermeeting.com/Intel26. Stockholders also may submit questions live during the meeting at the meeting website. Stockholders can also access copies of the proxy statement and annual report at our Annual Meeting website. 
If you cannot attend, following the meeting, a replay of our Annual Meeting webcast will be available on our Investor Relations website at www.intc.com and will remain posted for at least one year. 
 
 
100 Intel 2026 Proxy Statement 
How Do I Get a List of Stockholders Entitled to Vote? 
Intel’s list of stockholders as of March 16, 2026 will be available for inspection at our headquarters for the 10 days prior to the Annual Meeting. If you want to inspect the stockholder list, call our Investor Relations department at (408) 765-1480 to schedule an appointment. 
How Are Proxies Solicited and What is the Cost? 
We will bear the expense of soliciting proxies, and we have retained D.F. King & Co., Inc. to solicit proxies for a fee of approximately $30,000, plus a reasonable amount to cover expenses. Our directors, officers, and other employees, without additional compensation, may also solicit proxies personally or in writing, by telephone, e-mail, or otherwise. We are required to request brokers, banks, and other nominees that hold stock in their names to furnish our proxy materials to the beneficial owners of the stock, and we must reimburse these brokers, banks, and other nominees for the expenses of doing so, in accordance with statutory fee schedules. 
How Do I Vote? 
Whether you are a stockholder of record or a beneficial stockholder, you may direct how your shares are voted without participating in the Annual Meeting. We encourage stockholders to vote well before the Annual Meeting, even if they plan to attend the virtual meeting, by completing proxies in any of the following ways: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Go to www.proxyvote.com and follow the instructions provided. 
Call the applicable number and follow the instructions provided if you have received a printed version of these proxy materials. 
For stockholders of record: (800) 690-6903 
For beneficial stockholders: (800) 454-8683 
Mail , complete, sign, date, and mail the proxy card in the return envelope provided to you if you have received a printed version of these proxy materials. 
Scan this code to your phone to receive all of the meeting details. 
 
Stockholders can vote via the Internet in advance of or during the meeting. Stockholders who attend the virtual Annual Meeting should follow the instructions on the meeting website to vote or submit questions during the meeting. Any vote submitted online during the meeting will replace any previous votes. 
Revoking Your Proxy or Changing Your Vote. Stockholders of record may revoke their proxy at any time before the electronic polls close by submitting a later-dated vote online during the Annual Meeting, or via the Internet, by telephone, by mail, or by delivering instructions to our Corporate Secretary before the Annual Meeting commences. Beneficial stockholders may revoke any prior voting instructions by contacting the broker, bank, or other nominee that holds their shares or by voting online during the meeting. 
Voting Instructions. If you complete and submit your proxy voting instructions, the individuals named as proxies will follow your instructions. If you are a stockholder of record and you submit proxy voting instructions but do not direct how to vote on each item, the individuals named as proxies will vote as the Board recommends on each proposal. The individuals named as proxies will vote on any other matters properly presented at the Annual Meeting or any adjournment or postponement thereof in accordance with their best judgment. Our Bylaws set forth requirements for advance notice of any nominations or agenda items to be brought up for voting at the Annual Meeting, and we have not received timely notice of any such matters that we expect to be presented at the Annual Meeting other than the items described in this proxy statement. 
Who Counts the Votes? 
Broadridge Financial Solutions, Inc. has been engaged as our independent inspector of elections to tabulate stockholder votes for the Annual Meeting. 
 
 Additional Information 
101 
What are the Voting Standards? 
On March 16, 2026, the record date for the Annual Meeting, 5,021,010,228 shares of Intel common stock were outstanding. In order to have a quorum at the meeting, a majority of the shares outstanding entitled to vote on the record date must be present at the scheduled time of the meeting in person or by proxy. Each share of our common stock outstanding on the record date is entitled to one vote on each of the director nominees and one vote on each other matter. 
The following chart describes the proposals to be considered at the meeting, the vote required to elect directors and to adopt each other proposal, and the manner in which votes will be counted: 
 
 Proposal Voting
Options Vote Required to 
Adopt the Proposal Effect of
Abstentions Effect of “Broker
Non-Votes” if Any* 
 
 
1. Election of directors 
For, against, or abstain on each nominee. 
Majority of votes cast.** No effect. No effect. 
 
 
 
2. Ratification of selection of independent registered public accounting firm 
For, against or abstain. 
Majority of shares present or represented.*** 
Counted as vote. Same effect as votes against. No effect. 
 
 
 
3. Advisory vote on

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
47 
2025 NEO Compensation 
Our executive compensation programs consist of cash and equity elements designed to attract, retain and motivate our executives and align pay with performance. 
Cash Compensation 
The Compensation Committee’s decisions related to base salary and annual incentive cash compensation are focused on ensuring pay is aligned to the market and reflective of company performance and individual experience and performance. Some of the committee’s considerations include the executive officer’s pay relative to the market, internal pay equity, criticality of role, experience and an assessment of the executive’s performance across our three key measures: results, culture and learning. 
Base Salary 
The table below shows the base salary for our NEOs for 2025, as compared with their approved base salary for 2024, with the exception of Messrs. Tan and Chandrasekaran who were not NEOs in 2024. 
 
 Name 
2025 Base Salary 
($) 
2024 Base Salary 
($) 
Change 
2025 vs. 2024 
 Lip-Bu Tan 1,000,000 N/A N/A 
 David A. Zinsner 850,000 850,000 — % 
 Naga Chandrasekaran 800,000 N/A N/A 
 
 April Miller Boise 750,000 750,000 — % 
 Michelle Johnston Holthaus 1,000,000 850,000 17.6 % 
 Christoph Schell 850,000 850,000 — % 
2025 Base Salary. Amounts reflect the ending annualized base salaries of the NEOs. Ms. Johnston Holthaus’ base salary and target bonus opportunity were increased effective January 1, 2025 in connection with her promotion to CEO, Intel Products. 
2024 Base Salary. Amounts reflect the ending annualized base salaries of the NEOs, which for Mr. Zinsner and Ms. Johnston Holthaus reflect increases to their base salaries effective April 1, 2024. 
Annual Incentive Cash Compensation 
In February 2025, the Compensation Committee approved the 2025 performance metrics and the goals under the Intel Corporation Executive Annual Performance Bonus Plan (Annual Cash Bonus Plan). In determining the performance metrics and the goals under the Annual Cash Bonus Plan, the committee considered whether the existing performance metrics were adequately linked to corporate strategy and drove appropriate incentives and whether any other metrics would be appropriate to add. The committee replaced the group operating income metric with a company-wide operating expense metric to align the Annual Cash Bonus Plan with our commitment to investors to reduce operating expenses in 2025. In addition, for 2025, we renamed and redesigned the One Intel Operational goals into the Intel Top Jobs goals and replaced company-wide objectives for Intel Products, Intel Foundry and Intel Corporate specific objectives. The maximum payout opportunity under the Annual Cash Bonus Plan is 200% of the executive’s target opportunity. 
The table below shows the target opportunities for our NEOs under the 2025 Annual Cash Bonus Plan as compared to the approved target opportunity for 2024. 
 
 Name 
2025 Annual Cash 
Bonus Target 
(% of Base Salary) 
2025 Annual Cash 
Bonus Target 
Amount ($) 
2024 Annual Cash 
Bonus Target 
Amount ($) 
Change 2025 
vs. 2024 
 Lip-Bu Tan 200 % 2,000,000 N/A N/A 
 David A. Zinsner 175 % 1,487,500 1,476,600 0.7 % 
 Naga Chandrasekaran 175 % 1,374,000 N/A N/A 
 April Miller Boise 175 % 1,312,500 1,312,500 — % 
 Michelle Johnston Holthaus 200 % 2,000,000 1,476,600 35.4 % 
 Christoph Schell 175 % 1,487,500 1,476,600 0.7 % 
2025 Annual Cash Bonus Target Amount. The amounts included in this column are based on a percentage of actual base salary paid for 2025, which amounts differ from the amounts included as annual base salary on page 48 above for Mr. Chandrasekaran because an increase in his base salary became effective on February 15, 2025. 
2024 Annual Cash Bonus Target Amount. The amounts included in this column are based on a percentage of actual base salary paid for 2024, which amounts differ from the amounts included as annual base salary on page 48 above for Mr. Zinsner and Ms. Johnston Holthaus because the increases in their base salaries for 2024 became effective on July 1, 2024. 
 
 
48 
Intel 2026 Proxy Statement 
2025 Annual Cash Bonus Plan Metrics 
A summary of the Annual Cash Bonus Plan metrics and how they align to our long-term strategy is presented below. 
 
 Metric Weight Why Included in our Annual Cash Bonus Plan 
 
 Revenue 20% 
▪ Aligns to our growth strategy and gives us the ability to measure our progress against our financial plans set early in the year 
 
 
 Gross Margin Percentage 20% 
▪ Aligns to our goal for growth to be additive to the bottom line and gives us the ability to measure our progress against our financial plans set early in the year 
 
 
 Operating Expense 20% 
▪ Aligns to our corporate strategy by focusing on limiting our operating expense as we have committed to our investors 
 
 
 Intel Top Jobs Goals 20% 
▪ Goals represent key deliverables or milestones for each of our three major groups (Intel Products, Intel Foundry and Intel Corporate) aligned to our long-term strategic objectives of product leadership, building an external foundry business and strengthening our foundations for predictable execution 
 
 
 Individual Performance Goals 20% 
▪ Provides ability to further promote strong execution of our strategy and drive differentiation in the plan results based on our NEOs’ individual contributions during the performance period 
▪ Each NEO’s performance is assessed against the individual’s 2025 pre-established objectives 
 
Use of Non-GAAP Measures and Adjustments. The revenue, gross margin percentage and operating expense targets are generally established by the Compensation Committee using the company’s non-GAAP measures of revenue, gross margin percentage and operating expense as reported in its annual and quarterly earnings releases. The company’s achievement against those targets is then subject to further adjustments as permitted under our Annual Cash Bonus Plan. See “Adjustments” on page 50. 
Tan Annual Bonus Design. The Annual Cash Bonus Plan design for Mr. Tan did not include individual performance goals, and each of the four metrics—revenue, gross margin percentage, operating expense and Intel Top Jobs goals—was weighted 25%. 
Financial Metrics and Goals 
When setting targets, the Compensation Committee consults with management and external advisors and considers our operating plan, the broader macroeconomic environment and the expectations of our stockholders. The committee replaced the group operating income performance metric with a new company operating expense metric to align the Annual Cash Bonus Plan with our commitment to investors to reduce operating expenses in 2025. 
At the time the Compensation Committee established the incentive compensation targets for 2025, there were a number of anticipated business challenges for 2025. These challenges included elevated geopolitical tensions and conflicts, rapidly changing trade policies and regulations in the areas of tariffs and export controls, an intensifying competitive environment in our core markets in a year where we had numerous execution challenges to close gaps in product competitiveness and bring to high-volume manufacturing our next generation process technology (Intel 18A) by the end of the year, and our internal leadership transitions as we were undertaking a search for a new CEO and expected other leadership changes once a new CEO was hired. 
The expectation that there could be a meaningful reduction in revenue from 2024 to 2025 factored significantly into the committee’s decision to set a 2025 target goal for revenue lower than the target goal for 2024 and lower than the actual result for revenue in 2024. The committee set the target goal for gross margin percentage lower than the target goal for 2024, but higher than the actual result for gross margin percentage in 2024. The committee considered our actual performance for 2024, which was below expectations, as well as the expectation that the external environment for 2025 would remain highly volatile. Accordingly, the committee aligned the target goals with our business plan and prevailing market conditions, while still requiring strong execution to achieve above-target payouts. 
The Compensation Committee aims to motivate executives to deliver strong execution and strategic progress, even in the face of uncertainty, by selecting performance goals that remain both rigorous and attainable, calibrated to the realities of the business landscape. This methodology supports our pay-for-performance philosophy, maintaining a high bar for achievement while recognizing the need for flexibility during periods of transformation. The committee remains confident that these goals will continue to drive performance and reward executives for delivering results that advance stockholder interests. 
 
 
Compensation Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
49 
The graphs below provide details on the targets set—linear interpolation is used for performance between listed outcomes—and the performance results for the financial performance metrics applicable to our NEOs. In reviewing these results, the Compensation Committee reaffirmed its belief that the 2025 goals were appropriate and rigorous given the operating environment Intel faced. The committee further determined that the resulting payout percentages accurately reflected our performance in 2025, including improved execution and continued progress against strategic priorities. 
 
 Payout Percentage Threshold
0% Target
100% Maximum
200% Score 
 
 
Achievement: $53.36 billion 
 
Revenue (Adjusted) 
 
113.6% 
 
 
$48.0 billion 
$52.0 billion 
$58.0 billion 
 
 
 
Achievement: 36.96% 
 Gross Margin Percentage 
(Adjusted) 
 
99.6% 
 
 
34% 
37% 
40% 
 
 
 
Achievement: $16.48 billion 
 Operating Expense (Adjusted) 
 
200% 
 
 
$19.5 billion 
$18.5 billion 
$17.5 billion 
 
Adjustments. Achievement for the three performance metrics reflects permitted adjustments under the 2025 Annual Bonus Plan to reflect the impacts to our financials from M&A activity and divestitures, specifically the sale of a majority interest in and deconsolidation of Altera Corporation in the third quarter of 2025. Adjustments were made starting from the company’s reported consolidated GAAP revenue ($52.9 billion), non-GAAP gross margin percentage (36.7%) and non-GAAP operating expense ($16.5 billion) and adjusting such numbers to a result that was designed to reflect what would have been achieved had Altera continued to be fully owned by Intel through the end of fiscal 2025 and achieved the results forecasted for the remainder of 2025 at the time of the divestiture. 
Intel Top Jobs Goals 
As a global designer and manufacturer of semiconductor products, our strategy in 2025 was focused on product competitiveness, open platforms, manufacturing at scale and our people. Our Intel Top Jobs goals were established to reflect these critical business priorities and leading indicators measuring our progress toward our long-term transformational journey. For 2025, we redesigned the One Intel Operational goals into the Intel Top Jobs goals to streamline company-wide objectives with Intel Products and Intel Foundry objectives. Intel Top Jobs goals are specific with respect to Intel Products, Intel Foundry and Intel Corporate. 
The weight of the Products Top Jobs, Foundry Top Jobs and Corporate Top Jobs differ based on what business group the employee is a part of, as follows: 
 
 Products Top Jobs = Products Top Jobs 
(80%) + Corporate Top Jobs 
(20%) 
 
 Foundry Top Jobs = Foundry Top Jobs 
(80%) + Corporate Top Jobs 
(20%) 
 
 Corporate Top Jobs = Average of Products Top Jobs and Foundry Top Jobs
(80%) + Corporate Top Jobs 
(20%) 
Each of the Top Jobs categories consists of specific, measurable objectives, which together comprise a “balanced scorecard” framework for measuring our operational performance. The goals under the objectives represent key milestones that position the company to successfully execute our long-term strategic objectives. Each of the objectives has a number of sub-goals that are weighted based on priority. A scoring factor ranging from 0% to 150% can be earned for each sub-goal, with a score of 100% indicating on-target completion of our goals. A score of 50% may be awarded for partial completion, whereas a score of 150% indicates exceptional achievement. 
 
 
50 
Intel 2026 Proxy Statement 
Each of the objectives is intended to be rigorous to incentivize our NEOs and employees to achieve results that drive our long-term strategic objectives. These objectives are reviewed and approved at the beginning of the year by the Compensation Committee. Progress against the objectives is reviewed quarterly at the executive leadership meetings and regularly shared with the committee throughout the year. At the conclusion of the fiscal year, scores are tabulated based on performance as determined and assessed by our CEO and management and presented to the committee for final review and approval. 
Competitive Concerns 
Certain Intel Top Jobs goals represent highly confidential information. We transact business in the highly competitive semiconductor industry, and disclosure of the forward-looking targets and product-specific operational goals could cause competitive harm to the company by providing competitors insight into the internal goals related to the company’s products and business initiatives, particularly as many of our product and technology goals are based on milestones that are part of a capital intensive, multi-year R&D effort. Disclosure would allow competitors to more effectively glean specific strategies and adjust their own operational objectives or take other measures, such as modifying the timing of competing product launches or commercialization strategies, or instituting particular sales or marketing programs, which could hinder, delay or frustrate the achievement of our strategic operational objectives. We do not elsewhere publicly disclose the specifics of these operational goals that involve products that have not been qualified for production or release, cost, manufacturing targets and dates and product release dates. 
Consequently, in the table below we have strived to provide stockholders with high visibility into the Intel Top Jobs goals where practical while balancing the competitive concerns noted above. 
Summary of Results 
The following table summarizes the categories of our Intel Top Jobs operational goals (and their importance to our strategy), our 2025 key results for each goal, and the points scored for each goal for the NEOs. 
 
 Operational Goal Key Results Score/Target Points 
 
 
Products Top Jobs: Design and deliver world-leading compute platforms that enable our customers to win in PC, Edge, Enterprise, Cloud and AI 
▪ Launch of Intel Core Ultra Series 3 on Intel 18A 
▪ Partnership with NVIDIA to jointly develop multiple generations of custom data center and PC products across hyperscale, enterprise and consumer markets 
69.0 /80.0 
 
 
 
Foundry Top Jobs: World-class, financially self-sustaining 
▪ Launch of Intel Core Ultra Series 3 on Intel 18A with high-volume manufacturing at both our Arizona and Oregon facilities 
▪ Continued development of Intel 14A, our next generation node beyond 18A 
▪ Continued development of Advanced Packaging technologies (Foveros, EMIB, EMIB T) to support unique needs of internal and external Foundry customers 
53.0 /80.0 
 
 
 
Corporate Top Jobs: Unlock the full potential of Intel people, portfolio and assets 
▪ Improved employee morale, engagement and retention across the enterprise 
▪ Facilitated culture shift prioritizing execution, engineering discipline and financial rigor 
19.5 /20.0 
 
 
 
Final Score 
Intel Product 
88.5 
 
Intel Foundry 
72.5 
 
Intel Corporate 
80.5 
 
Individual Performance Goals 
Individual performance goals, or “objectives and key results” (OKRs), are included in the Annual Cash Bonus Plan (other than for our CEO) to further promote strong execution of our strategy and drive differentiation in the payout results based on our NEOs’ individual contributions during the performance period. The Compensation Committee approved the OKRs for each NEO, which included objectives critical to our strategy and transformation, at the beginning of 2025. Within each of the OKRs, there were another three to five specific and measurable objectives. Mr. Tan’s Annual Cash Bonus Plan did not include an individual performance metric, because the committee considers the company results a reflection of CEO performance. 
Our CEO assessed the performance of each of the other NEOs against their individual OKRs established early in 2025, and then presented assessments and recommendations of the performance score for each NEO to the Compensation Committee. The committee concurred with the CEO’s assessments and recommendations for the individual performance. 
 
 
Compensation Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
51 
The following table summarizes each NEO’s performance highlights and individual score: 
 
 Name Individual Performance Highlights Individual
Score 
 
 David A. Zinsner Mr. Zinsner took on additional responsibilities as Interim Co-CEO until Mr. Tan joined in March 2025. Other accomplishments included successful execution of a number of transactions that significantly improved our balance sheet position (U.S. government, Nvidia, SoftBank Group, Altera and Mobileye), significant reductions in operating expenses and capital expenditures in 2025, and execution across structural transformation and discipline objectives. 110 % 
 
 
 Naga Chandrasekaran Mr. Chandrasekaran led a significant reorganization and transformation of Intel Foundry into a single operating model, executed against a number of objectives around foundry execution reducing operating costs and capital intensity, and rebuilding customer confidence, and took further steps to better position Intel Foundry for improved scale, competitiveness and financial performance in the future. 110 % 
 
 
 April Miller Boise 
Ms. Miller Boise helped achieve significant litigation wins, including dismissal of major securities and class-action cases, and led the organization through multiple significant transactions. She also strengthened our external standing through leadership in industry and governance forums. 100 % 
 
 
 Michelle Johnston 
Holthaus 
Ms. Johnston Holthaus took on additional responsibilities as Interim Co-CEO until Mr. Tan joined in March 2025 and as CEO of Intel’s Product Group. Among other things, she led our product teams through a critical transition period, including her own transition and commitment to remain employed in a non-executive role through March 1, 2026, to facilitate a smooth transition. 100 % 
 
Final 2025 Annual Cash Bonus Plan Payout 
The following table sets forth the performance results for each NEO under the Annual Cash Bonus Plan for 2025, including the Compensation Committee’s assessment of performance and their actual cash payments for 2025. 
 
 Name Performance Metrics Final Payout
(%) 2025 Annual 
Cash Bonus
Payment
($) 
 Revenue
(weighted 20%) Gross Margin
Percentage
(weighted 20%) Operating
Expense
(weighted 20%) Intel
Top Jobs
Goals
(weighted 20%) Individual
Performance
Goals
(weighted 20%) 
 Lip-Bu Tan 113.6 % 99.6 % 200 % 80.5 % N/A 118.7 % 2,374,000 
 David A. Zinsner 113.6 % 99.6 % 200 % 80.5 % 110 % 120.7 % 1,795,700 
 Naga Chandrasekaran 113.6 % 99.6 % 200 % 72.5 % 110 % 119.1 % 1,636,700 
 April Miller Boise 113.6 % 99.6 % 200 % 80.5 % 100 % 118.7 % 1,558,200 
 Michelle Johnston Holthaus 113.6 % 99.6 % 200 % 88.5 % 100 % 120.3 % 2,406,400 
 Christoph Schell — % — % — % — % — % — % — 
Tan Annual Bonus Design. The Annual Cash Bonus Plan design for Mr. Tan did not include individual performance goals, and each of the four metrics—revenue, gross margin percentage, operating expense, and Intel Top Jobs goals—was weighted 25%. 
Tan Final Payout. 

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ast.** No effect. No effect. 
 
 
 
2. Ratification of selection of independent registered public accounting firm 
For, against or abstain. 
Majority of shares present or represented.*** 
Counted as vote. Same effect as votes against. No effect. 
 
 
 
3. Advisory vote on executive compensation (Say-on-Pay) 
 
 
 
4. Approval of amendment and restatement of the 2006 Equity Incentive Plan 
 
 
 
5. Approval of amendment and restatement of the 2006 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) 
 
 
 6 - 8. Stockholder Proposals 
 
* If you are a beneficial holder and do not provide specific voting instructions to the holder’s broker, the organization that holds the beneficial owner’s shares may not be authorized to vote your shares, which would result in “broker non-votes.” 
** A nominee for director will be elected if the votes cast for such nominee exceed the votes cast against such nominee. 
*** The affirmative vote of a majority of the shares present or represented at the Annual Meeting and entitled to vote on the proposal. 
Stockholders Sharing the Same Last Name and Address 
To reduce the expense of delivering duplicate proxy materials to stockholders who may have more than one account holding Intel stock but who share the same address, we have adopted an SEC-approved procedure called “householding.” Under this procedure, certain stockholders of record who have the same address and last name, and who do not participate in electronic delivery of proxy materials, will receive a single copy of our Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials and, as applicable, any additional proxy materials that are delivered until such time as one or more of these stockholders notify us that they want to receive separate copies. This reduces duplicate mailings and saves printing costs, postage fees and natural resources. Stockholders who participate in householding will continue to have access to and utilize separate proxy voting instructions. 
If you receive a single set of proxy materials as a result of householding and you would like to have separate copies of our Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials, annual report or proxy statement mailed to you, please submit a request to our Corporate Secretary or call our Investor Relations department, and we will promptly send you the requested materials. However, if you want to receive a paper proxy or voting instruction form or other proxy materials for this year’s Annual Meeting, you will need to follow the instructions included in the Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials sent to you. You can also contact our Investor Relations department if you received multiple copies of the Annual Meeting materials and would prefer to receive a single copy in the future, or if you would like to opt out of householding for future mailings. 
If you are a beneficial stockholder and you share an address with other beneficial stockholders, your broker, bank, or other institution is permitted to deliver a single copy of the proxy materials and Notice of Internet Availability of Proxy Materials to your address, unless you otherwise request separate copies. 
When will the Company Announce the Voting Results? 
We will announce preliminary results during the Annual Meeting. We will report final results at www.intc.com and in a filing with the SEC on Form 8-K. 
 
 
102 Intel 2026 Proxy Statement 
2027 Annual Meeting Proposals and Nominations 
 
 Rule 14a-8 Stockholder Proposals Director Nominees 
by Proxy Access Other Proposals 
or Director Nominees 
 
 Description Stockholder proposals that comply with applicable requirements established by the SEC, including Rule 14a-8 of the Exchange Act, are eligible for inclusion in our proxy statement. A stockholder (or a group of up to 20 stockholders) who has held at least 3% of our stock continuously for three years or more may nominate a director and have that nominee included in our proxy materials, provided that the stockholder and nominee satisfy the requirements specified in our Bylaws. 
A stockholder who intends to nominate a candidate for election to the Board (including pursuant to Rule 14a-19) or to propose any business for presentation at our 2027 Annual Meeting (other than non-binding proposals presented under Rule 14a-8) can bring such business before the Annual Meeting

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
(no related-person transactions section separately located)
