JOHNSON & JOHNSON (JNJ) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: JOHNSON & JOHNSON
Ticker: JNJ
CIK: 200406
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-11

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance practices continue to meet the high standards expected by our shareholders. Our Principles of Corporate Governance can be found at www.jnj.com/principles-of-corporate-governance. 
 
 
Effective Board structure and composition 
 
Strong independent Board leadership 
All Directors other than our Chairman and CEO are independent. All Committees other than the Finance Committee are comprised only of independent Directors. 
 
Lead Independent Director 
The independent Directors appoint a Lead Independent Director on an annual basis. 
 
Annual review of Board leadership 
The Nominating & Corporate Governance Committee conducts an annual review of the Board leadership structure to ensure effective Board leadership. 
 
Accountability of Chairman / CEO 
The independent Directors evaluate the performance of the Chairman and CEO each year in executive sessions and determine compensation. 
 
Executive sessions of independent Directors 
Independent Directors are allotted time to meet in executive session without management present at each Board and Committee meeting. 
 
Private Committee sessions with key compliance leaders 
Independent Directors hold private Committee sessions with key compliance leaders without the Chairman and CEO present. 
 
Rigorous Board and Committee evaluations 
The Board evaluates its performance on an annual basis. Each Committee evaluates its performance on an annual basis based on guidance from the Nominating & Corporate Governance Committee. 
 
Regular Board refreshment 
The Board’s balanced approach to refreshment results in an effective mix of experienced and new Directors. 
 
Mandatory Director retirement age 
Mandatory retirement age of 72 years, with exceptions considered. 
 
 
Responsive and accountable to shareholders 
 
Annual election of Directors 
Each Director is elected annually to ensure accountability to our shareholders. 
 
Majority voting standard for Director elections 
In an election where the number of Directors nominated does not exceed the total number of Directors to be elected, Director nominees must receive the affirmative vote of a majority of votes cast to be elected. If a Director nominee receives more votes “against” his or her election than votes “for” his or her election, the Director must promptly offer his or her resignation. 
 
One class of stock 
Our common stock is the only class of shares outstanding. 
 
Proxy access 
Each shareholder or a group of up to 20 shareholders owning 3% or more of our common stock continuously for at least three years may nominate and include in our proxy materials Director nominees constituting up to 20% of the Board, in accordance with the terms set forth in our By-Laws. 
 
 
 
22 
 
 
 
Director overboarding policy 
A director who serves as CEO at our or any other public company should not serve on more than two public company boards. Other directors should not serve on more than five public company boards. 
 
No shareholder rights plan 
We do not have a "poison pill" and have no intention of adopting one at this time. 
 
No supermajority requirements in certificate of incorporation or By-laws 
Our Restated Certificate of Incorporation, as amended, and By-Laws contain majority standards for all actions requiring shareholder approval. 
 
Shareholder right to call a special meeting 
Shareholders holding 10% of shares may call a special meeting for good cause, and shareholders holding 25% of shares may call a special meeting for any reason. 
 
Removal of Directors with or without cause 
Directors may be removed by shareholders with or without cause. 
 
Active shareholder engagement 
See pages 38 to 39 for more information on our shareholder engagement program. 
 
Annual Say on Pay advisory vote 
Shareholders are asked to vote annually on our named executive officer compensation. 
 
Policy against pledging, hedging and short selling of Company stock 
We have a policy prohibiting directors and executive officers from pledging, hedging or short selling Company stock 
(see www.investor.jnj.com/corporate-governance ). 
 
Code of Business Conduct 
We have a comprehensive Code of Business Conduct designed to provide Directors, senior executives and employees with guidance on our Company’s compliance policies. Directors, members of the Company's Executive Committee and all employees receive biennial training on the Code of Business Conduct. 
 
Compensation recoupment policy 
We have comprehensive compensation recoupment policies designed to ensure that management is held accountable in the event of specified misconduct or financial restatements as further described in the respective policy (see www.investor.jnj.com/governance/corporate-governance-overview/compensation-recoupment-policies ). 
 
Stock ownership guidelines 
Company ownership guidelines require our CEO to own shares equal to twelve times his/her base salary and each of our other named executive officers to own sufficient shares equal to six times their base salaries. See stock ownership guidelines for named executive officers on page 77. 
 
Insider trading policy 
Our Code of Business Conduct applies to all employees and prohibits the use of non-public information to buy or sell the Company's stock. 
The Insider Stock Trading Policy for Directors, Executive Officers and Insiders includes additional restrictions on certain "Insiders" such as pre- clearance requirements and blackout periods. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
23 
 
 
Key elements of our

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis on pages 51 to 81 
• Executive Compensation Tables on pages 82 to 114 
When casting your 2026 Say on Pay vote, we encourage you to consider: 
• Our financial results were robust and our share price performance was exceptional. 
• Our named executive officers’ 2025 compensation is aligned with our performance. 
• We link annual incentives to business outcomes. 
• We base long-term incentive performance share unit payouts on our financial results and relative total shareholder return. 
• Over 90% of the CEO’s and over 85% of other NEOs’ target compensation is at risk based on performance. 
• We tie more than two-thirds of our named executive officers’ compensation to our stock. 
• We proactively engage with shareholders and evaluate our program design on an ongoing basis to ensure alignment with our shareholders' interests. 
 
 
 
48 
A message from our Compensation & Benefits Committee 
Dear fellow shareholders: 
2025 was a pivotal year for Johnson & Johnson. The Company advanced its commitment to improve patient lives and accelerated its role as a catalyst for innovation. 
The Company continues to set the global benchmark in healthcare, underpinned by a commitment to Innovative Medicine, MedTech, and breakthrough R&D. This focus translated into robust performance across the enterprise, with the Company exceeding its financial and strategic goals. The planned separation of the Orthopaedics business will allow both Johnson & Johnson and the new Orthopaedics business to harness growth opportunities and unlock value. 
Every year, we review the executive compensation structure to ensure that we are incentivizing strong results in a manner that is consistent with the values embodied in Our Credo. We actively solicit shareholder input regarding our executive compensation practices. The Company's 2025 Say on Pay vote received approximately 92% approval, reflecting strong shareholder support for our pay for performance alignment, proactive engagement, and continuous program refinement. 
When evaluating 2025 performance, we conducted a comprehensive joint review with the Audit Committee of all items excluded from non-GAAP performance measures for the purpose of measuring results under the incentive compensation plans. Consistent with common peer practice, this approach is intended to avoid both windfalls and penalties that are beyond the control of executives, while promoting accountability and aligning compensation to objectives that accurately reflect underlying Company performance. For example, the 2025 annual incentive results and payout factors excluded the reversal of the $7.0 billion settlement charge related to talc matters. We determined that including this amount would create a windfall for executives that is inconsistent with the Company’s non-GAAP policies and past practices. 
The named executive officers' annual incentives paid out at 118.3% of target, reflecting strong financial and strategic performance. Our 2023-2025 PSUs paid out at 113.6% of target. These outcomes reflect our executives' disciplined execution of Company strategy, the dedication of our teams, and our deep commitment to Our Credo. 
We are confident that the future of the Company is strong and supported by a compensation program that rewards performance and aligns with shareholders' interests. We thank you for your continued feedback and respectfully request your support for our 2026 Say on Pay proposal. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Eugene A. Woods 
Chair 
 
Marillyn A. Hewson 
 
 
 
John G. Morikis 
 
Daniel E. Pinto 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
49

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ncentive awards. 
Require executives to own significant amounts of Company stock. 
Employ a compensation recoupment policy applicable to our named executive officers. 
Actively engage with our shareholders. 
Engage an independent compensation consultant reporting directly to the Committee. 
Hold an advisory vote to approve named executive officer compensation annually. 
 
 What we don't do 
 
 
No automatic or guaranteed annual salary increases. 
No guaranteed annual or long-term incentive awards. 
No above-median targeting of executive compensation. 
No automatic single-trigger equity acceleration. 
No tax gross-ups (unless they are provided pursuant to our standard relocation practices). 
No option repricing without shareholder approval. 
No hedging, pledging or short selling of Company stock. 
No long-term incentive backdating. 
No dividend equivalents on unvested long-term incentives. 
We do not have any change-in-control agreements in place for any of the named executive officers. Our 2022 Long-Term Incentive Plan only provides for a change-in-control benefit in the event that outstanding awards granted under the plan are not assumed or substituted by the acquirer in connection with a change-in-control. If that is the case, the awards will vest and any performance conditions will be deemed to be achieved at the greater of target or actual performance levels as of the date of the change-in-control. If outstanding awards are assumed or substituted, the awards will remain outstanding and will continue to vest following the change-in-control. 
 
 
56 
2025 Executive compensation 
Guiding principles 
We design our executive compensation program to attract, retain and motivate global business leaders who can achieve financial and strategic objectives and build long-term shareholder value. We use the following guiding principles to design our compensation programs: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pay for performance 
We tie annual incentive payouts and long-term incentive grants to the performance of the Company, the individual’s segment or function and the individual. 
Accountability for short-term and long- term performance 
We structure performance-based compensation to reward an appropriate balance of short-term and long-term financial and strategic business results, with an emphasis on managing the business for long-term results. 
Alignment to shareholders’ interests 
We structure performance-based compensation to align the interests of our named executive officers with the long-term interests of our shareholders. 
Competitiveness 
We compare our practices against appropriate peer companies that are of similar size and complexity so we can continue to attract, retain and motivate high-performing executives. 
 
 
 
The Board is responsible for oversight of risk management (including product development, supply chain and quality risks) as described under Oversight of our Company beginning on page 33. Our compensation program’s emphasis on long-term value helps to reduce the possibility that our executives make excessively risky business decisions that could maximize short-term results at the expense of long-term value. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
57 
Components of executive compensation 
Base salary, annual incentive and long-term incentives 
Below we describe the components of our total direct compensation, how we determine each component's amount and why we pay them. 
 
 
Component 
Form 
Vesting / performance period 
How we determine the amount 
Why we pay each component 
 
 
Base 
salary 
Cash 
Ongoing 
• We set base salary rates by considering: 
• Competitive data 
• Scope of responsibilities 
• Work experience 
• Time in position 
• Internal equity 
• Individual performance 
• Recognizes job responsibilities. 
 
 
 Annual incentive 
Cash 
1 year 
• We set target awards as a percent of salary based on competitive data. 
• We determine award payouts based on business and individual performance. 
• Motivates attainment of our near-term priorities, consistent with our long-term strategic plan. 
 
 
 Long-term incentives 
Equity 
3 years (options: 10-year term) 
• We set target awards as a percent of salary based on competitive data. 
• We grant long-term incentives based on business and individual performance, contribution and long-term potential. 
• We

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Related person transactions 
122 
Voting 
 
71 
Compensation consultant 
and responsibilities 
33 
Risk oversight 
127 
Websites and resources 
 
52 
Compensation summary 
 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
3 
Our Credo 
We believe our first responsibility is to the patients, doctors and nurses, to mothers and fathers and all others who use our products and services. In meeting their needs everything we do must be of high quality. We must constantly strive to provide value, reduce our costs and maintain reasonable prices. Customers' orders must be serviced promptly and accurately. Our business partners must have an opportunity to make a fair profit. 
We are responsible to our employees who work with us throughout the world. We must provide an inclusive work environment where each person must be considered as an individual. We must respect their diversity and dignity and recognize their merit. They must have a sense of security, fulfillment and purpose in their jobs. Compensation must be fair and adequate and working conditions clean, orderly and safe. We must support the health and well-being of our employees and help them fulfill their family and other personal responsibilities. Employees must feel free to make suggestions and complaints. There must be equal opportunity for employment, development and advancement for those qualified. We must provide highly capable leaders and their actions must be just and ethical. 
We are responsible to the communities in which we live and work and to the world community as well. We must help people be healthier by supporting better access and care in more places around the world. We must be good citizens - support good works and charities, better health and education, and bear our fair share of taxes. We must maintain in good order the property we are privileged to use, protecting the environment and natural resources. 
Our final responsibility is to our stockholders. Business must make a sound profit. We must experiment with new ideas. Research must be carried on, innovative programs developed, investments made for the future and mistakes paid for. New equipment must be purchased, new facilities provided and new products launched. Reserves must be created to provide for adverse times. When we operate according to these principles, the stockholders should realize a fair return. 
 
 
4 
A message from our Lead Independent Director 
Dear fellow shareholders, 
On behalf of the Board of Directors, thank you for your investment in Johnson & Johnson and the trust that it conveys. We are laser-focused on furthering the Company’s strategic objectives, capital allocation priorities and good governance principles, all toward our shared ambition for the long-term success of Johnson & Johnson. 
2025 was marked by extraordinary financial performance reflecting Johnson & Johnson’s relentless commitment to serving patients. Taken together, the performance across the Company’s portfolio reflects a new era of accelerated growth, driven by innovation in our six key businesses: Oncology, Immunology, Neuroscience, Cardiovascular, Surgery, and Vision. The Board has worked closely with senior management to execute on its long-term strategy across these key businesses, and the result is the strongest portfolio and pipeline in the Company’s history. In furtherance of this prioritization, we also announced our intent to separate our Orthopaedics business, which we believe will enhance our operational focus while accelerating Johnson & Johnson’s shift toward higher-growth markets. 
Fostering innovation and continuing this level of performance requires the right mix of expertise and leadership on our Board. To that end, we are pleased to have elected two exceptional new Directors in 2025 – Daniel Pinto and John Morikis. I was personally inspired by the independent Directors’ decision to extend my eligibility to serve on the Board for two years beyond the Company's retirement age. I will continue to prioritize engagement with our shareholders and solicit feedback as we strive to maintain the highest standards of governance for the Company. 
The future is very bright and the Board is unwavering in its support of the Company’s commitment to tackling the world’s toughest health challenges. On behalf of the Board, I thank you for supporting these efforts. We will remain committed to driving long-term value for your investment. Your vote is important, and we kindly request that you review the voting recommendations contained in this Proxy Statement and share your perspectives with us throughout the year. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
Marillyn A. Hewson 
Lead Independent Director 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
5 
Living into Our Credo 
Our Credo inspires us to lead with purpose, guiding our values and decisions as Johnson & Johnson. We are committed to advancing healthcare by delivering medicines and technologies for patients, supporting healthcare providers and strengthening communities. By improving access and outcomes worldwide, we create lasting value for those we serve. Every day, we strive to make a meaningful impact across all pillars of Our Credo, including the following: 
Meeting the needs of patients, doctors and nurses 
 
 
Advancing access to our products 
Championing a thriving health workforce 
Strengthening health systems 
 
>2.8 billion 
doses 
of Vermox® delivered since 2006, treating up to 100 million children and women for intestinal worms annually. 
1.4 million nurses and healthcare workers 
equipped with essential skills and support, enabling them to create meaningful impact for patients in resource-limited settings. 
200,000 community health workers 
deployed to care for 100 million people in health systems in Africa thanks to support from The Johnson & Johnson Foundation for Africa Frontline First. 
Empowering our employees 
 
 
We care for our employees’ physical, mental, emotional and financial health 
Helping employees turn passions into future skills 
Fostering a culture of inclusion and belonging that drives engagement and retention of our global talent 
 
Care 
89% of responding employees rated our comprehensive health and wellbeing offerings favorably – our highest rating to date. 
Learn 
85% of responding employees reported having meaningful opportunities to build and enhance their skills at J&J. During our third Global Learning Day, employees completed nearly 500,000 hours of learning, reflecting strong engagement in our development programs. 
Include 
88% of respo
