KIMBERLY CLARK CORP (KMB) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: KIMBERLY CLARK CORP
Ticker: KMB
CIK: 55785
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-23

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Policies, and our Board Committee Charters. These documents, which are available in the Investors section of our website at www.kimberly-clark.com , guide the Board and our management in the execution of their responsibilities. 
Kimberly-Clark believes that there is a direct connection between good corporate governance and long-term, sustained business success, and we believe it is important to uphold sound governance practices. As such, the Board reviews its governance practices and documents on an ongoing basis, considering changing regulatory requirements, governance trends, and issues raised by our stockholders. After careful evaluation, we may periodically make changes to maintain or enhance current governance practices and promote stockholder value. 
Board Leadership Structure 
The Board has established a leadership structure that allocates responsibilities between our Chairman of the Board and CEO and our Lead Director. The Board believes that this allocation provides for dynamic Board leadership while maintaining strong independence and oversight. 
Consistent with this leadership structure, at least once a quarter our Lead Director, who is an independent director, chairs executive sessions of our non-management directors. Members of our senior management team do not attend these sessions. 
Chairman and CEO Positions 
The Board’s current view is that a combined Chairman and CEO position, coupled with a predominantly independent board and a proactive, independent Lead Director, promotes candid discourse, informed business considerations and responsible corporate governance. Mr. Hsu serves as Chairman of the Board and CEO. The Board believes Mr. Hsu has demonstrated the leadership and strategic vision necessary to lead the Board and Kimberly-Clark. Accordingly, Mr. Hsu serves in this combined role at the pleasure of the Board without an employment contract. As Mr. Hsu is not an independent director, the Board continues to believe it is appropriate for the independent directors to elect an Independent Lead Director. 
Lead Director 
Ms. McCoy has served as Independent Lead Director since May 2024. Our Corporate Governance Policies outline the significant role and responsibilities of the Lead Director, which include: 
• Chairing the Executive Committee of the Board 
• Chairing executive sessions at which non-management directors meet outside management’s presence and providing feedback from such sessions to the CEO 
• Coordinating the activities of the Independent Directors 
• Providing input on and approving the agendas and schedules for Board meetings 
• Leading (with the Chair of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee) the annual Board evaluation 
• Leading (with the Chair of the Management Development and Compensation Committee) the Board’s review and discussion of the CEO’s performance 
• Providing feedback to individual directors following their individual evaluations 
• Speaking on behalf of the Board and chairing Board meetings when the Chairman of the Board is unable to do so 
• Acting as a direct conduit to the Board for stockholders, employees, and others according to the Board’s policies 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
11 
 
 Corporate governance 
 
Director Independence 
Our By-Laws provide that a majority of our directors must be independent (“Independent Directors”). We believe our independent board helps ensure good corporate governance and strong internal controls. 
Our Corporate Governance Policies, as adopted by the Board, provide independence standards consistent with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and the listing standards of the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC (“Nasdaq”). Our independence standards can be found in Section 7 of our Corporate Governance Policies. 
The Board has determined that all directors and nominees, except for Michael D. Hsu, are Independent Directors and meet the independence standards in our Corporate Governance Policies. 
The Nasdaq listing standards and our own Corporate Governance Policies establish certain levels at which transactions are considered to have the potential to affect a director’s independence. Under our Corporate Governance Policies, certain relationships were considered immaterial and therefore were not considered by the Board in determining independence. 
Board Meetings 
The Board of Directors met 13 times in 2025 and acted one time by unanimous written consent. All of the directors attended in excess of 75 percent of the total number of meetings of the Board and the committees on which they served. 
All of our directors are encouraged to attend our annual meeting of stockholders. All of our directors attended the 2025 Annual Meeting. 
Board Committees 
The standing committees of the Board include the Audit Committee, Management Development and Compensation Committee, Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee, and Executive Committee. The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee maintains a standing Sustainability Subcommittee. 
In compliance with applicable Nasdaq corporate governance listing standards, the Board has adopted charters for the Audit, Management Development and Compensation, and Nominating and Corporate Governance Committees. These charters are available in the Investors section of our website at www.kimberly-clark.com. 
As set forth in our Corporate Governance Policies, the Audit, Management Development and Compensation, and Nominating and Corporate Governance Committees all have the authority to retain independent advisors and consultants, with all costs paid by Kimberly-Clark. 
 
 
12 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 Corporate governance 
 
 
 
 
A udit Committee 
The Board has determined that each of Mmes. Burwell, Mahlan, and Shive and Messrs. Ramirez and Romanelli is an “audit committee financial expert” under SEC rules and regulations. For Mr. Romanelli, the Board considered his significant experience, expertise and background with regard to accounting matters, including his past experience as Vice President, Investor Relations, for Merck & Co., Inc., as discussed below under “The Nominees.” In addition, all Audit Committee members meet the Nasdaq listing standard of financial sophistication and qualify as Independent Directors under the rules of the SEC and the Nasdaq, as well as under our Corporate Governance Policies. See “Corporate Governance - Director Independence” for additional information on Independent Directors. 
No member of the Audit Committee serves on the audit committees of more than three public companies and under our Audit Committee Charter, no Committee member is permitted to do so. 
 
 
 
Chair 
Dunia A. Shive 
Other Members 
Sylvia M. Burwell 
Deeptha Khanna 
Deirdre A. Mahlan 
Jaime A. Ramirez 
Joseph Romanelli 
Meetings in 2025: 8 
The Committee’s principal functions, as specified in its charter, include: 
• Overseeing: 
• the quality and integrity of our financial statements 
• our compliance programs 
• the independence, qualification, and performance of our independent auditor 
• the performance of our internal auditor 
• Selecting and engaging our independent auditor, subject to stockholder ratification 
• Pre-approving all audit and non-audit services that our independent auditor provides 
• Reviewing the scope of audits and audit findings, including any comments or recommendations of our independent auditor 
• Establishing policies for our internal audit programs 
• Overseeing the company’s risk management program (including risks related to data privacy, cybersecurity, business continuity, IT operational resilience, emerging technologies including artificial intelligence (AI) and regulatory matters) and receiving periodic reports from management on risk assessments, the risk management process, and issues related to the risks of managing our business 
 
Committee Report 
For additional information about the Audit Committee’s oversight activities in 2025, see “Proposal 2. Ratification of Auditor - Audit Committee Report.” 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
13 
 
 Corporate governance 
 
 
 
 
Management Development and Compensation Committee 
Each member of this Committee is an Independent Director under the rules of the SEC and the Nasdaq, as well as under our Corporate Governance Policies. 
 
 
 
Chair 
John W. Culver 
Other Members 
Mae C. Jemison, M.D. 
S. Todd Maclin 
Christa S. Quarles 
Meetings in 2025: 5 
The Committee’s principal functions, as specified in its charter, include: 
• Establishing and administering the policies governing annual compensation and long-term compensation, including stock option awards, restricted stock awards, and restricted share unit awards, such that the policies are designed to align compensation with our overall business strategy and performance 
• Setting, after an evaluation of his overall performance, the compensation level of the CEO 
• Approving, in consultation with the CEO, compensation levels and performance targets for the senior executive team 
• Overseeing: 
• leadership development for senior management and future senior management candidates 
• a periodic review of our long-term and emergency succession planning for the CEO and other key officer positions, in conjunction with our Board 
• key organizational effectiveness and engagement policies 
• Reviewing our inclusion and belonging programs 
• Annually reviewing our compensation policies and practices for the purpose of mitigating risks arising from these policies and practices that could reasonably have a material adverse effect 
 
Roles of the Committee and the CEO in Compensation Decisions 
Each year, the Committee reviews and sets the compensation of the officers that are elected by the Board (our “elected officers”), including our CEO and our other executive officers. The Committee’s charter does not permit the Committee to delegate to anyone the authority to establish any compensation policies or programs for elected officers, including our executive officers. With respect to officers that have been appointed to their position (our “non-elected officers”), our CEO has the authority to establish compensation programs and to approve equity grants. However, only the Committee may make grants to elected officers, including our executive officers. 
Our CEO makes a recommendation to the Committee each year on the appropriate target annual compensation for each of the other executive officers. The Committee makes the final determination of the target annual compensation for each executive officer, including our CEO. While our CEO and Senior Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer typically attend Committee meetings, none of the other executive officers is present during the portion of the Committee’s meetings when compensation for executive officers is set. In addition, our CEO is not present during the portion of the Committee’s meetings when his compensation is set. 
For additional information on the Committee’s processes and procedures for determining

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation discussion and analysis 
 
For 2025, the Committee chose the following as additional corporate non-financial strategic performance goals: 
Market Share 
Grow overall weighted market share 
Enabling Our Purpose 
Progress towards building an inclusive and engaging culture while enhancing K-C’s business resilience and sustainability. 
Market share goal. The target for our market share goal is considered confidential business information, disclosure of which could harm our operating performance or ability to compete. This goal was weighted at 20 percent. Achievement of the goal would require management to outperform its prior year performance. Actual results against the target corresponded to a calculated payout level of 70 percent. 
Enabling our purpose goal. The Committee does not use a formula to assess the performance of this goal but instead takes a holistic approach and considers performance on several objectives collectively. This goal was weighted at 10% percent. For 2025, the Committee made a qualitative assessment that the performance on this goal resulted in payout level of 100 percent. 
Actual payout percentages. For 2025, our calculated payout for our market share goal was 70 percent and for our enabling our purpose goal was 100 percent. Based on these results, the 2025 payout percentage for achieving these other non-financial strategic goals (i.e., Element 2) was 80 percent of target. 
Element 3: Business unit goals for Mr. Torres 
As described above, Mr. Torres had business unit goals prior to his promotion on May 1, 2025 to President and Chief Operating Officer, related to his role as leader of our North America business unit. These goals were established by our CEO and were intended to challenge Mr. Torres to exceed the objectives for our North America business and included both strategic performance and financial goals. The targets for these goals are considered confidential business information, disclosure of which could harm our operating performance or ability to compete. Achievement of the goals would require the business unit to outperform its prior year performance. 
At the end of the year, our CEO provided the Committee with an assessment of our North America business’s performance against its objectives. Based on the assessed performance and taking into account the CEO’s recommendations, the Committee determined a payout percentage of 27 percent for Mr. Torres’ business unit goals. Mr. Torres’ 2025 payout amount was prorated between the goal weighting structure for his role as President and Chief Operating Officer (eight months) and his role as President, North America (four months). 
 
 
60 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 Compensation discussion and analysis 
 
Annual Cash Incentive Payouts for 2025 
The following table shows the payout opportunities and the actual payouts of annual cash incentives for 2025 for each of our named executive officers. Payouts were based on the payout percentages for each element, weighted for each executive as shown on page 58. 
 
 Name 2025 Annual
Incentive Target 2025 Annual
Incentive
Maximum 2025 Annual
Incentive Payout 
 % of Base
Salary Amount ($) Amount ($) % of
Target Amount ($) 
 Michael D. Hsu 175 % 2,625,000 5,118,750 61 % 1,596,424 
 Nelson Urdaneta 100 % 930,000 1,813,500 61 % 565,590 
 Russell Torres* 117 % 1,138,613 2,231,515 54 % 616,000 
 Zackery Hicks 100 % 1,050,000 2,047,500 61 % 638,570 
 Jeffrey Melucci 110 % 1,010,900 1,971,255 61 % 614,790 
* On May 1, 2025, the Committee increased Mr. Torres’ target by 25 percentage points upon his promotion to President and Chief Operating Officer. Mr. Torres’ annual target was prorated between his two roles in 2025. 
Long-Term Equity Incentive Compensation 
The Committee awards long-term equity incentive grants to executive officers as part of their overall compensation package. These awards are consistent with the Committee’s objectives of aligning our senior leaders’ interests with the financial interests of our stockholders, focusing on our long-term success, supporting our performance-oriented environment, and offering competitive compensation packages. 
Information regarding long-term equity incentive awards granted to our named executive officers can be found under “Summary Compensation,” “

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
t registered public accounting firm for 2026. 
 
 
AUDIT COMMITTEE OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
 
Dunia A. Shive, Chair 
Sylvia M. Burwell 
Deeptha Khanna 
Deirdre A. Mahlan 
Jaime A. Ramirez 
Joseph Romanelli 
 
 
48 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
 
Proposal 3 – Advisory Vote to Approve Named Executive Officer Compensation 
 
 
In the Compensation Discussion and Analysis that follows, we describe in detail our executive compensation program, including its objectives, policies, and components. As discussed in that section, our executive compensation program seeks to align the compensation of our executives with our strategic objectives. To this end, the Management Development and Compensation Committee (the “Committee”) has adopted executive compensation policies that are designed to achieve the following objectives: 
• Pay-for-Performance. Support a performance-oriented environment that rewards achievement of our financial and non- financial goals. 
• Focus on Long-Term Success. Reward executives for long-term strategic management and stockholder value enhancement. 
• Stockholder Alignment. Align the financial interests of our executives with those of our stockholders. 
• Quality of Talent and Retention. Attract and retain executives whose abilities are considered essential to our long- term success. 
For a more detailed discussion of how our executive compensation program reflects these objectives and policies, including information about the fiscal year 2025 compensation of our named executive officers, see “Compensation Discussion and Analysis.” 
We are asking our stockholders to support our executive compensation as described in this proxy statement. This proposal, commonly known as a “say-on-pay” proposal, gives our stockholders the opportunity to express their views on our executive compensation on an annual basis. This vote is not intended to address any specific item of compensation, but rather the overall compensation of our executives and the objectives, policies, and practices described in this proxy statement. Accordingly, we will ask our stockholders to vote on the following resolution at the Annual Meeting: 
RESOLVED, that the compensation paid to the Corporation’s named executive officers, as disclosed pursuant to Item 402 of Regulation S-K, including the Compensation Discussion and Analysis, compensation tables, and narrative discussion, is hereby approved by the Corporation’s stockholders on an advisory basis. 
The say-on-pay vote is advisory and is therefore not binding on Kimberly-Clark, the Committee, or our Board. Nonetheless, the Committee and our Board value the opinions of our stockholders. Therefore, to the extent there is any significant vote against the executive compensation as disclosed in this proxy statement, the Committee and our Board will consider our stockholders’ concerns and will evaluate whether any actions are necessary to address those concerns. 
 
 
 
The Board of Directors unanimously recommends a vote FOR the approval of named executive officer compensation, as disclosed in this proxy statement pursuant to the SEC’s compensation disclosure rules. 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
49 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
This Compensation Discussion and Analysis is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our compensation policies and decisions regarding 2025 compensation for our named executive officers. 
For 2025, our named executive officers are: 
 
 Named Executive Officer Title 
 Michael D. Hsu Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer 
 Nelson Urdaneta Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer 
 Russell Torres President and Chief Operating Officer 
 Zackery Hicks Chief Digital and Technology Officer 
 Jeffrey Melucci 
Chief Strategy, Business Development and Administrative Officer 
On May 1, 2025, Mr. Torres was promoted to President and Chief Operating Officer. He is responsible for the day-to-day operations of our business segments, along with our global growth, innovation, digital and technology, and supply chain functions. Prior to such date, he served as President, North America and was responsible for our consumer business and our professional business in North America. 
On May 1, 2025, Mr. Melucci’s title was changed to Chief Strategy, Business Development and Administrative Officer to better reflec

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Transactions with Related Persons 
Policies and Procedures for Review, Approval or Ratification of Related Person Transactions. The Board has adopted procedures for reviewing any transactions between the company and certain “related persons” that involve amounts above certain thresholds. The SEC requires that our proxy statement disclose these “related person transactions.” A related person is defined under the SEC’s rules and includes our directors, director nominees, executive officers and five percent stockholders. 
The Board’s procedures provide that: 
• The Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee is best suited to review, approve and ratify related person transactions involving any director, nominee for director, any five percent stockholder, or any of their immediate family members or related firms, and 
• The
