LOWES COMPANIES INC (LOW) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: LOWES COMPANIES INC
Ticker: LOW
CIK: 60667
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-04-16

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Guidelines in order that 2 separate people 
hold the office of the Chairman and the office of the CEO as soon as possible. 
The Chairman of the Board shall be an Independent Director. An independent Lead Director shall not be 
a substitute for an independent Board Chairman. 
The Board shall have the discretion to select an interim Chairman of the Board, who is not an 
Independent Director, to serve while the Board is required to seek an Independent Chairman of the 
Board on an accelerated basis. This policy could be phased in when there is a contract renewal for our 
current CEO or for the next CEO transition although it is better to adopt it now to obtain the maximum 
benefit. 
An independent Board Chairman at all times improves corporate governance by bringing impartiality, 
objective oversight, and external expertise to board decisions, mitigating conflicts of interest, enhancing 
transparency, and boosting shareholder confidence. 
An independent Board Chairman could also help Lowe’s (LOW) deal with future headwinds like those 
that emerged in 2025: 
Lowe’s faced a challenging consumer environment, with shoppers pulling back on larger discretionary 
purchases (items over $500, such as appliances and large renovation projects) due to ongoing 
macroeconomic uncertainties, stubborn inflation, and elevated borrowing costs/mortgage rates. This has 
resulted in a decline in overall comparable sales and reduced in- store foot traffic. 
Throughout the year, Lowe’s adjusted its financial forecasts to reflect the ongoing uncertainty. As of 
November 2025, Lowe’s narrowed its full-year 2025 comparable sales expectation to flat (compared to a 
previous range of flat up to 1%) and slightly trimmed its adjusted earnings per share (EPS) forecast. 
While aiming to grow its Pro customer base, Lowe’s major acquisitions of Artisan Design Group (ADG) 
and Foundation Building Materials (FBM) negatively impacted its consolidated adjusted operating margin 
in the near term. To manage debt related to these deals, Lowe’s has also paused share repurchases 
until 2027. 
Lowe’s was ordered to pay $1 million to resolve a lawsuit in Los Angeles alleging it charged customers 
prices higher than the advertised price. Lowe’s was also sued in a class-action alleging a false discount 
advertising scheme. 
Please vote yes: 
Independent Board Chairman — Proposal 4 
 
 
 
80 
 
 
 
Proposal 4: Shareholder Proposal – Independent Board Chairman 
 
 
 
Lowe’s Board of Directors’ Statement OPPOSING This 
Shareholder Proposal. 
The Board has carefully considered this shareholder proposal and has determined that it is not in the 
best interests of our shareholders. We believe Lowe’s current Board leadership structure, coupled with 
our strong corporate governance practices, which allow the Board to evaluate and determine the best 
structure based on the needs of the Company, best serves the Company and our shareholders. 
We Believe Flexibility in Board Leadership Structure is More Suitable for the Company Than the 
Rigid Approach Set Forth in the Shareholder Proposal. 
We believe that it is in the best interests of the Company and our shareholders for the Board to have the 
ability to continue to determine the most effective leadership structure for Lowe’s, rather than take a rigid 
approach to Board leadership, as requested by the shareholder proposal. 
The Board periodically considers whether the roles of Chairman and Chief Executive Officer should be 
combined or separated based upon the Company’s needs, the directors’ skills and experiences, the 
strengths, talents and bandwidth of senior management and other prevailing circumstances at any given 
time. On an annual basis, the Board formally reviews and makes a determination as to the appropriate 
leadership structure for the Company. The Board believes that it should not be constrained by a policy 
mandate when making decisions related to how the Board can most effectively operate, and that it 
should instead consider relevant circumstances to meet the business needs of the Company and 
composition of the Board, taking into account factors such as Lowe’s strategic goals, the current 
operating and governance environment, the skill set of the independent directors, the dynamics of the 
Board and shareholder input. 
Under the Company’s governing documents, whenever the Chairman is not an independent director, the 
independent directors elect a Lead Independent Director. To further encourage regular refreshment and 
independent oversight, the Corporate Governance Guidelines specify a term limit of six years for the 
individual in the Lead Independent Director role. We believe that the Company and our shareholders 
benefit from maintaining the flexibility to implement an appropriate Board leadership structure while 
ensuring that there is strong independent leadership and oversight of the Board’s operations. 
We Believe the Board’s Current Leadership Structure, the Process to Determine and Review the 
Leadership Structure, and a Strong Lead Independent Director Best Serves the Company and 
Our Shareholders. 
Under our current Board leadership structure, Marvin R. Ellison serves as Chairman and Chief Executive 
Officer and Richard W. Dreiling serves as Lead Independent Director. The Board believes that at this 
time, this current structure is in the best interests of the Company and our shareholders as this structure 
enables Mr. Ellison to effectively manage the business and execute on our strategic priorities given his 
deep understanding of the Company’s business, growth opportunities and challenges. At the same time, 
this structure empowers Mr. Dreiling to provide independent Board leadership and oversight with robust, 
well-defined leadership powers and responsibilities. As Chair of the Nominating and Governance 
Committee, Mr. Dreiling is especially well positioned to ensure the independence of director nominations, 
board evaluations and refreshment, and annual CEO performance reviews. The Board believes that 
Mr. Ellison’s exceptional leadership and track record of success since his appointment as President and 
Chief Executive Officer in 2018 make him qualified to facilitate discussions of the Board, foster an 
important unity of leadership between the Board and management, speak on behalf of the Company 
with respect to business operations and promote alignment of the Company’s strategy with its 
operational execution. 
Our Board recognizes that circumstances may change such that a different structure may be warranted 
in the future to support the Company’s needs. Prior to electing Mr. Ellison as Chairman, the Nominating 
and Governance Committee and the full Board discussed the relative benefits of combining the 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer roles versus retaining the separate roles with an independent 
Chairman. After considering the Company’s strategy and strategic goals, perspectives of our 
independent directors, views of our shareholders, peer company practices and governance trends, 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
81 
 
 
 
Proposal 4: Shareholder Proposal – Independent Board Chairman 
 
 
 
the Board unanimously elected Mr. Ellison as Chairman in May 2021, and it has elected him unanimously 
every May thereafter. The Board plans to continue to review the Company’s leadership structure and 
assess the needs of the Company at least annually. 
Our Lead Independent Director is elected by the independent directors of the Board and has specifically 
enumerated roles and responsibilities, providing what the Board views as the same leadership, 
oversight and other benefits that would be provided by an independent Chairman. These roles and 
responsibilities include: 
• Presiding at all meetings of the Board at which the Chairman/CEO is not present, including executive 
sessions of independent directors; 
• Serving as a liaison between the Chairman/CEO and independent directors; 
• Approving information sent to the Board; 
• Approving meeting agendas for the Board; 
• Approving meeting schedules for the Board to assure that there is sufficient time for discussion of all 
agenda items; 
• Having the authority to call meetings of independent directors; 
• Providing feedback from executive sessions of independent directors to the Chairman/CEO; 
• Coordinating, with the Nominating and Governance Committee, the annual performance evaluation of 
the Chairman/CEO, the Board and each of its Committees and individual directors; and 
• Facilitating effective communication between the Board and shareholders and being available for 
consultation and direct communication with major shareholders. 
In addition, our Lead Independent Director generally attends each committee meeting and has regular 
one-on-one conversations with each of the independent directors as well as with the Chairman/CEO. 
Lowe’s Strong Corporate Governance Practices Provide Effective, Independent Board Oversight. 
The Board believes that a commitment to strong and responsible corporate governance standards is an 
essential element of enhancing long-term shareholder value in a sustainable manner. In keeping with 
such commitment, Lowe’s has adopted governance policies and practices that promote effective, 
independent Board oversight and provide shareholders with meaningful rights, including: 
• Annual election of directors by a majority of votes cast in uncontested elections; 
• 11 of 12 director nominees are independent, including our Lead Independent Director, and the five 
Board committees are comprised only of independent directors; 
• Highly qualified and actively engaged Board with the relevant business experience and skills to 
oversee management, including on matters of corporate strategy, business initiatives, industry 
positioning and human capital management; 
• Retirement policy (age of 75 or older at the expiration of his or her current term) for non-employee 
directors to promote thoughtful Board refreshment and to provide additional opportunities to maintain 
a balanced mix of perspectives and experience; 
• Shareholders owning 15% of shares outstanding have the right to call a special meeting of 
shareholders; 
• Shareholders have the right of proxy access; 
• Robust year-round shareholder engagement process and opportunities for our shareholders to 
communicate directly with our Board; 
• The independent directors meet in executive session at each of the regularly scheduled Board 
meetings and as necessary at other Board meetings led by the Lead Independent Director; and 
 
 
 
82 
 
 
 
Proposal 4: Shareholder Proposal – Independent Board Chairman 
 
 
• Robust and constructive Board and committee annual evaluation process, the results of which are 
leveraged to enhance Board and committee functioning as a strategic partner with management, as 
well as the ability to carry out its traditional monitoring and oversight function. 
Consistent with its current practice, the Board plans to continue to regularly evaluate the future 
implementation of appropriate corporate governance measures that are tailored to the Company’s 
evolving needs and not limited to the shareholder proposal’s “one-size-fits all” approach. 
Summary 
The Board believes that the rigid approach to the Company’s leadership structure requested by this 
shareholder proposal is not necessary and not in the best interest of our shareholders. Accordingly, the 
Board believes that adoption of this proposal is not advisable. 
 
 
 
The Board of Directors unanimously recommends a vote “ AGAINST ” this shareholder proposal. 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
83 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSAL 
5 
Proposal 5: Shareholder Proposal – Report Describing 
How the Company Could Disclose its Plastic 
Packaging Footprint 
As You Sow has informed the Company that they intend to present the proposal set forth below 
on behalf of the proponents for consideration at the Annual Meeting. 
Proposal 5 — Plastics Report 
WHEREAS : Without immediate and sustained new commitments to make packaging recyclable, 
reusable, or compostable, and reduce overall plastic use, annual flows of plastics to land, air, and water 
could more than double to 280 million metric tons per year by 2040. The authoritative study Breaking the 
Plastic Wave 2025 , by Pew Charitable Trusts (“Pew Report”), concludes that half of the annual 130 
million metrics tons of plastic pollution consists of packaging. 1 
Improved recycling coupled with reductions in use, materials redesign, and substitution could reduce 
plastic pollution from packaging by 97% by 2040, according to the Pew Report, with two-thirds of the 
reduction coming from innovative reuse applications. 2 Many governments and major brands have 
committed significant cuts in the use of virgin and single-use plastics. 3 
The growing plastic pollution crisis poses increasing risk to Lowe’s. Corporations could face an annual 
financial risk of approximately $100 billion should governments require them to cover the waste 
management costs of the packaging they produce, a policy that is increasingly being enacted around the 
globe. 4 Lowe’s sells many products packaged in polyvinyl chloride (PVC). Vinyl chloride, a chemical used 
to make PVC plastic, is a known carcinogen associated with liver, brain and lung cancers. PVC is not 
collected in curbside recycling programs and ends up in trash flows which are often incinerated, forming 
harmful dioxin emissions. The company has phased out most of the PVC packaging for its own private 
label products but has not set goals to reduce sales of other branded PVC packaging. 
The company has taken initial steps to deal with plastic pollution by committing to making its private 
brand plastic packaging recyclable, reusable, or compostable by 2030. However, it has many suppliers 
who have not made such a commitment. Further, it has not disclosed its total plastic packaging footprint 
or set a goal for overall reduction of plastic packaging. Competitors Walmart and Target have disclosed 
their plastic usage and set plastics reduction goals. The Company does not state the amount of plastic 
packaging that is designed for recycling. Walmart states that 80% of its plastic packaging is designed for 
recycling. 5 Lowe’s is also notably absent from participation in the largest pre-competitive corporate 
initiative to address plastic pollution, the New Plastics Economy Global Commitment. 6 
Reducing the Company’s overall plastic packaging and disclosing its plastic footprint are necessary 
steps to combat the plastic pollution crisis. Our Company is overdue to act on this important issue. 
RESOLVED : Shareholders request the Board issue a report, at reasonable expense and excluding 
proprietary information, describing how the Company could disclose its plastic packaging footprint and 
set overall plastic packaging reductions goals. 
(1) https://www.pew.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2025/12/breaking-the-plas

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Long-Term Equity Awards 
In March each year, the Compensation Committee approves a 
long-term equity award for each executive officer with a target value, 
expressed as a percentage of base salary. 
For 2025, given the Company’s continued strong performance under 
Mr. Ellison’s leadership, the Board approved an increase in the 
CEO’s target long-term incentive award, raising the target 
opportunity from 1,000% to 1,100% of base salary. The equity award 
mix for the CEO remained unchanged and consisted of 50% PSUs, 
25% stock options and 25% time-vested RSAs. 
For the other NEOs, the Compensation Committee approved a 
one-time adjustment to executive officer long-term incentive targets 
and fiscal 2025 long-term incentive vehicle mix to support leadership 
continuity during a period when the Company was reacting to 
changes in the external environment and sector disruption. The 
adjustment reflects the Board’s view that a stable and engaged 
executive leadership team is critical as the Company positions itself 
to benefit from a recovery in the home improvement market. The 
resulting mix was delivered entirely in equity in the form of 
40% PSUs, 40% time-vested RSAs and 20% stock options, subject 
to standard multi-year vesting provisions. This balanced approach 
moderates outcome volatility and supports long-term alignment with 
shareholder interests and Company performance. The 
Compensation Committee believes this one-time adjustment 
preserves the Company’s pay-for-performance philosophy and 
long-term focus. 
CEO 2025 Equity Award Mix 
25% 
Time-vested 
RSAs 
50% 
PSUs 
25% 
Stock 
Options 
2025 Award Mix. The Compensation Committee believes the mix of equity awards continues to create an appropriate balance 
between providing incentive compensation for the achievement of Company-specific performance measures (PSUs), 
increases in the market value of the common stock (stock options) and stability (RSAs). 
2025 Target Value. The following table reflects the target value of long-term equity awarded to each NEO for 2025, both 
expressed as a percentage of base salary and in dollars. Target awards are determined based on each executive officer’s 
position and level of responsibility, the Company’s historical grant practices and market benchmarks that are reviewed annually 
by the Compensation Committee. 
 
 
Name 
2025 Target Long-Term 
% of Base Salary (1) 
Target Total Equity 
Award Value ($000s) (2) 
 
Marvin R. Ellison 
1,100% 
$ 17,050 
 
Brandon J. Sink 
563% 
$ 4,781 
 
Joseph M. McFarland III 
625% 
$ 5,625 
 
William P. Boltz 
625% 
$ 5,625 
 
Seemantini Godbole 
563% 
$ 4,714 
(1) Base salary considered for long-term incentive plan purposes is as of April 1, 2025. 
(2) Target total equity award values are rounded to the nearest thousand dollars. 
2025 PSU Performance Metrics. The Compensation Committee determined that the PSUs awarded in 2025 will be earned 
based on the Company’s ROIC for the three-year performance period of fiscal years 2025 through 2027 and the relative 
TSR modifier. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
57 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
ROIC is computed by dividing the Company’s lease adjusted net operating profit after taxes for the year by the average of the 
Company’s invested capital as of the beginning and end of the fiscal year. Invested capital for these purposes means the 
average of the current year and prior year ending debt and shareholders’ (deficit)/equity. See Appendix A to this Proxy 
Statement for our fiscal 2025 ROIC calculation. The return percentages for each fiscal year in the performance period are 
averaged to yield a ROIC measure for the three-year performance period. The Compensation Committee believes strong 
ROIC performance is aligned with creating long-term value for the Company’s shareholders. Specifically, ROIC is a 
comprehensive long-term financial metric that incorporates both operating profit and effective capital deployment in the 
calculation. This metric motivates management to generate sustained profitable growth over time while balancing the 
Company’s effectiveness at allocating capital to drive future investment and growth. 
For fiscal 2025 PSU awards, the Compensation Committee raised the maximum payout for ROIC performance from 150% to 
200% to drive focus and reward achievement of our core performance metric, and to better align with market practice. This 
increased payout leverage strengthens the alignment of pay with performance on a key indicator of our long-term business 
success and reinforces accountability for long-term capital efficiency and profitability. 
PSU payouts are also subject to a relative TSR modifier, which adjusts the ROIC-based payout based on the Company’s TSR 
performance relative to companies in the S&P 500 Index over the performance period. For fiscal 2025 awards, the TSR 
modifier was refined to a percentile-based approach, with a target set at the 55th percentile. The modifier may adjust payouts 
downward to 0.75x at the 25th percentile or upward to 1.25x at the 80th percentile, subject to an overall maximum payout of 
200% of target. No payout will be earned if ROIC performance is below threshold. The chart below illustrates how the relative 
TSR modifier influences the payout opportunity of the 2025 PSU performance award to range from 38% of target at threshold 
performance to 200% of target at maximum performance: 
 
 
Target 
 Number of  
PSUs 
Granted 
ROIC  
Performance  
Level  
Payout 
Percentage  
(% of Target  
Award) (1)   
Lowe’s 
percentile vs. 
S&P 500 Index  
Modifier (1)   
PSU  
Performance  
Level  
Final Payout  
Opportunity  
(% of Target 
Award) (1)   
 
x 
Maximum  
200% 
x 
80th 
1.25x 
= 
Maximum  
200% 
 
Target  
100% 
55th 
1.00x  
Target  
100% 
 
Threshold  
50% 
25th 
0.75x 
Threshold  
38% 
 
<Threshold  
0% 
<Threshold  
0% 
(1) Performance between discrete points will be interpolated. If ROIC is below threshold, there will be no payout. TSR modifier cannot be lower 
than 0.75x or higher than 1.25x. 
I n line with the factors described above in setting targets for annual incentive awards, the Compensation Committee 
determines ROIC targets in the year the PSUs are granted, with an aim to set goals that are sufficiently rigorous based on the 
Company’s internal long range plan, appropriately consider recent performance and the potential impact of the 
macroeconomic environment, and motivate management to create sustainable shareholder value over the long-term. 
2023 PSU Awards. The performance period for the PSUs awarded in 2023 (the “ 2023 PSUs ”) ended on January 30, 2026, 
the last day of the 2025 fiscal year. The 2023 PSUs were eligible to be earned based on the Company’s average ROIC and 
relative TSR performance for fiscal years 2023 through 2025. Similar to the operating income performance for the annual 
incentive award discussed on page 54 , the Compensation Committee adjusted fiscal 2025 ROIC performance to account for 
the ADG and FBM acquisitions and adjusted fiscal 2023 and fiscal 2024 ROIC performance to account for the sale of our 
Canadian retail operations. In accordance with our pay for performance structure and philosophy, because our ROIC 
performance for the 2023 PSUs fell below the threshold level, no shares of common stock were earned. 
2025 Stock Option Awards. The Compensation Committee views options as performance-based incentive compensation as 
they provide no realizable value to recipients if our share price does not increase from the grant date. These awards promote 
the value-creating actions necessary to increase the market value of our common stock. 
The number of options awarded is calculated based on the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The exercise price of stock 
options is set at 100% of the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant. Stock options granted to our NEOs in 
2025 vest ratably over a three-year period and have a ten-year term. 
 
 
 
58 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
2025 RSAs. RSAs promote executive retention, stock ownership and alignment with shareholders’ interests. The number of 
RSAs awarded is determined based on the fair market value of our common stock as of the grant date. RSAs awarded to our 
NEOs in 2025 cliff vest after three years. 
Benefit Restoration Plan 
The Benefit Restoration Plan (the “BRP” ), adopted by the Company in August 2002 and as amended effective January 1, 
2025, is intended to provide NEOs and other qualifying executives with benefits lost due to qualified plan limitations imposed 
by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “ Code ”) that are equivalent to those received by all other employees 
under the Company’s qualified retirement plans. The Company makes matching contributions to each executive officer’s BRP 
account under the same matching contribution formula based on the executive’s elective contribution to Lowe’s 401(k) Plan, 
regardless of the Code limitations. 
Severance and Change-in-Control Arrangements 
The Compensation Committee approved an amended and restated severance plan for senior executives (the “ Severance 
Plan ”) in August 2024, that covers all current NEOs other than Mr. Ellison. The terms of the Severance Plan are described on 
page 67. Mr. Ellison’s severance entitlements are governed by his offer letter, the terms of which are described on page 67. 
All NEOs are also parties to agreements that provide severance benefits in the context of a change-in-control of the Company 
(the “ Change-in-Control Agreements ”). The Change-in-Control Agreements are described beginning on page 66. 
Perquisites 
NEOs and other qualifying executives are eligible for an annual routine physical exam to assess overall health and to screen 
for chronic diseases, which is intended to protect the investment we make in these key individuals. In addition, these 
executives are eligible for a reimbursement of up to $15,000 for financial and tax planning services. NEOs and other qualifying 
executives are also eligible for individual disability insurance, which supplements the Company’s long-term disability plan. 
The Company owns and operates business aircraft to allow associates to safely and efficiently travel for business purposes. 
Company policy requires that Mr. Ellison use corporate aircraft for all of his travel, both for business and personal purposes, 
with limited personal travel allowed for certain other executives. The corporate aircraft allows executive officers to be far more 
productive than commercial flights since the corporate aircraft provides a confidential, safe and productive environment in 
which to conduct business. The personal usage of the corporate aircraft by the Chairman, President and Chief Executive 
Officer is currently capped at $200,000 of incremental cost per year. 
V. Other Compensation Policies 
Compensation Risk Assessment 
Each November, the Compensation Committee performs a risk assessment of our compensation programs, which includes a 
targeted audit and analysis of the risk associated with the Company’s executive compensation program conducted by the 
Compensation Committee’s independent compensation consultant. In its annual review, the Compensation Committee 
considers the balance between pay components, measures of performance, magnitude of pay, pay caps, plan time horizons 
and overlapping performance cycles, program design and administration and other features that are designed to mitigate risk 
(e.g., stock ownership guidelines and clawback policies). Following its review, the Compensation Committee has determined 
that our compensation practices and policies do not incentivize inappropriate or excessive risk-taking behavior by Company 
executives. Management and the Compensation Committee have determined that our compensation practices and policies do 
not create risks that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
59 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Stock Ownership Guidelines 
The Compensation Committee strongly believes that executive officers should own appropriate amounts of common stock to 
align their interests with those of the Company’s shareholders. Executives can acquire common stock through our 401(k) Plan, 
employee stock purchase plan and long-term incentive awards. 
The Compensation Committee has adopted stock ownership and retention guidelines for all senior executives in the Company. 
The ownership targets under the current guidelines are as follows: 
 
 
 
Target Ownership 
(Multiple of Base 
Salary) 
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
Executive Vice 
Presidents 
Senior Vice 
Presidents 
 
6.0x 
4.0x 
2.0x 
 
The Compensation Committee reviews compliance with the guidelines annually. The Company determines the number of 
shares of common stock required to be held by each senior officer by dividing the applicable salary multiple ownership 
requirement (expressed as a dollar amount) by the average closing price of the common stock for the preceding fiscal year. 
 
 
 
Shares of common 
stock are counted 
towards ownership 
as follows: 
• All shares held or credited to a senior officer’s accounts under the Lowe’s 401(k) Plan, 
benefit restoration, deferred compensation and employee stock purchase plans; 
• All shares owned directly by the senior officer and his or her immediate family members 
residing in the same household; and 
• 100% of the number of shares of unvested RSAs. 
 
Unvested PSUs and unexercised stock options do not count towards ownership. Senior officers may not sell the net shares 
resulting from an RSA or PSU vesting event or stock option exercise until the ownership requirement has been satisfied. 
All of our current NEOs are in compliance with the stock ownership guidelines. 
Clawback of Incentive Compensation 
The Compensation Committee supports transparent governance and compliance practices and protecting the interests of the 
Company’s shareholders. To reinforce the Company’s practices in these areas, the Company has two clawback policies, to 
address not only required recovery of incentive-based compensation in the event of an accounting error causing a financial 
restatement, but also appropriate recovery of compensation in case of officer misconduct. The Company maintains a “no-fault” 
clawback policy as required under NYSE and SEC rules. In the event the Company is required to prepare an accounting 
restatement due to material non-compliance with any financial reporting requirement under the federal securities laws, the 
Company will recover the amount of any incentive-based compensation received by any covered executive, including current 
and former NEOs, during the prior three fiscal years that exceeds the amount the executive otherwise would have received 
had the incentive-based compensation been determined based on the restated financial statements. 
Additionally, the Company maintains a fault-based clawback policy applicable to officers at the level of senior vice president or 
higher. Under this policy, the Compensation Committee can seek to recover all or a portion of any cash or equity-based 
compensation that was provided to any current or former officer under the Company’s annual or long-term incentive plans 
(whether or not such compensation has already been paid or vested), if the Compensation Committee determines that (i) the 
compensation was based on the Company having met or exceeded specific performance targets that were satisfied due to the 
covered officer engaging in fraud or intentional misconduct, including, but not limited to, conduct resulting in a significant 
restatement of the Company’s financial results or (ii) the current or former officer engaged in any intentional misconduct that 
results in significant financial or reputational harm to the Company. 
 
 
 
60 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Equity Award Grant Practices 
The Compensation Committee has followed a practice of granting annual equity awards , including annual awards of PSUs, 
stock options and RSAs granted to the NEOs, on April 1 each year. Interim equity grants, such as grants made to newly hired 
executives, are typically made on March 15, June 15, September 15 and December 15 each year. During fiscal 2025, the 
Compensation Committee did not consider material non-public information when determining the timing or terms of equity 
awards, and the Company did not time the disclosure of material non-public information for the purpose of affecting the value 
of any executive compensation awarded during the year. 
The Compensation Committee did not grant stock options to any NEO in 2025 during the period beginning four business days 
before and ending one business day after the filing or furnishing of a Form 10-K, Form 10-Q or Form 8-K that discloses 
material non-public information. 
Trading in Company Securities 
The Company has adopted an Insider Trading Policy that sets forth policies and procedures governing the purchase, sale and 
other transactions in the Company’s securities by directors, officers, associates and certain other persons, and the Company 
has established procedures applicable to transactions by the Company itself, that the Company believes are reasonably 
designed to promote compliance with insider trading laws, rules and regulations and listing standards applicable to 
the Company. 
Persons subject to the Insider Trading Policy are, among other provisions, prohibited from engaging in a transaction involving 
the Company’s securities or “tipping” while aware of material non-public information about the Company. The Policy also 
prohibits short sales of Company common stock. The Policy limits trading in Company common stock, including stock held in 
an account under the Lowe’s 401(k) Plan, by an executive and the executive’s immediate family members who reside with the 
executive or whose transactions are subject to the executive’s influence or control, to open window trading periods designated 
by the Company’s Chief Legal Officer. All transactions by an executive officer or director involving common stock are to be pre- 
cleared by the Chief Legal Officer. A copy of our Insider Trading Policy was filed as Exhibit 19.1 to our Annual Report on Form 
10-K filed with the SEC on March 23, 2026. In addition, the Company’s anti-hedging policy prohibits all executive officers, 
directors and associates from engaging in any transaction involving the use of a security or other investment designed to 
hedge or offset any decrease in the market value of Company securities or, alternatively, to leverage the potential return of a 
predicted price movement (up or down) in Company securities. Executive officers, directors and certain designated associates 
are also prohibited from using common stock as collateral for any purpose, including in a margin account. 
VI.

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
tion of this Proxy Statement provides a thorough 
description of how the Compensation Committee has designed and administered the executive 
compensation program to meet these objectives. 
At the 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, the Company provided shareholders with the opportunity to 
cast an advisory vote to approve the compensation of our named executive officers (commonly known as 
a “say-on-pay” vote), and shareholders approved our named executive officer compensation with 
approximately 94% of the votes cast in favor. 
At the 2026 Annual Meeting, shareholders again have the opportunity to provide feedback to the 
Compensation Committee on our executive compensation program by endorsing or not endorsing the 
compensation of the named executive officers through a non-binding vote on the following resolution: 
RESOLVED, that the compensation paid to the Company’s named executive officers, as disclosed in this 
Proxy Statement pursuant to the compensation disclosure rules of the SEC, including the Compensation 
Discussion and Analysis, compensation tables and related narrative discussion, is hereby APPROVED. 
Even though the result of the say-on-pay vote is non-binding, the Compensation Committee and the 
Board value the opinions that shareholders express in their votes and will carefully consider the results of 
the vote when making future executive compensation decisions. 
The Company periodically asks shareholders to indicate whether a say-on-pay vote should occur every 
one, two or three years. At the 2023 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, approximately 98% of the votes 
cast were in favor of an annual advisory vote, in line with the Board’s recommendation. The next say-on- 
pay vote will be held at the 2027 Annual Meeting of Shareholders. 
 
 
 
 
The Board of Directors unanimously recommends a vote “FOR” the resolution. 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
41 
 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion 
and Analysis 
This Compensation Discussion and Analysis (“ CD&A ”) explains the key elements of our executive compensation program and 
compensation decisions as they relate to the following NEOs of the Company in the 2025 fiscal year: 
 
 
Marvin R. Ellison 
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
Brandon J. Sink 
Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer 
 
Joseph M. McFarland III 
Executive Vice President, Stores 
 
William P. Boltz 
Executive Vice President, Merchandising 
 
Seemantini Godbole 
Executive Vice President, Chief Digital and Information Officer 
Our CD&A is organized as follows: 
 
 
 
 
I. Executive Summary 
42 
 
 
 
 
Fiscal 2025 Financial Highlights and Incentive 
Program Outcomes 
42 
 
Compensation Philosophy and Objectives 
43 
 
Fiscal 2025 Executive Compensation Overview 
44 
 
2025 Compensation Program Components 
44 
 
How Our Executive Compensation is Tied 
to Performance 
45 
 
Annual Say-on-Pay Vote 
46 
 
Shareholder Engagement 
46 
 
Committed to Strong Compensation 
Governance Practices 
47 
 
 
II. Compensation Elements 
48 
 
 
 
 
III. Compensation Decision-Making Process 
50 
 
 
 
 
Compensation Market Data and Peer Group 
51 
 
 
IV. Fiscal 2025 Compensation Actions 
52 
 
 
 
 
Base Salary Adjustments 
52 
 
Annual Incentive Awards 
52 
 
Long-Term Equity Awards 
56 
 
Benefit Restoration Plan 
58 
 
Severance and Change-in-Control Arrangements 
58 
 
Perquisites 
58 
 
 
V. Other Compensation Policies 
58 
 
 
 
 
Compensation Risk Assessment 
58 
 
Stock Ownership Guidelines 
59 
 
Clawback of Incentive Compensation 
59 
 
Equity Award Grant Practices 
60 
 
Trading in Company Securities 
60 
 
 
VI. Compensation Committee Report 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 
 
 
 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
I. Executive Summary 
We seek to generate long-term sustainable shareholder value by driving operational excellence 
throughout the enterprise , consistently generating high levels of cash flow and optimizing our capital 
deployment. Over the years, we have demonstrated a strong commitment to returning capital to our 
shareholders and since 1961 have continued dividend growth.

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Related Person Transactions 
Policy a nd Procedures f or Review a nd Approval o f 
Related Person Transactions 
The Company has a written policy and procedures for the review and approval of transactions in which related persons have a 
direct or indirect material interest that are required to be reported under the SEC rules (the “ Policy ”). Related persons include 
directors and executive officers of the Company and members of their immediate families. To help identify related person 
transactions and relationships, each director and executive officer completes a questionnaire that requires the disclosure of 
any transaction or relationship that the person, or any member of his or her immediate family, has or is proposed to have with 
the Company. The Company’s Chief Legal Officer is primarily responsible for the development and implementation of 
processes and controls to obtain information from the directors and executive officers about any such transactions. The Chief 
Legal Officer is also responsible for making a recommendation, based on the facts and circumstances in each instance, on 
whether the Company or the related person has a material interest in the transaction. 
The Policy, which is administered by the Nominating and Governance Committee of the Board, includes several categories of 
pre-approved transactions with related persons, such as employment of executive officers and certain banking-related 
services. For transactions that are not pre-approved, the Nominating and Governance Committee, in determining whether to 
approve a transaction with a related person, takes into account, among other things, (i) whether the transaction would violate 
the Company’s Code of Business Conduct and Ethics, (ii) whether the transaction is on terms no less favorable than terms 
generally available to or from an unaffiliated third party under the same or similar circumstances and (iii) the extent of the 
related person’s interest in the transaction as well as the importance of the interest to the related person. In addition, the 
Committee will not approve any transaction if it determines the transaction to be inconsistent with the interests of the Company 
and its shareholders. No director may participate in any discussion or approval of a transaction for which he or she or a 
member of his or her immediate family is a related person. 
Approved Related Person Transactions 
The Nominating and Governance Committee of the Company’s Board of Directors, which is comprised entirely of independent 
directors, has reviewed all of the material terms and approved the following transactions in accordance with the Policy. In 
presenting the transactions to the Nominating and Governance Committee, the Company confirmed that the compensation 
paid to each associate, as described below, as well as customary employee benefits, are and are expected to remain 
consistent with, and within the established range for, that provided to associates with comparable positions and tenure. 
Sylvia Ellison, who is the sister of Marvin R. Ellison, the Company’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, has 
been employed by the Company as a field merchant since August 2020. Sylvia Ellison’s cash compensation paid in fiscal 
2025, including base salary and bonus, was approximately $261,000, and she was granted an equity award for 107 RSAs, 
which vests over three years. 
Timothy Lollis, who is the brother-in-law of Marvin R. Ellison, the Company’s Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, 
has been employed by the Company since February 2020, including as a field merchant since November 2022. Timothy Lollis’ 
cash compensation paid in fiscal 2025, including base salary and bonus, was approximately $198,000, and he was granted an 
equity award for 107 RSAs, which vests over three years. 
Jonathan McFarland, who is the brother of Joseph M. McFarland III, the Company’s Executive Vice President, Stores, has 
been employed by the Company since June 2020, including as a store manager since March 2022. Jonathan McFarland’s 
cash compensation paid in fiscal 2025, including base salary and bonus, was approximately $198,000, and he was granted an 
equity award of 86 RSAs, which vests over three years. 
 
 
 
90
