MCDONALDS CORP (MCD) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: MCDONALDS CORP
Ticker: MCD
CIK: 63908
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-04-07

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Principles, Directors are expected to attend all or substantially all meetings of our Board and the Committees on which they serve, as well as our Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. Our Board met six times in 2025, and our Committees met the number of times set forth on pages 38 – 41. Each of our Directors attended at least 75% of the total number of meetings of our Board and the respective Committees on which they served in 2025. In addition, all of our Directors who were elected at the 2025 meeting attended our virtual 2025 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. 
E xecutive S essions 
Directors meet regularly in executive sessions without management present. An executive session is typically scheduled immediately before or after each regular Board meeting. Currently, our Chairman presides at such executive sessions, except in such matters as may 
 
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
involve his re-election or compensation, or our Board’s leadership structure, in which case our Lead Independent Director presides. Our Lead Independent Director also presides over executive sessions conducted only among the independent Directors. Executive sessions are also regularly scheduled in connection with Committee meetings, other than our Executive Committee, throughout the year. 
D irector O rientation & C ontinuing E ducation 
Upon joining our Board, Directors participate in an orientation that includes introductions to members of our senior leadership team and provides information about our operations, performance, strategic plans and corporate governance practices. In addition, members of senior leadership and other speakers are periodically invited to attend portions of Board and Committee meetings to provide updates on business and general industry trends, as well as governance, regulatory, legal and financial matters. 
Directors are encouraged to participate in continuing education programs to stay informed of developments in corporate governance and issues relating to the operation of public company boards. Directors also conduct periodic visits to our restaurants and, of course, are McDonald’s customers. For more information on how Directors oversee and remain informed on Company strategy, see “Strategy Oversight” on page 43. 
Communica tions With Our Board 
Persons wishing to communicate with our Directors, individually or as a group, may do so by emailing bod@us.mcd.com. Under our Board’s policy for public communications addressed to our Board, our Corporate Secretary reviews correspondence, forwards correspondence addressed to an individual Director to that Director and screens correspondence addressed to multiple Directors or our full Board in order to forward it to the most appropriate person. Communications relating to our accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing matters are referred to our Audit & Finance Committee Chair, while certain communications that are unrelated to the duties and responsibilities of our Board (e.g., business solicitations, mass mailings and employment inquiries) are excluded.

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis (the “ CD&A ”), compensation tables and related material disclosed in this Proxy Statement. 
As fully described in the CD&A, our executive compensation program is guided by the following long-standing principles: (i) pay for performance; (ii) drive business results with a focus on creating long-term shareholder value; and (iii) pay competitively. Our executives’ compensation opportunities are predominantly performance-based. Our Compensation Committee has established financial performance targets designed to be challenging, and payouts under our incentive plans can vary significantly based on Company performance. 
During 2025, the Company navigated a challenging QSR industry backdrop by remaining agile and concentrating on what we can control. While our 2025 performance did not meet our expectations, the Company delivered global Systemwide sales growth of 7%. 
The Company’s 2025 operating income and Systemwide sales performance was below target, resulting in a Corporate Short-Term Cash Incentive Plan ( " STIP ”) payout factor for the named executive officers (“ NEOs ”) of 76.4%. Related to the performance-based RSUs (“ PRSU ”) awarded to our executives that vested in early 2026, Return on Invested Capital (“ ROIC ”) performance finished above target, while annual Earnings Per Share (“ EPS ”) growth and relative Total Shareholder Return (“ TSR ”) finished below target and below median, respectively, resulting in a 82.2% payout factor. These payouts underscore the Company’s strong pay-for-performance alignment across both the respective one- and three-year performance periods, with our executives held accountable to achieve rigorous performance targets despite a challenging external environment. 
We believe that our Compensation Committee’s commitment to align payouts with Company performance over different time periods has helped to drive long-term value creation for our shareholders. 
For the reasons expressed above and discussed in more detail in the CD&A, our Board believes that our executive compensation program effectively motivates strong performance while balancing risk, thereby aligning the interests of our executives with those of our shareholders. Although this vote is advisory and non-binding, our Compensation Committee and Board value the opinions of shareholders and will consider the outcome of the vote, along with our ongoing dialogue with shareholders and other relevant factors, when considering future executive compensation decisions. 
We currently hold our advisory vote on executive compensation annually, and the next such vote is expected to occur at our 2027 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting. 
Executive Compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
51 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
This CD&A describes our executive compensation program and provides insights into the Committee’s process and rationale for reviewing and implementing such program. To enable easier navigation, we have organized the disclosure into the following sections: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our 2025 Year in Review 
 
53 
 
 
 
2025 Direct Compensation Elements 
 
58 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Named Executive Officers 
 
53 
 
 
 
Other Compensation Elements 
 
62 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compensation Guiding Principles 
 
53 
 
 
 
Compensation Policies & Practices 
 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aligning Compensation with 
Business Strategy 
 
 
 
 
Mitigating Risk in Executive Compensation 
 
64 
 
 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Compensation Setting Process 
 
55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance-Based Compensation 
Metrics 
 
58

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
nsation program. The Committee considered the 2025 voting results as part of its annual review of the program and determined that our compensation guiding principles and compensation program design continued to be appropriate and aligned with our Accelerating the Arches growth strategy. 
 
 
2025 Say-on-Pay-Vote 
Internal Pay Equity 
The Committee considers the following in determining our executives’ direct compensation opportunities: competitive pay levels; relative scope of responsibilities; individual performance; tenure in position; and the effect on our general and administrative expenses. In addition, as circumstances warrant, we may provide compensation to executives outside of our regular compensation structure in connection with their hiring, promotion, or retention. This approach permits us to meet specific business objectives without distorting pay equity. In line with our core values, our global pay principles emphasize the importance of compensation that is competitive, non-discriminatory, performance-based, transparent, and compliant with legal and regulatory standards. 
Independent Compensation Consultant 
The Committee has the sole authority to retain and dismiss an independent compensation consultant. The Committee has engaged Semler Brossy Consulting Group LLC (“ Semler Brossy ”) as its independent compensation consultant. Consistent with its Charter, the Committee regularly considers its compensation consultant’s independence. In October 2025, the Committee concluded that Semler Brossy is independent and that its work for the Committee did not raise any conflicts of interest. Management may not engage the Committee’s consultant for any purpose. 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
 
§ The Coca-Cola Company 
§ Colgate Palmolive Company 
§ The Kraft-Heinz Company 
§ Marriott International, Inc. 
§ Mastercard Incorporated 
§ Mondelēz International, Inc. 
§ NIKE, Inc. 
§ PepsiCo, Inc. 
 
§ The Procter & Gamble Company 
§ Starbucks Corporation 
§ Target Corporation 
§ Visa Inc. 
§ Wal-Mart Inc. 
§ The Walt Disney Company 
§ Yum! Brands Inc. 
Peer Companies 
Consistent with our goal of providing competitive compensation to motivate and retain executive talent, we review compensation practices and levels for a group of peer companies that we believe best reflect our business. In setting target compensation levels for our executives, we use the market median for each compensation element as a reference point; however, we do not specifically target any element of compensation at a particular percentile. 
Annually, based on input from Semler Brossy and management, the Committee selects a peer group comprised of companies with which we compete for talent, including our direct competitors, major retailers, producers of consumer branded goods and companies with a significant global presence, based on the following screens: 
For 2025, the Compensation Committee, in consultation with Semler Brossy, modified the 2024 peer group by removing Johnson & Johnson and Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. because they no longer meet the criteria set forth above. The Walt Disney Company was added to the 2025 peer group based on the above criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
57 
 
 
 
 
Performance- Based Compensation Metrics 
 
 
Our 2025 compensation program included both annual and long-term incentive awards, based on objective performance metrics (both absolute and relative), as well as our stock price performance, as reflected in the following graphic: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40% 
30% 
15% 
15% 
 
 
Operating Income Growth 
Systemwide Sales Growth 
New Restaurant Openings 
Strategic Scorecard 
 
 
§ The Committee takes a holistic approach to establishing performance targets under our incentive compensation plans. 
§ The Committee recognizes the importance of achieving an appropriate balance between rewarding executives for strong performance over both the short- and long-term and establishing motivating but rigorous targets. 
§ The Committee focuses on the need to motivate and retain executives, without encouraging excessive risk-taking. 
§ In setting these objective performance targets, the Committee considers our financial objectives and the macro economic and competitive environments. 
 
 
75% 
25% 
+/- 25 
 
 
EPS Growth 
ROIC 
Relative TSR Points 
 
 
 
100% 
 
 
Share Price Increase 
 
 
 
 
 
2025 Direct Compe nsation Elements 
 
 
ANNUAL COMPENS

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related person transactions within the meaning of SEC rules. 
The McDonald’s System has over 45,000 restaurants worldwide, most of which are independently owned and operated. Within this extensive System, it is not unusual for our business to interact with many companies in many industries, including suppliers of food and other products and services. Our Board reviews and approves or ratifies, as appropriate, transactions, relationships or arrangements in which our Company is a participant and which involve Directors, Director nominees, executive officers and beneficial owners of more than 5% of our common stock, as well as immediate family members (including domestic partners) of the foregoing and companies in which the foregoing have a material interest. 
Our Board has a written policy that sets out procedures for the reporting, review and approval/ratification of related person transactions. The policy operates in conjunction with other aspects of our compliance program, including a requirement that Directors and employees report any circumstances that may create or appear to create a conflict of interest, regardless of the amount involved. Directors and executive officers must also confirm information about related person transactions, and management reviews its books and records and makes other inquiries, as appropriate. 
Under the policy, our Board evaluates related person transactions for purposes of recommending to our disinterested Directors whether or not such transactions are fair, reasonable and within Company policies and should be approved or ratified. Related person transactions involving Directors are reviewed by our Board at least annually. 
Our Board has considered the following types of transactions and pre-approved them as not presenting material conflicts of interest: (i) compensation paid to Directors and executive officers that has been approved by our Board or Compensation Committee; (ii) Company contributions to Ronald McDonald House and certain other contributions made in limited amounts to other charitable or not-for-profit organizations; and (iii) transactions in which the related person’s interest arises solely from ownership of our common stock and in which all holders of our common stock receive the same benefit on a pro rata basis. Our Board considers the appropriateness of any related person transaction not within the pre-approved classes in light of all relevant factors, including: 
▪ 
whether the terms of the transaction are arm’s length and in the ordinary course of our business; 
▪ 
the direct or indirect nature of the related person’s interest in the transaction; 
▪ 
the size and expected duration of the transaction; and 
▪ 
other facts and circumstances that bear on the materiality of the transaction under applicable law and stock exchange listing standards. 
Related person transactions involving Directors are also subject to approval or ratification by our disinterested Directors when so required under Delaware law. 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement 
 
Q&A: Pro xy Materials & Voting Information 
 
 
 
1. 
 
What is Included in the Proxy Materials? 
The proxy materials for the meeting include the Notice of 2026 Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, this Proxy Statement and our 2025 Annual Report on Form 10-K. If you received a paper copy of the proxy materials, they also include a proxy card or voting instruction form. 
 
 
 
2. 
 
What is the Record Date? 
March 23, 2026 is the record date for the meeting. Shareholders owning shares of our common stock at the close of business on that date may vote at the meeting. On that date, there were 710,827,631 shares of our common stock outstanding held by over 5.2 million shareholders. Each share of our common stock is entitled to one vote for each Director nominee and one vote for each other matter to be voted upon at the meeting. 
 
 
 
3. 
 
What are the Proposals to be Voted on, and What are the Voting Standards? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposal 
 
 
 
 
Our Board’s 
Voting 
Recommendation 
 
 
Voting Standard 
 
 
Effect of 
Abstentions 
 
 
Effect of 
Broker 
Non-Votes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Election of 12 Directors to 
Serve Until our 2027 Annual 
Shareholders’ Meeting and 
Until Their Successors Have 
Been Elected and Qualified 
 
 
each of our board’s director nominees 
 
 
Majority of votes cast 
 
 
None 
 
 
None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advisory Vote to Approve 
Executive Compensation 
 
 
 
 
Majority of the voting power 
represented at the meeting 
and entitled to vote thereon 
 
 
Vote against 
 
 
None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advisory Vote to Ratify the 
Appointment of Ernst & 
Young LLP as Independent 
Auditor for 2026 
 
 
 
 
Majority of the voting power 
represented at the meeting and entitled to vote thereon 
 
 
Vote against 
 
 
Brokers may vote 
in their discretion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advisory Vote on Two 
Shareholder Proposals, Each 
Only if Properly Presented 
 
 
each shareholder proposal 
 
 
Majority of the voting power represented at the meeting and entitled to vote on each shareholder proposal 
 
 
Vote against 
 
 
None 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For
