Mondelez International, Inc. (MDLZ) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: Mondelez International, Inc.
Ticker: MDLZ
CIK: 1103982
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-04-03

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
Governance Guidelines 
 
 
Key Practice or Policy 
Benefits 
 
 
Tenure and Retirement Policies. 
• Non‑employee directors have a term limit of 15 years. 
• Non‑employee directors will not be nominated for election to the 
Board after their 75th birthday. 
• Promotes ongoing evolution and refreshment. 
• Average tenure for current directors is approximately six years. 
 
 
 
Ongoing Director Succession Planning. The Guidelines provide that 
the Governance Committee will periodically review the succession 
plans for members of the Board, each Committee and its Chair, and 
the Lead Independent Director. 
Maintaining a diverse Board with varying backgrounds, skills, and 
expertise promotes inclusion in decision‑making and oversight and 
helps the Board remain appropriately tailored to guiding the Company 
and its strategy. 
 
 
 
Limitations on Other Board Service. 
• Directors should not serve on more than three public company 
boards in addition to our Board. 
• Directors who also serve as CEO at another public company 
should not serve on more than one public company board in 
addition to our Board. 
• Helps affirm that directors have sufficient time to fulfill their fiduciary 
duties to the Company. 
• All directors comply with this policy. 
 
 
 
Annual Election of Directors. Shareholders elect directors annually 
by majority vote in uncontested elections. 
Strengthens Board, committee, and individual director accountability. 
 
 
 
Proxy Access. Shareholders who own 3% or more of our outstanding 
Common Stock continuously for at least three years may nominate 
up to two director nominees to our Proxy Statement. 
Strengthens Board accountability and encourages engagement with 
shareholders regarding Board composition. 
 
 
 
Special Meeting of Shareholders. The holders of at least 20% of the 
voting power of the outstanding Common Stock may call a special 
meeting of shareholders. 
Strengthens Board accountability and encourages engagement with 
shareholders regarding important matters. 
 
 
 
Regular Shareholder Engagement. 
• We regularly engage with shareholders to seek their input on 
emerging issues, address their questions, and understand 
their perspectives. 
• The Lead Independent Director is available for consultation with 
our shareholders. 
• Following our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, we reached 
out to shareholders representing approximately 57% of our 
outstanding shares and engaged with 23 different shareholders that 
collectively represent approximately 35% of our outstanding shares. 
The Lead Independent Director met with shareholders representing 
approximately 22% of our outstanding shares. 
• This practice provides open channels of communication with our 
shareholders and helps promote regular consideration of and 
response to feedback on the Company’s strategy, corporate 
governance, compensation, and sustainability. 
 
 
 
Stock Ownership Requirements. Directors must own shares of our 
Common Stock in an amount equal to five times the annual Board 
cash retainer within five years of joining the Board. 
Aligns directors’ and shareholders’ long‑term interests. 
 
 
 
Annual CEO Evaluation and Board Oversight of

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS (CD&A) 
Compensation Program 
The table below describes the performance measures for the 2025-2027 PSUs and outlines how they align with our 
strategy. In selecting the metrics, the PCC seeks to incentivize behavior consistent with achieving our long-term 
objectives and to align the interests of our executives with the interests of our shareholders. 
 
 
Metrics (1) 
Impact 
Alignment with Strategy 
 
Organic Net Revenue Growth (2) 
50% Weighting 
Incentivize growth over the long term; also a key objective of our growth-oriented 
strategy 
 
Adjusted EPS Growth 
50% Weighting 
Overall measure of performance and primary driver of shareholder value creation 
and return on capital 
 
Annualized Relative TSR 
+/-25pp Modifier 
Link awards to shareholder value creation and performance versus peers; relative 
TSR at or above the 60 th percentile is required to have a positive impact on payouts 
(1) See definitions in Annex A. 
(2) Organic Net Revenue Growth is a metric for cash awards under our AIP and for share grants related to our PSUs. This metric is a fundamental driver of 
shareholder value, and we believe our executives should focus on it over both the short and long term. A one-year target (under the AIP) and a three-year 
target (for the PSUs) for Organic Net Revenue Growth create different, yet complementary, incentives for our employees. Organic Net Revenue Growth is 
also a key driver impacting our operational and financial performance and advancing our strategic plan. 
At the end of the PSU performance cycle, the number of shares actually earned may range from 0% to 200% of the 
target number of PSUs granted. The number of shares that may be earned against each weighted measure, as a 
percentage of target, at threshold, target and maximum performance levels is as follows: 
 
 
Metric Achievement: 
Below Threshold 
Threshold 
Target 
Max 
 
Shares Earned (as a percentage of target): 
0% 
50% 
100% 
200% 
The number of shares earned based on the weighted metrics will increase or decrease by up to 25pp based on our 
annualized TSR relative to our Performance Peer Group, as follows: 
 
 
Company’s Annualized TSR Relative to Performance Peer Group 
Award Modifier (1) 
 
≥75 th 
25pp 
 
60 th – <75 th 
12.5pp 
 
40 th – <60 th 
No Adjustment 
 
25 th – <40 th 
(12.5)pp 
 
<25 th 
(25)pp 
(1) The Relative TSR Modifier cannot result in a PSU payout greater than 200% of target. 
2025-2027 Targets and Target-Setting Process 
The PCC set our financial performance targets for Organic Net Revenue Growth and Adjusted EPS Growth after a 
robust planning process based on projected annual average growth rates, external guidance, our long-term strategic 
plan, macroeconomic conditions, cocoa and other commodity input costs, and the competitive environment over a 
three-year period. 
While we saw strong organic net revenue growth over the prior three years, we anticipated that the following factors 
would create headwinds for the 2025-2027 period: the challenging macroeconomic environment; continued inflation in 
prices of cocoa, our largest commodity impacting the cost of goods sold, which reached 50-year highs; the importance 
of maintaining chocolate category health when setting prices in key geographies; ongoing consumer price sensitivity in 
the U.S.; and volume softness in certain markets and brands. The PCC took these external factors into consideration 
when setting targets for the 2025-2027 PSU grant. 
Although we do not prospectively disclose specific financial performance targets, we do disclose them retrospectively, 
along with results, at the end of each performance cycle (see “ 2023-2025 Performance Cycle Results and Shares 
Earned” on page 76 ). Revealing specific targets prospectively would provide competitors and other third parties with 
insights into our confidential planning process and strategies and potentially harm us competitively. We design our 
financial performance targets to be challenging and there is no guarantee that any shares will be earned. 
 
 
 
76 2026 PROXY STATEMENT 
 
 
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS (CD&A) 
Compensation Program 
Below is the directional guidance for the two weighted metrics in our 2025-2027 performance cycle. We provide 
directional guidance to assist shareholders in determining if our prospective performance targets are rigorous when 
evaluating our compensation programs. See the table above for the exact targets set for the Relative TSR Modifier. 
 
 
Metrics (1) 
Threshold 
Target 
Max 
 
3-Year Organic Net Revenue Growth (2) 
1.3pp below target 
≥3% 
1.3pp above target 
 
3-Year Adjusted EPS Growth (2) 
3.5pp below target 
≥0% 
5.0pp above target 
(1) See definitions in Annex A. 
(2) Targets were set at a challenging level, based on anticipated headwinds for the 2025-2027 period as described above, and during a period of sustained 
unprecedented cocoa price increases. For reference, actual 2025 Adjusted EPS Growth was (14.6)% in a challenging macroeconomic environment. 
Earned PSUs vest and pay out (or are cancelled if not earned) following the end of the three-year performance period. 
The actual value realized by our NEOs with respect to these awards is based on achievement of performance goals 
and our stock price at the time of vesting. 
2023-2025 Performance Cycle Results and Shares Earned 
The following chart details: 
• the key financial measures, weightings, and performance standards the PCC set in early 2023 ; 
• our actual performance over the 2023-2025 performance cycle; and 
• th e final business performance rating approved by the PCC at the conclusion of the 2023-2025 performance cycle. 
The target set for Annualized Relative TSR is the 55 th percentile of the Performance Peer Group. The PCC set our 
2023-2025 financial performance targets for Organic Net Revenue Growth and Adjusted EPS Growth after a robust 
planning process based on projected annual average growth rates, external guidance, our long-term strategic plan, 
macroeconomic conditions, and the competitive environment over a three-year period. 
Based on the Company’s three-year results, we achieved an above-target performance rating of 102%. Actual results 
for the 2023-2025 performance cycle included: 
 
 
 
2023-2025 Performance 
Cycle Results 
 
Key Performance Measures (1) 
Weighting 
Threshold 
Target 
Max 
Actual 
 
Payout 
Percentage 
 
3-Year Organic Net Revenue Growth 
25% 
3.7% 
5.0% 
6.3% 
7.8% 
 
200% 
 
3-Year Adjusted EPS Growth 
25% 
5.4% 
7.0% 
9.5% 
5.8% 
 
63% 
 
3-Year Annualized Relative TSR (2) 
50% 
25 th percentile 
55 th percentile 
90 th percentile 
39 th percentile 
 
73% 
 
Final Business Performance Rating 
 
102% 
(1) See definitions in Annex A. 
(2) In determining our Annualized Relative TSR performance, we used our Performance Peer Group (see “Performance Peer Group” on page 80 ). 
Based on target awards and the performance rating, the shares earned (before taxes) for each NEO for the 2023-2025 
performance cycle were as follows: 
 
 
Name 
Shares Earned 
 
Mr. Van de Put 
158,019 
 
Mr. Zaramella 
58,528 
 
Mr. Kuhn 
New Hire 
 
Mr. Valle 
26,928 
 
Mr. Renaud 
23,409 
 
 
 
 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT 77 
 
 
COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS (CD&A) 
Compensation Program 
Stock Options (25% of LTI) 
Stock options vest ratably over three years and have a full term of 10 years. The PCC believes options are an 
appropriate vehicle for long-term compensation because they are performance-based and emphasize growth. 
OTHER COMPENSATION ACTIONS 
In January 2025, Mr. Kuhn joined us as EVP and President, Europe. To replace compensation opportunities forfeited 
upon leaving his prior employer, he received a $335,000 sign-on DSU award which vests annually over three years 
(disclosed in the

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
esults. If the Board does not accept 
the director’s resignation, the director will continue to serve until the next annual meeting of shareholders or until the 
director’s successor is duly elected and qualified. 
14. What vote is needed to approve the other proposals? 
Approval of each of Item 2 (Advisory Vote to Approve Executive Compensation), Item 3 (Ratification of the Selection of 
the Independent Registered Public Accountants), and Items 4 and 5 (Shareholder Proposals) also require a majority of 
votes cast — i.e., more votes FOR than AGAINST. Abstentions and broker non‑votes (described in Question 15 below) 
are not considered votes cast and will have no effect on the vote outcome for Items 2, 4, and 5. We do not expect that 
there will be any broker non‑votes with respect to Item 3. 
15. What are broker non‑votes? 
If you are a beneficial shareholder, your vote instructs your broker, bank, or other nominee, as the holder of record, how 
to vote your shares. If you do not provide voting instructions to your broker, bank, or other nominee, your nominee has 
discretion to vote your shares only on matters classified as “routine” under stock exchange rules. If you do not provide 
voting instructions to your broker or other nominee, your nominee may in some cases vote the shares in their 
discretion, but are not permitted to vote on certain proposals and may elect not to vote on any of the proposals unless 
you provide voting instructions. If you do not provide voting instructions and the broker elects to vote your shares on 
some but not all matters, it will result in a “broker non‑vote” for the matters on which the broker does not vote. As a 
result, we urge you to direct your bank, broker, trustee, or other nominee on how to vote your shares on all proposals to 
ensure that your vote is counted. 
16. Who bears the cost of soliciting votes for the Annual Meeting? 
The Company bears the cost of the Company’s solicitation of your vote. The Company’s directors, officers, or 
employees may solicit proxies or votes in person, by telephone, or by electronic communication. They will not receive 
any additional compensation for these solicitation activities. 
The Company will enlist the help of banks, brokers, and other nominee holders in soliciting proxies for the Annual 
Meeting from their customers (i.e., beneficial shareholders) and reimburse those firms for related out‑of‑pocket 
expenses. We retained Sodali & Co to aid in soliciting votes for the Annual Meeting for a fee not to exceed $15,000, 
plus reasonable expenses. 
 
 
 
 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT 121 
 
 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT THE ANNUAL MEETING AND VOTING 
Frequently Asked Questions About the Annual Meeting and Voting 
17. Two shareholders live at my address. Why did we only receive one set of Proxy Materials? 
We have adopted procedures that allow us to deliver Proxy Materials more cost effectively. If you are a beneficial 
shareholder and you and other residents at your mailing address share the same last name and also own shares of 
Common Stock in an account at the same broker, bank, or other nominee, your nominee delivered a single Notice or 
set of Proxy Materials to your address, unless you provided contrary instructions. This method of delivery is known as 
householding. Householding reduces the number of mailings you receive, saves on printing and postage costs, and 
helps the environment. Shareholders participating in householding continue to receive separate proxy cards and control 
numbers for voting electronically. 
A shareholder who received a single Notice or set of Proxy Materials at a shared address may request a separate copy 
of the Notice or Proxy Materials by calling free of charge 1‑866‑648‑8133 in the United States and Canada or sending 
an email to paper@investorelections.com , with the control number that is printed on your Notice, Proxy Card, or VIF. 
We will deliver promptly a separate copy of the Notice or Proxy Materials to a shareholder at a shared address to which 
a single copy was delivered, if requested. If you would like to opt out of householding for future deliveries of Proxy 
Materials, please contact your broker, bank, or other nominee. 
Beneficial shareholders who share an address and receive multiple copies of the Proxy Materials but want to receive 
only a single copy of these materials in the future should contact their broker, bank, or other nominee and make 
this request. 
If you are a regist

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related person transactions. In general, “related persons” are 
directors, director nominees, executive officers, and shareholders who beneficially own more than 5% of our 
outstanding Common Stock and any of their immediate family members. A related person transaction is one in which 
Mondelēz International or one of its subsidiaries is a participant, the amount involved exceeds $120,000, and a related 
person had, has, or will have a direct or indirect material interest. 
The Governance Committee reviews transactions that might qualify as related person transactions. If the Governance 
Committee determines that a transaction is a related person transaction, it reviews and then approves, disapproves, or 
ratifies the transaction. Only those related person transactions that are fair and reasonable to Mondelēz International 
and in our shareholders’ best interests are ratified or approved. When it is not practicable or desirable to delay review of 
a transaction until a committee meeting, the Chair of the Governance Committee may act on behalf of the Committee 
and report to the Governance Committee on any transaction reviewed. 
When reviewing and acting on a related person transaction under this policy, the Governance Committee considers, 
among other things: 
• the commercial reasonableness of the transaction; 
• the materiality of the related person’s direct or indirect interest in the transaction; 
• whether the transaction may involve an actual conflict of interest or create the appearance of one; 
• the impact of the transaction on the related person’s independence (as defined in the Guidelines and the Nasdaq 
listing standards); and 
• whether the transaction would violate any provision of the Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Non-Employee 
Directors or the Code of Conduct. 
Any member of the Governance Committee who is a related person with respect to a transaction under review may not 
participate in the deliberations or decisions regarding the transaction. 
REVIEW OF RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS SINCE JANUARY 1, 2025 
On February 13, 2024, BlackRock, Inc. (“BlackRock”), an investment management corporation, filed a Schedule 13G/A 
with the SEC reporting that it was a greater than 5% shareholder of the Company. During 2025, BlackRock acted as an 
investment manager with respect to certain investment options under our U.S., Canadian, and Puerto Rican retirement 
savings plans and Canadian, Irish, and U.K. pension plans. BlackRock was selected as an investment manager after 
considering potential investment manager options by each plan’s designated authority for plan investments. 
BlackRock’s selection was based on the determination of each plan’s designated authority that the selection met 
applicable standards and that the fees were reasonable and appropriate. BlackRock’s fees were approximately 
$4.23 million during 2025. Each of the plans for which BlackRock performed services paid the fees for those services 
from its assets. The plans expect to pay similar fees to BlackRock during 2026 for similar services. Fees, based on plan 
asset value, are paid quarterly on a lag basis. 
 
 
 
 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT 45 
 
 
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE 
Shareholder Outreach And Communication with the Board 
 
 
 
SHAREHOLDER OUTREACH AND COMMUNICATION WITH 
THE BOARD 
As part of our effort to better understand our shareholders’ perspectives, we regularly engage with shareholders, 
seeking their input and views on various matters. Since our 2025 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, the Lead 
Independent Director and members of senior management have conducted extensive shareholder engagement. We 
reached out to shareholders representing approximately 57% of our outstanding shares and engaged with 23 different 
shareholders that collectively represent approximately 35% of our outstanding shares. The Lead Independent Director 
met with shareholders representing approximately 22% of our outstanding shares. In addition, we engaged with 
shareholders on governance and sustainability matters at roundtables and corporate governance forums. 
During these engagements, we discussed a variety of topics, including the Company’s business strategy, Board 
governance, executive compensation, human capital management, sustainability, nutrition, and other matters. These 
discussions were very productive, and we appreciate that our shareholders took the time to share their perspectives 
and questions with us. The feedback we received during these conversations was shared with the Board, the PCC, and 
the Governance Committee, and it continues to inform our policies and practices. 
 
 
 
REACHED OUT 
to shareholders representing 
SPOKE with 23 different 
shareholders representing 
Lead Independent Director 
led meetings with shareholders 
representing 
 
 
~ 57% 
 
~ 35% 
 
~ 22% 
 
OF OUR OUTSTANDING SHARES 
OF OUR OUTSTANDING SHARES 
OF OUR OUTSTANDING SHARES 
 
Shareholders may directly contact the Board, the Lead Independent Director, any of the independent directors, or any 
committee of the Board regarding matters relevant to the Board’s duties and responsibilities. Information about how to 
do so is available at www.mondelezinternational.com/investors/corporate-governance/contacting-the-board-and- 
reporting-wrongdoings. The Lead Independent Director is available for consultation with our shareholders. 
The Corporate Secretary forwards communications relating to matters within the Board’s purview to the Lead 
Independent Director or appropriate independent director(s), and communications relating to matters within a Board 
committee’s area of responsibility to the chair of the appropriate committee. Communications relating to ordinary 
business matters, such as suggestions, inquiries, and consumer complaints, are forwarded to the appropriate Mondelēz 
International executive or employee and made available to any independent director who requests them. We do not 
forward solicitations, junk mail, or frivolous or inappropriate communications. 
In furtherance of our commitment to ongoing engagement with our shareholders, management, and subject matter 
experts met, or are scheduled to meet in advance of the Annual Meeting, with the proponents of the shareholder 
proposals contained in this Proxy Statement to discuss their respective proposals. 
 
 
 
46 2026 PROXY STATEMENT 
BOARD COMMITTEES 
AND MEMBERSHIP 
The Governance Committee considers and makes recommendations to the Board regarding the Board’
