NVIDIA CORP (NVDA) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: NVIDIA CORP
Ticker: NVDA
CIK: 1045810
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-05-12

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Policies (as further described below) require that a majority of our directors not have a relationship that would interfere with their exercise of independent judgment in carrying out their responsibilities and that they meet any other qualification requirements required by the SEC and Nasdaq. 
After considering all relevant relationships and transactions, our Board determined that, except for Mr. Huang, all of our directors who currently serve on the Board are, and all of our directors who served on the Board during Fiscal 2026 were, “independent” as defined by Nasdaq’s rules and regulations. The Board also determined that all members of our AC, CC, and NCGC are independent under applicable Nasdaq listing standards, and that each of Mr. Seawell, Mr. Jones and Ms. Lora of the AC are “audit committee financial experts” as defined under applicable SEC rules. 
Board Leadership Structure 
Our Board ensures that each member has an equal voice in the affairs and management of NVIDIA by having an independent Lead Director, rather than a chairperson. The independent directors consider the role and designation of the person to serve as Lead Director on an annual basis. The Board recognizes that different board leadership structures may be appropriate under different circumstances and its annual review includes consideration of whether having a Lead Director continues to best meet NVIDIA’s evolving needs and serves in the best interest of its stockholders. 
Our Board believes its current leadership structure is appropriate because: 
• The active involvement of each of our independent directors, combined with the qualifications and significant responsibilities of, and strong oversight by, our Lead Director, provide balance on the Board; 
• It promotes independent oversight of our management and affairs; 
• It effectively allocates authority, responsibility, and oversight between management and our independent directors; and 
• It provides the right foundation to pursue the Company’s strategic and operational objectives as our business and operating environment continue to evolve. 
Our CEO has primary responsibility for the operational leadership and strategic direction of the Company. Our Lead Director facilitates our Board’s independent oversight of management, promotes communication between management and our Board, and supports our Board’s consideration of key governance matters. This arrangement promotes open dialogue among the Board, including quarterly executive sessions of independent directors led by our Lead Director without the presence of our CEO. 
We believe that our current structure best serves our stockholders, without the need to appoint a person to serve as chairperson of the Board. Under our Corporate Governance Policies, the Board may select a chairperson, but if it does not, a Lead Director shall be designated annually by a majority of the independent directors and identified in the Company’s proxy statement. These policies help to ensure a robust independent leadership structure on our Board. While the Board has discretion to adopt other leadership structures, including having the Lead Director (or chairperson, if any) and CEO roles filled by a single individual, it would only consider a change if it best aligned with the interests of our stockholders, management, and the Board, and it complied with applicable laws and regulations. If in the future our CEO were to take a leadership position on the Board, such as chairperson, we expect that the Board would continue to appoint an independent Lead Director to maintain a balanced and strong leadership structure and otherwise represent the Board independently from the Company’s management team. Any changes to the Board’s leadership structure would take into account stockholder views, including through our ongoing stockholder outreach, and would be communicated on our Investor Relations website and in our proxy statement. Our Lead Director may provide input on the design of the Board as requested by the NCGC. In his role as NCGC Chairperson, our Lead Director will continue to lead discussions, provide input, and oversee the design of the Board itself. 
23 
Table of Contents 
 
 Our Lead Director 
 Stephen C. Neal 
 Director since 2019 
 Chairperson of the NCGC 
 Experience 
 ü Extensive experience as a trial attorney 
 ü Has advised numerous companies, boards and individuals on governance and legal matters 
 ü Helped clients manage internal and government investigations 
 ü 
Executive experience as Cooley LLP’s CEO, and board and chairman experience on the Levi Strauss & Co. board of directors 
The Board believes Mr. Neal’s experience, breadth of knowledge, and contributions to the Board position him well to provide strong leadership, oversight, and the ability to contribute valuable insight with respect to the Company’s business. 
Our Lead Director may require Board consideration of risk matters, including adding them to Board agendas or as topics for executive sessions of the independent members of the Board. The Board believes that Mr. Neal is highly qualified to assist the Board as Lead Director in effectively overseeing the identification, assessment, and management of the Company’s exposure to various risks as a result of his extensive risk management, legal, and executive experience. Further information on the Board’s oversight of risk management and its work with the CEO to address risk management matters is detailed below under Role of the Board in Risk Oversight. 
Our Lead Director has significant responsibilities, which are detailed in our Corporate Governance Policies, and include the duties listed below. 
 
 Duties of Our Lead Director 
 ü 
Determining an appropriate schedule of Board meetings and seeking to ensure that the independent members of the Board can perform their duties responsibly while not interfering with the flow of our operations 
 ü Working with the CEO, and seeking input from other directors and relevant management, to prepare Board meeting agendas 
 ü Advising the CEO on a regular basis as to the quality, quantity, and timeliness of the information requested by the Board from our management, to provide what is necessary for the independent members of the Board to effectively and responsibly perform their duties. Although management is responsible for preparing materials for the Board, the Lead Director may specifically request the inclusion of certain information 
 ü Coordinating, developing the agenda for, and moderating executive sessions of the independent members of the Board and acting as principal liaison between them and the CEO on sensitive issues 
 ü Presiding over Board meetings when the CEO is not present 
 ü Convening meetings of the independent directors, as necessary or appropriate 
 ü Performing such other duties as the Board may determine from time to time 
In addition, our Lead Director may represent the Board in communications with stockholders and other stakeholders. The Lead Director makes themself available for consultation with major stockholders pursuant to our Corporate Governance Policies. As Lead Director, Mr. Neal has participated in our annual stockholder outreach meetings and we expect this practice to continue. 
24 
Table of Contents 
Committees of the Board of Directors 
The Board has three committees: an AC, a CC, and a NCGC. Each of these committees operates under a written charter, which may be viewed in the Investor Relations section of our website at www.nvidia.com. 
Committee assignments are determined based on background and the expertise that individual directors can bring to a committee. Our Board believes regular committee rotations are a good corporate governance practice and introduce a variety of perspectives and ideas, more fully inform its members regarding the full scope of the Board and our activities, and benefit each committee and the Board as a whole. Since our 2025 Meeting, Ms. Lora and Dr. Dabiri have joined the NCGC. The composition and functions of our committees are set forth below. 
 
 
 AC
 
 Members as of our 2026 Meeting 
 
• A. Brooke Seawell (Chairperson) 
• Tench Coxe 
• Harvey C. Jones 
• Melissa B. Lora 
• Aarti Shah 
 
 In Fiscal 2026, the AC met four times. Selected highlights from its agenda topics included: capitalization review and strategy, tax, treasury, internal audit, information security, enterprise risk management, and insurance reviews. 
 
 Committee Role and Responsibilities 
 
 
• Oversees our corporate accounting and financial reporting process; 
• Oversees our internal audit function; 
• Determines and approves the engagement, compensation, retention, and termination of the independent registered public accounting firm; 
• Evaluates the performance and qualifications of our independent registered public accounting firm; 
• Reviews and approves the retention of the independent registered public accounting firm for permissible audit and non-audit services; 
• Confers with management and our independent registered public accounting firm on the results of the annual audit, our quarterly financial statements and results, and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, including those regarding information security; 
• Reviews the financial statements to be included in our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and annual reports on Form 10-K; 
• Reviews earnings press releases and the substance of financial information and outlook provided to investors and analysts on earnings calls; 
• Adopts and maintains policies regarding preapproval of employment of individuals employed or formerly employed by auditors and engaged on our account; 
• Prepares their report as required to be included by SEC rules in our annual proxy statement or annual report on Form 10-K; 
• Establishes procedures for the receipt, retention, and treatment of complaints we receive regarding accounting, internal accounting controls or auditing matters and the confidential and anonymous submission by employees of concerns regarding accounting or auditing matters; 
• Oversees risks related to financial reporting and exposures, internal audit functions, regulatory, and accounting policies; and 
• Reviews and reports on the adequacy and effectiveness of the Company’s information security policies and practices and the internal controls regarding information security risks 
 
25 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 CC
 
 
Members as of our 2026 Meeting 
 
• Dawn Hudson (Chairperson) 
• Tench Coxe 
• John O. Dabiri 
• Aarti Shah 
• Mark A. Stevens 
 
 In Fiscal 2026, the CC met three times. Selected highlights from its agenda topics included: executive, employee, and

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis, compensation tables, and narrative discussion, is hereby APPROVED.” 
37 
Table of Contents 
Executive Compensation 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
This CD&A describes our Fiscal 2026 executive compensation philosophy, design, and process, and how our corporate results affected the payout of performance-based awards. Our Fiscal 2026 NEOs were: Jen-Hsun Huang, President and CEO; Colette M. Kress, EVP and CFO; Ajay K. Puri, EVP, Worldwide Field Operations; Debora Shoquist, EVP, Operations; and Timothy S. Teter, EVP, General Counsel and Secretary. 
Fiscal 2026 Executive Compensation Summary 
Continued Focus on Pay for Performance 
NVIDIA’s executive compensation program in Fiscal 2026 continued to be guided by a pay for performance philosophy to link competitive NEO pay with our stockholders’ interests. 96% of our CEO’s and 48% of our other NEOs’ Fiscal 2026 total target pay was dependent on corporate performance. 
Executive Pay Heavily Weighted Towards Equity Awards 
The vast majority of our NEOs’ total target pay for Fiscal 2026 was comprised of equity awards: 
• SY PSUs that can be earned based on annual Non-GAAP Operating Income performance, vesting over 4 years, 
• MY PSUs that can be earned based on 3-year TSR performance relative to the S&P 500, vesting over 3 years, and 
• RSUs vesting over 4 years (for NEOs other than our CEO) 
(1) Based on total target pay as approved by the CC, consisting of annual base salary, and, assuming the Company achieves associated performance goals at a Base Compensation Plan level, target payout opportunity under our Variable Cash Plan and target equity opportunities the CC intended to deliver. 
(2) Reflects the average total target pay mix for our NEOs other than our CEO. 
NEOs were also eligible for variable cash awards based on annual revenue, in addition to base salary and other compensation and benefits. 
Key NEO Compensation Actions for Fiscal 2026 
• Cash Compensation Remained Constant : no changes compared to Fiscal 2025 base salary or variable cash opportunity 
• Increased Target Equity Opportunities : increased target equity opportunities for all NEOs to recognize the complexity and scope of NEOs’ roles and responsibilities; by increasing target equity opportunities, aligned total target pay for all NEOs other than our CEO to reflect their comparable, significant contributions and impact on corporate performance 
• Continued Increased Rigor of Performance Goals : set the Base Compensation Plan revenue goal for the Fiscal 2026 Variable Cash Plan in line with our record Fiscal 2025 results and the Base Compensation Plan Non-GAAP Operating Income goal for SY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 in line with our corresponding Fiscal 2025 Stretch Compensation Plan goal 
38 
Table of Contents 
Record Performance Resulting in Maximum Payouts 
 
 Fiscal 2026 Revenue 
Fiscal 2026 Non-GAAP Operating Income (1) 
3-Year TSR Relative to S&P 500 
(Fiscal 2024 to 2026) (2) 
 Stretch Compensation Plan Goal $160.0 billion (3) $96.0 billion (3) 75th percentile 
 Performance Achievement for Period Ended Fiscal 2026 $215.9 billion $137.3 billion 100th Percentile (1,055%) 
(1) See Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures below for a reconciliation between the non-GAAP financial measures and GAAP results. 
(2) Represents TSR for purposes of the MY PSU performance goal, calculated using cumulative stock price appreciation with dividends reinvested and the average closing stock price for the 60 trading days preceding the start, and preceding and including the last day, of the three-year performance period. 
(3) Our original Fiscal 2026 Stretch Compensation Plan revenue goal of $190.0 billion was automatically adjusted to $160.0 billion, and our original Fiscal 2026 Stretch Compensation Plan Non-GAAP Operating Income goal of $120.0 billion was automatically adjusted to $96.0 billion, due to the imposition of additional export controls on the Company’s H20 products during the first half of Fiscal 2026. See Fiscal 2026 Compensation Actions and Achievements — Performance Metrics and Goals for Executive Compensation below for further discussion of these adjustments. 
As a result of the above performance achievements, each exceeding the CC’s pre-established Stretch Compensation Plan goals, our NEOs earned the maximum payouts possible for our Fiscal 2026 Variable Cash Plan, SY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 (which remain subject to service-based vesting), and MY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2024. 
Our Compensation Philosophy and Practices 
NVIDIA is building a one-of-a-kind company that invents the future, builds amazing technologies, and strives to achieve the highest level of craft. To achieve this vision, we must attract and retain a high-caliber executive team while balancing our stockholders’ interests. While our CC considers numerous factors in making executive pay decisions, our compensation program is guided by the following philosophies: 
• Pay for Performance : emphasize at-risk and performance-based cash and equity for NEOs based on multiple corporate metrics 
• Competitive Pay : structure competitive NEO target compensation to reflect job impact, scope, and responsibilities, that attracts and retains talent 
• Stockholder Alignment : align NEO pay with stockholders’ long-term interests and consider feedback from our annual stockholder engagement efforts and “say-on-pay” vote 
• Simplicity and Transparency : design a compensation program with simple, objective metrics 
In this CD&A , total target pay refers to (i) an NEO’s annual base salary, (ii) target variable cash opportunity, which means the potential payout under our Variable Cash Plan, assuming the Company achieves the associated performance goal at a Base Compensation Plan level, and (iii) target equity opportunity, which means the value of the equity opportunities granted during the year that the CC intended to deliver at grant, assuming the Company achieves associated performance goals at a Base Compensation Plan level. 
Our executive compensation program adheres to the following practices: 
 
 What We Do What We Don’t Do 
 
ü Emphasize at-risk, performance-based compensation, with simple, objective performance goals 
ü Use annual and multi-year performance targets to determine PSU awards earned 
ü Set rigorous performance goals and use different metrics for annual and multi-year awards 
ü Require NEOs to provide continuous service for 4 years to fully vest in RSU awards and SY PSU awards earned based on performance 
ü Evaluate our program annually based on feedback from stockholder engagement efforts and make adjustments when appropriate 
ü Mitigate compensation risks 
ü Cap performance-based variable cash and PSU payouts 
ü Retain an independent compensation consultant reporting directly to the independent CC 
ü Require NEOs to maintain meaningful stock ownership 
ü Maintain a clawback policy for performance-based compensation 
X Enter into agreements with NEOs providing for specific terms of employment or severance benefits 
X Give our executive officers special change-in-control benefits 
X Provide automatic equity vesting upon a change-in-control (except for the provisions in our equity plans that apply to all employees if an acquiring company does not assume or substitute our outstanding stock awards) 
X Give NEOs supplemental retirement benefits 
X Provide tax gross-ups 
X Pay dividends or the equivalent on unearned or unvested equity 
X Permit executive officers, employees, or directors to hedge their ownership of NVIDIA stock or to pledge NVIDIA stock as collateral for a loan (though we do allow participation in certain exchange funds for portfolio diversification) 
39 
Table of Contents 
How We Determine Executive Compensation 
The CC’s oversight and decision-making for our Fiscal 2026 executive compensation program was a multi-year process: 
 
 December 2024 December 2024 - January 2025 March 2025 March 2026 
May 2026 
 CC determined peer companies 
 Members of management and the Board, including our Lead Director and CC Chair, engaged in stockholder outreach 
 
CC determined performance goals and approved target compensation levels and PSU and RSU grants, considering stockholder feedback and peer company practices 
 CC certified achievement and payouts for Fiscal 2026 Variable Cash Plan, SY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 and MY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2024* 
 CC oversaw compensation risk assessment; published executive compensation program details in proxy statement 
* The CC is expected to certify achievement and payouts for MY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 by March 2028. 
Roles of the Compensation Committee, Compensation Consultant, and Management 
The roles of (i) our CC, (ii) our independent compensation consultant, and (iii) management, including our CEO and Finance and Human Resources departments, are summarized below. 
For advice regarding our Fiscal 2026 NEO compensation program, our CC utilized Semler Brossy for its experience working with our CC and with compensation committees at other technology companies. Our CC analyzed whether Semler Brossy’s role raised any conflict of interests, taking into consideration the following: 
• Semler Brossy did not provide any services directly to NVIDIA (although we paid Semler Brossy on the CC’s behalf); 
• The percentage of Semler Brossy’s total revenue resulting from fees paid by us on the CC’s behalf; 
• Semler Brossy’s conflict of interest policies and procedures; 
• Any business or personal relationship between Semler Brossy and an executive officer, or between Semler Brossy’s individual compensation advisors and an executive officer or any member of our CC; and 
• Any NVIDIA stock owned by Semler Brossy or its individual compensation advisors. 
After considering these factors, our CC determined that Semler Brossy’s work did not create any conflict of interests. 
Our CC reviews and approves all NEO compensation decisions, with input from Mr. Huang and Semler Brossy. At the CC’s direction, Semler Brossy and management recommended a peer group for our Fiscal 2026 executive pay program, which the CC approved. Semler Brossy provided data on CEO compensation from the peer group companies to inform the CC on Mr. Huang’s compensation and management gathered peer data from the Radford Global Technology Survey, or the Radford Survey, to inform Mr. Huang’s recommendations for other NEOs’ compensation. The CC considered Semler Brossy’s advice, Mr. Huang’s recommendations, and management’s proposed Fiscal 2026 performance goals, before making its final decisions on Fiscal 2026 NEO compensation. The CC certified compensation payouts for performance periods that concluded at the end of Fiscal 2026 under the Variable Cash Plan and for SY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 and MY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2024. The CC also oversaw management’s Fiscal 2026 compensation risk analysis. 
Peer Companies and Market Compensation Data 
We believe our peers should be companies that compete with us for executive talent, have an established business, market presence, and complexity similar to NVIDIA, and are of similar size, measured by revenue or market capitalization at approximately 1/3 - 3.5x ours. After consulting with management, and based on Semler Brossy’s recommendation, the CC determined in December 2024 that the existing peer group remained appropriate for Fiscal 2026, with the following adjustments: (i) removing Adobe Inc., Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., and SAP SE due to their revenue and market capitalization being below our target range (and also, for Adobe and SAP, because of limited direct business relevance); and (ii) adding Alphabet Inc., Amazon.com, Inc., Apple Inc., and Microsoft Corporation as competitors for talent with revenue and market capitalization being within our target range. These changes resulted in the following Fiscal 2026 peer group: 
Fiscal 2026 Peer Group 
 
 Alphabet Inc. (GOOG) 
Meta Platforms, Inc. (META) 
 Amazon.com, Inc. (AMZN) Microsoft Corporation (MSFT) 
 
Apple Inc. (AAPL) Netflix, Inc. (NFLX) 
 
Broadcom Inc. (AVGO) Oracle Corporation (ORCL) 
 Cisco Systems, Inc. (CSCO) Qualcomm Incorporated (QCOM) 
 International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) Salesforce, Inc. (CRM) 
 Intel Corporation (INTC) Visa Inc. (V) 
40 
Table of Contents 
Our CC selected each member of the peer group based on a combination of the factors described above. As a result, while some peer companies were outside our targeted size range, the CC determined they were still appropriate due to their established businesses and relevance as competitors for talent. 
To determine our Fiscal 2026 peer group, the CC reviewed our trailing 12-month revenue (reported through our third quarter results for Fiscal 2025) and market capitalization as of November 2024. They compared these metrics to the 75th percentile, median, and 25th percentile of peer group companies, as follows: 
 
 
 
For our NEOs other than our CEO, Mr. Huang reviewed market practices and compensation data from the Radford Survey and peer company proxy data for comparable executives before recommending their Fiscal 2026 compensation for approval by the CC. The CC reviewed the same information for peer companies’ CEOs, before determining the components of our executive compensation program, as well as total compensation, for all NEOs. We compared the total compensation opportunity for our NEOs and similarly situated executives at the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of peer company data where available, and the CC considered the factors below in setting NEO compensation. 
Factors Used in Determining Executive Compensation 
In addition to peer data, our CC considers the following factors in making executive compensation decisions. The weight given to each factor may differ among NEOs and each component of pay, and is subject to the CC’s sole discretion. 
 
 
ü 
The need to attract and retain talent in a highly competitive industry 
ü 
Each NEO’s unvested equity 
 
ü 
Internal pay equity relative to similarly situated executives 
 
ü 
Stockholder feedback regarding our executive pay 
 
ü 
The desire for simplicity of the overall program and transparency of the performance metrics 
ü 
Our CEO’s recommendations for the NEOs other than himself, including his understanding of each NEO’s performance, capabilities, and contributions 
 
ü 
An NEO’s past performance and anticipated future contributions 
 
ü 
Our CC’s independent judgment 
 
ü 
Our financial performance and forecasted results, as well as our prior financial performance and resulting impact on our executives’ compensation 
ü 
Our philosophy that an NEO’s total compensation opportunity and percentage of at-risk pay should increase with responsibility 
 
ü 
Changes in the scale and complexity of our business 
ü 
The total compensation cost and the growth in such cost, including from executive compensation, to maintain a responsible cost structure for our compensation programs * 
 
ü 
Each NEO’s current total compensation 
 
ü 
The scope and complexity of the department(s) or function(s) the NEO manages 
* See Note 3, Stock-Based Compensation of our Form 10-K consolidated financial statements for a discussion of stock-based compensation cost. 
Fiscal 2026 Compensation Actions and Achievements 
Stockholder Outreach and Feedback 
We value stockholder feedback and conduct an annual outreach program. In Fall 2024, in preparation for Fiscal 2026 compensation decisions, we contacted our top institutional stockholders representing an aggregate ownership of 31% of our shares. Management and the Board, including our Lead Director, met with stockholders holding 30% of our shares to discuss a wide range of topics including executive compensation. Stockholders provided positive feedback on our linkage of pay and performance and shared their views on multi-year performance goals and long equity vesting terms. 
41 
Table of Contents 
In response to this feedback and considering our 92% say-on-pay approval rate for Fiscal 2024 NEO compensation, our CC maintained generally the same elements and performance-based metrics for Fiscal 2026, but (i) increased target equity opportunities for all NEOs to recognize the complexity and scope of their roles and responsibilities, (ii) by increasing target equity opportunities, aligned total target pay for all NEOs other than our CEO to reflect their comparable, significant contributions and impact on corporate performance, and (iii) increased the rigor of the Company’s performance-based executive pay opportunities by referencing our record Fiscal 2025 results and Fiscal 2025 Stretch Compensation Plan goals in setting Fiscal 2026 Base Compensation Plan goals to further motivate our NEOs. Our CC believed that structuring performance-based components of our executive pay program solely around NVIDIA’s financial performance goals continued to align management’s incentives with stockholder interests. 
Total Target Compensation Approach 
In setting Fiscal 2026 compensation, our CC reviewed each NEO’s total target pay opportunity and distribution across multiple pay elements. Our CC compared Mr. Huang’s base salary, target variable cash opportunity, target total cash opportunity, target equity opportunity, and total target pay opportunity against chief executives at peer companies. For our other NEOs, Mr. Huang reviewed their total target pay against similarly situated executives at peer companies where the data was available from the Radford Survey, considering internal pay equity, individual performance, unvested equity levels, and the increasing complexity of their roles. These factors informed Mr. Huang’s recommendations to the CC. The CC also considered the factors outlined in Factors Used in Determining Executive Compensation and its compensation objectives for Fiscal 2026. Rather than applying a formula or assigning specific weights to each factor, our CC used its judgment and experience to set total target compensation, the mix of cash and equity, and fixed and at-risk pay opportunities for each NEO. When setting pay elements, the CC evaluated them in the context of the levels of the other pay elements and total target pay to ensure alignment with program objectives. The CC established amounts and designed a structure to reward NEOs with above-market value from equity awards and variable cash incentives only upon exceptional corporate performance. 
Components of Pay 
The primary components of NVIDIA’s Fiscal 2026 executive compensation program are summarized below: 
 
 Fixed Compensation At-Risk Compensation 
 Base Salary Variable Cash SY PSUs MY PSUs 
RSUs (1) 
 Form Cash Cash Equity 
Equity 
Equity 
 Who Receives NEOs NEOs NEOs NEOs 
NEOs (except our CEO, whose equity awards are solely PSUs) 
 Performance Measure N/A Revenue (determines cash payout) Non-GAAP Operating Income (determines number of shares eligible to vest) TSR relative to the S&P 500 (determines number of shares eligible to vest) 
N/A 
 Performance Period N/A 1 year 1 year 3 years N/A 
 Vesting Period N/A N/A 4 years from grant 3 years from grant 
4 years from grant 
 Vesting Terms N/A N/A 
If at least Threshold goal achieved, 25% on approximately the 1-year anniversary of the grant date; 6.25% quarterly thereafter 
If at least Threshold goal achieved, 100% on approximately the 3-year anniversary of the grant date 
6.25% vests quarterly from the grant date (2) 
 Timeframe Emphasized Annual Annual Long-term Long-term Long-term 
 Purpose Compensate for expected day-to-day performance Reward for annual corporate financial performance Align with stockholder interests by linking NEO pay to annual operational performance and ongoing stock price performance during the vesting period Align with long-term stockholder interests by linking NEO pay to multi-year relative shareholder return and ongoing stock price performance during the vesting period 
Align with stockholde

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
mittee self-assessments 
ü Annual stockholder outreach, including Lead Director participation 
ü Stock ownership guidelines for our directors and NEOs 
Advisory Approval of Executive Compensation for Fiscal 2026 (Proposal 2) 
We are asking our stockholders to cast a non-binding vote, also known as “say-on-pay,” to approve our NEOs’ compensation. The Board believes that our compensation policies and practices are effective in achieving our goals of paying for performance, providing competitive pay so that we may attract and retain a high-caliber executive team, aligning our executives’ interests with those of our stockholders to create long-term value, and achieving simplicity and transparency with our compensation program. The Board and our stockholders have approved holding our “say-on-pay” votes annually. The Board recommends that you vote  FOR  Proposal 2. 
Executive Compensation Highlights 
Our executive compensation program is designed to reward performance. We use compensation elements that align our NEOs’ interests with those of stockholders to drive long-term value. Our NEOs’ compensation is heavily weighted toward performance-based, “at-risk” variable cash and long-term equity awards, which are earned only if the Company achieves pre-established financial metrics, with caps on maximum payouts. In recent years, over 90% of our CEO’s and over 45% of our other NEOs’ total target pay have been performance-based and at-risk. Additionally, 100% of our CEO’s equity awards have been granted solely as PSUs. 
For Fiscal 2026, the CC kept NEO cash compensation constant as compared to Fiscal 2025, but increased target equity opportunities for all NEOs to recognize the complexity and scope of their roles and responsibilities. The CC also set Fiscal 2026 target equity opportunities at levels that aligned total target pay for all NEOs other than our CEO to reflect their comparable, significant contributions and impact on corporate performance. To motivate executives, the CC set the Base Compensation Plan revenue goal for the Fiscal 2026 Variable Cash Plan in line with our record Fiscal 2025 results and the Base Compensation Plan Non-GAAP Operating Income goal for SY PSUs granted in Fiscal 2026 in line with our corresponding Fiscal 2025 Stretch Compensation Plan goal. 
Financial Performance and Link to Executive Pay 
As described in CD&A , a significant portion of our executive pay opportunities are tied to the achievement of financial measures that drive business value and contribute to our long-term success. The tables below show our goals for the applicable periods that were completed at the end of Fiscal 2026, performance achievement against the goals, and their impacts on our executives’ pay. 
 
 PERFORMANCE GOALS 
 Variable Cash Plan SY PSUs MY PSUs 
 Fiscal 2026 Revenue Payout as a % of Target Opportunity 
Fiscal 2026 Non-GAAP Operating Income (1) Shares Eligible to Vest as a % of Target Opportunity Fiscal 2024 to 2026 
3-Year Relative TSR Shares Eligible to Vest as a % of Target Opportunity 
 Threshold $100.0 billion 50% $46.0 billion 50% 
25th percentile 25% 
 Base Compensation Plan $130.0 billion 100% $71.0 billion 100% 
50th percentile 100% 
 Stretch Compensation Plan $160.0 billion (2) 200% $96.0 billion (2) CEO 150% 
Other NEOs 200% 
75th percentile CEO 150% 
Other NEOs 200% 
 
 PERFORMANCE ACHIEVEMENT AND PAYOUTS 
 Variable Cash Plan SY PSUs MY PSUs 
 
Performance Achievement for Period Ended Fiscal 2026 (3) $215.9 billion 
revenue 
$137.3 billion 
Non-GAAP Operating Income (1) 100th percentile 
3-year TSR relative to S&P 500
(1,055%) 
 Payout as % of Target Opportunity 200% CEO 150%
Other NEOs 200% CEO 150%
Other NEOs 200% 
8 
Table of Contents 
(1) See Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures in CD&A for a reconciliation between the non-GAAP financial measures and GAAP results. 
(2) Our original Fiscal 2026 Stretch Compensation Plan revenue goal of $190.0 billion was automatically adjusted to $160.0 billion, and our original Fiscal 2026 Stretch Compensation Plan Non-GAAP Operating Income goal of $120.0 billion was automatically adjusted to $96.0 billion, due to the imposition of additional export controls on the Company’s H20 products during the first

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Transactions with Related Persons 
Employees, officers, and directors must avoid any activity that conflicts with, or has the appearance of conflicting with, our interests. This policy is included in our Code of Conduct and our Financial Team Code of Conduct. We regularly conduct a review of all related party transactions for potential conflicts of interest and all transactions involving executive officers or directors must be approved by the NCGC in compliance with the Company’s policies and Nasdaq listing standards. Except as discussed below, there were no transactions with related persons since the beginning of Fiscal 2026 or currently proposed transactions that would require disclosure in this proxy statement or approval by the NCGC. 
Transactions with Related Persons 
The daughter and son of Jen-Hsun Huang, our President and CEO and a member of our Board, are employed by the Company. Neither of them shares a household with Mr. Huang, is one of our executive officers, or reports directly to Mr. Huang. Additionally, the son of Dr. Shah, one of our directors, is employed by the Company. He does not share a household with Dr. Shah and is not one of our executive officers. 
The compensation of these individuals was determined in accordance with NVIDIA’s compensation practices applicable to employees with comparable qualifications and responsibilities and holding similar positions and without the involvement of Mr. Huang or Dr. Shah, respectively. The total compensation for Fiscal 2026 of the daughter and son of Mr. Huang was approximately $1,232,000 and $1,320,000, respectively. The total compensation for Fiscal 2026 of the son of Dr. Shah was approximately $265,000. 
Each of them has received and continues to be eligible for equity awards on the same general terms and conditions as applicable to employees in similar positions who do not have such family relationships. 
The Jen-Hsun and Lori Huang Foundation, or the Huang Foundation, a charitable organization, has entered into an agreement with CoreWeave, Inc., a third-party cloud services provider, to purchase GPU compute time for donation to university and other non-profit research institutes to develop open science and AI research, of which $108.3 million has been donated to date. NVIDIA routinely offers engineering services for no charge in the ordinary course of business to developers of NVIDIA accelerated computing and we plan to offer similar engineering services for no charge to certain recipients of GPU compute time grants from the Huang Foundation. 
We have entered into indemnity agreements with our executive officers and directors. The agreements provide that we will indemnify them, under certain circumstances, for liabilities they may be required to pay in actions or proceedings by reason of their position with NVIDIA, and otherwise to the fullest extent permitted under Delaware law, our Charter, and our Bylaws. We intend to execute similar agreements with our future executive officers and directors. See Employment, Severance, and Change-in-Control Arrangements below for a description of the terms of the 2007 Plan related to a change-in-control of NVIDIA. 
During Fiscal 2026, we granted RSUs to our non-employee directors, and RSUs and PSUs to our executive officers (other than Mr. Huang, who received PSUs only). See Director Compensation above and Executive Compensation below. 
34 
Table of Contents
