PFIZER INC (PFE) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: PFIZER INC
Ticker: PFE
CIK: 78003
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-12

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance or increases shareholder value. 
• Proposals on this topic have been voted on at previous Annual Meetings and have consistently failed to receive majority shareholder support. At the 2024 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, the last time shareholders considered this proposal, the proposal received 34.9% of the votes cast. 
PFIZER’S SHAREHOLDER RIGHTS AND GOVERNANCE PRACTICES SUPPORT INDEPENDENT BOARD OVERSIGHT 
Pfizer’s governance policies, including annual director elections, election of a Lead Independent Director, majority voting standards for uncontested elections, shareholder rights to call special meetings, and proxy access, support robust independent Board oversight and our responsiveness to shareholders' needs. Except for Chairman and CEO, Dr. Albert Bourla, the Board consists exclusively of independent Directors who possess the requisite skills and expertise to provide robust independent oversight and appropriately challenge management as circumstances require. The independent Directors meet in executive session, led by the Lead Independent Director, at every Board meeting to address topics such as succession planning and evaluation of senior leaders, including the Chairman and CEO. In addition, the Board’s Committees, including Audit, Compensation, Governance, Regulatory and Compliance, and Science and Technology, are composed solely of independent Directors. 
The Board’s independent oversight is further reinforced through its ongoing refreshment. Since 2024, two new independent Directors have joined the Board, bringing their fresh perspectives and expertise to the Board. Director tenure averages 9 years. 
LEADERSHIP STRUCTURE FLEXIBILITY IS EFFECTIVE FOR PFIZER AND OUR SHAREHOLDERS 
The Corporate Governance Principles require that the independent Directors elect a Chairman annually based on recommendations from the Governance Committee. The Board does not have a preferred structure and recognizes that the right structure may vary as circumstances warrant. The Chairman may or may not be the CEO, but when the CEO also serves as Chairman, a Lead Independent Director is elected. The Board values having the flexibility to select the optimal leadership structure for Pfizer and its shareholders at any given time. The independent Directors, with their distinct backgrounds and perspectives and knowledge of the company, are best positioned to evaluate and select the optimal leadership structure at any given time. 
PFIZER’S BOARD CONDUCTS AN ANNUAL REVIEW OF ITS LEADERSHIP STRUCTURE 
In December 2025, following a thorough review by the Governance Committee, the independent Directors evaluated the Board’s leadership structure taking into consideration the company’s performance under the current operating and governance environment and investor feedback. The Committee, with input from the other independent Directors, determined that it would be in the best interest of the company and its shareholders for Dr. Bourla to continue serving as Chairman of the Board in 2026. The Board concluded that Dr. Bourla demonstrates the leadership and vision necessary to lead the Board. His deep scientific, industry and regulatory expertise, along with his extensive company knowledge enables him to effectively lead the Board. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
101 
 
 
Shareholder Proposal 
The independent Directors also re-elected Mr. Shantanu Narayen to serve as Lead Independent Director in 2026. Mr. Narayen has demonstrated strong leadership skills, risk oversight abilities, and expertise in technology and product innovation during his tenure as a Director and Lead Independent Director. His strong independent leadership, global leadership experience, and commitment to the Board make him well-suited for this independent leadership role. Accordingly, the independent Directors remain confident in Mr. Narayen’s ability to continue as Lead Independent Director for 2026. For further information concerning the Board’s leadership structure, please see “ 2025 Annual Review of Leadership Structure ” in this Proxy Statement. 
ROLE OF THE LEAD INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR 
The role of Lead Independent Director is governed by a Board-approved charter and entails a specific mandate, substantial authority, and clearly articulated responsibilities, including, but not limited to: presiding at all meetings of the Board at which the Chairman and CEO is not present, including executive sessions of the independent Directors; calling meetings of independent Directors; leading the annual evaluation of the Chairman and CEO; and functioning as a liaison between the Chairman and CEO and the independent Directors. For further information about the roles of the Chairman and Lead Independent Director, please see “ The Board’s Leadership Structure ” in this Proxy Statement. 
SUMMARY 
The Board is best positioned to determine its optimal leadership structure and believes it is of utmost importance that it retains this flexibility. Imposing an enduring policy that mandates separating the roles of Chairman and CEO would be overly restrictive and would not be in the best interest of Pfizer or our shareholders. The Board remains committed to engaging with investors and considering their feedback, alongside other factors, when evaluating its leadership structure. Proposals on this topic have been voted on previously at Pfizer’s Annual Meetings and have consistently failed to receive majority shareholder support. 
 
 
 
The Board of Directors unanimously recommends a vote “ AGAINST ” this proposal. 
 
 
102 
Pfizer 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Annual Meeting Information 
 
 
 
 
Annual Meeting 
WHEN AND WHERE? 
 
 
Date and Time 
April 23, 2026 at 9:00 a.m., EDT 
 
Location 
https://meetnow.global/PFE2026 
The 2026 Annual Meeting (the Annual Meeting or the Meeting) will be held in virtual format only through a live video webcast with the option to ask live questions. We designed the format to ensure that our shareholders who attend the meeting will be afforded comparable rights and opportunities to participate as they would at an in-person meeting, allowing for broader shareholder attendance at no cost to the shareholder. Closed captioning will be provided. 
 
 
 
HOW DO I ATTEND THE ANNUAL MEETING? 
On the day of the Meeting, shareholders may log in to the Meeting website, using the URL above, beginning at 8:45 a.m. EDT and can attend the Meeting, ask questions and vote their shares. You will be required to enter a control number, which can be found on your Notice of Internet Availability (Notice), proxy card, electronic notification or voting instructions included with your proxy materials. Additional information will be available on the Meeting website, including the Rules of Conduct and Meeting Procedures. 
 
 
 
Registered Shareholders 
Enter your 15-digit control number found on the Notice, proxy card or electronic notification included with your proxy materials. 
 
Beneficial Owners 
(Shareholders who hold shares through an intermediary, such as a bank or broker) 
Enter your control number found on the voting instructions included with your proxy materials. Access to the Meeting website will be available on the day of the Meeting beginning at 8:45 a.m. EDT. Beneficial owners should check with their intermediary through which they hold their shares to confirm whether it is necessary to register in advance of the Annual Meeting. If registration is required, please see “ How Do I Register in Advance of the Annual Meeting? ” below. 
 
Guests 
Join the Annual Meeting as a “Guest.” You will not have the ability to ask questions or vote during the meeting if you join the meeting as a Guest. 
 
Proponent(s) of Shareholder Proposal(s) 
The proponent(s) of shareholder proposal(s) included in this Proxy Statement should notify the company in writing of the individual authorized to present the proposal at the Meeting at least two weeks before the Annual Meeting to obtain information on how to attend. 
 
 
 
HOW DO I REGISTER IN ADVANCE OF THE ANNUAL MEETING? 
 
 
While we expect the vast majority of beneficial owners will be able to attend the Annual Meeting, vote their shares and ask questions using the control number received with their proxy materials, as described above, we recommend that beneficial owners confirm this ability with the intermediary through which they hold their shares such as a bank or broker. If your intermediary does not provide for the ability to access the Annual Meeting using the control number found on the voting instructions included with your proxy materials, you will be required to request a legal proxy from your intermediary to register in advance of the Annual Meeting to participate in the Annual Meeting. 
To register, you must submit proof of your proxy power (legal proxy) reflecting your ownership of Pfizer common stock, which can be obtained from your intermediary, and your email address. Requests for registration should be directed to Computershare and be received no later than 5:00 p.m., EDT, on April 20, 2026 at the following: 
• By e-mail: Forward an image of your legal proxy to legalproxy@computershare.com along with your name and email address. Requests for registration must be labeled as “Legal Proxy”; or 
• By mail: Computershare, Pfizer Legal Proxy, P.O. Box 43001, Providence, RI, 02940-3001. 
You will receive a confirmation email from Computershare of your registration and a new control number, which will be 15-digits, which will allow you to attend the Annual Meeting, vote your shares, ask questions at the meeting and submit questions in advance of the Meeting. 
If you have already voted your shares and then request a legal proxy, your original vote will be invalidated and you will be required to vote your shares again. 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
103 
 
 
Annual Meeting Information 
HOW DO I ASK A QUESTION AT THE ANNUAL MEETING? 
• IN ADVANCE OF THE ANNUAL MEETING : During the two weeks prior to the Meeting, shareholders may submit questions via the Meeting website. See instructions below. The deadline to submit questions in advance is April 21, 2026 at 5:00 p.m. EDT. 
◦ Registered Shareholders : Registered shareholders can submit questions electronically via the Meeting website. Please visit https://meetnow.global/PFE2026 and enter the 15-digit control number included on the Notice, proxy card or electronic notification included with your proxy materials when prompted and follow the instructions on-screen. 
◦ Beneficial Owners: To submit a question in advance of the Meeting, using the Meeting website, beneficial owners must register in advance of the Meeting. See “ How Do I Register in Advance of the Annual Meeting? ” above. 
• Questions and answers may be grouped by topic and substantially similar questions may be grouped and answered once. 
• DURING THE ANNUAL MEETING : Shareholders will have the opportunity to ask live questions during the meeting. Details on how to ask live questions will be provided on the Meeting website provided below. 
◦ Registered Shareholders and Beneficial Owners: Please visit https://meetnow.global/PFE2026 and enter the control number included on your Notice, proxy card, voting instruction form or electronic notification when prompted and follow the instructions on-screen. 
◦ Note: Beneficial owners should check with their intermediary through which they hold their shares to confirm whether it is necessary to register in advance of the Annual Meeting in order to attend the Meeting. If registration is required, please see “ How Do I Register in Advance of the Annual Meeting? ” above. 
We will hold a live Q&A session, during which we intend to answer as many questions as time permits. Questions must comply with the Rules of Conduct and Meeting Procedures, which will be available on the Meeting website, and be pertinent to Pfizer, our shareholders and the Meeting matters. 
Questions and answers to any pertinent questions not addressed during the Meeting, will be published following the meeting on our Investors website at https://investors.pfizer.com/Investors/Overview/default.aspx. 
WHAT IF I HAVE TECHNICAL QUESTIONS? 
Beginning at 8:30 a.m. EDT on the day of the Meeting and through the conclusion of the Meeting, our support team will be ready to assist shareholders with any technical difficulties accessing and participating in the Meeting. Should you require assistance, please call the support team listed on the virtual Annual Meeting website at https://meetnow.global/PFE2026 or by phone, within the U.S., U.S. territories & Canada: +1-888-724-2416 or outside of the U.S., U.S. territories & Canada:+1-781-575-2748. 
WILL THE VIRTUAL ANNUAL MEETING BE AVAILABLE FOR REPLAY? 
A replay of the Annual Meeting will be made publicly available at https://investors.pfizer.com/Investors/Events--Presentations approximately 24 hours after the Meeting. The replay will be available for approximately one year. 
WHAT IS A QUORUM FOR THE MEETING? 
The presence of holders representing a majority of the voting power of all shares of Pfizer stock issued and outstanding and entitled to vote at the Annual Meeting, logging into the Meeting using the control number or represented by proxy, is necessary to constitute a quorum. Abstentions and broker non-votes are counted as present and entitled to vote for purposes of determining a quorum. 
Voting 
WHO IS ENTITLED TO VOTE AT THE MEETING? 
Holders of Pfizer common stock at the close of business on February 25, 2026 (the Record Date), are entitled to receive the Notice of 2026 Annual Meeting and Proxy Statement and to vote their shares at the Meeting. As of that date, there were 5,688,356,129 shares of the company’s common stock outstanding and entitled to vote. Each share of common stock is entitled to one vote on each matter properly brought before the Meeting. 
 
 
104 
Pfizer 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
Annual Meeting Information 
HOW DO I VOTE? 
Whether or not you plan to attend the Meeting, we urge you to review your proxy materials and vote your shares in advance of the Meeting. 
 
 
 
By Mail 
Complete, sign and date the accompanying proxy card or voting instruction form and return it in the prepaid envelope. If you are a registered shareholder and return your signed proxy card, but do not indicate your voting preferences, the persons named in the proxy card will vote the shares represented by your proxy card as recommended by the Board of Directors. 
If you are a registered shareholder and you do not have the prepaid envelope, please send your completed proxy card by regular mail to Pfizer Inc., Proxy Services, c/o Computershare Investor Services, P.O. Box 43119, Providence, RI, 02940-5110, or by overnight mail to Pfizer Inc., Proxy Services, c/o Computershare, 150 Royall St., Suite 101, Canton, MA 02021. 
 
 
 
By Telephone or via the Internet 
Registered Shareholders: Pfizer has established telephone and Internet voting procedure

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis ” section for a more detailed summary of investor feedback and actions taken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
27 
 
 
Governance 
 
 
 
 
Board of Directors: Investors expressed interest in the composition of the Board of Directors and inquired about the skills and expertise the Board may prioritize when seeking future Director candidates. Specifically, investors asked whether the Board is actively recruiting Directors with expertise in AI, as well as inquired about plans to further increase gender diversity among Board members. Additionally, investors were interested in the progress of the onboarding process for the recently elected Directors, Messrs. Mortimer J. Buckley and Cyrus Taraporevala, including updates on their integration and contributions to the Board to date. Further, investors expressed interest in the Board’s commitment to continuing education for its Directors and inquired about the schedule for potential upcoming Committee Chair rotations. 
Action taken: During 2025, the Board successfully completed the onboarding process for Messrs. Buckley and Taraporevala. Both Directors have made strong contributions throughout the year, leveraging each of their strong financial backgrounds to enhance the Board’s overall blend of commercial and scientific expertise. The Board benefits from the diverse expertise of its members, with certain Directors bringing valuable experience in technology, including AI. This breadth of knowledge supports informed decision-making and strengthens the Board’s capacity to address emerging issues. To support its ongoing development, the Board participated in briefings led by external experts, including executives from several of our institutional investors. These sessions covered key topics central to the business, such as AI and the evolving geopolitical landscape, and were designed to ensure that Directors remain well-informed and prepared to address critical issues. Investor feedback was shared with the Governance Committee and incorporated into the development of Board-related content for this Proxy Statement. The Board remains committed to ensuring that the Board’s composition reflects members possessing a broad range of backgrounds and perspectives. For further details, please refer to “ Item 1 - Election of Directors ”. 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainable Business Risks: Certain investors expressed interest in Pfizer’s responsible business practices and were pleased that our approach and continued commitment to responsible business growth remains balanced and aligned with our business priorities. Investors were primarily interested in discussing access to medicines, our environmental goals and progress, product safety, and the use of Limulus Amebocyte Lysate (LAL) and Tachypleus Amebocyte Lysate (TAL) derived from horseshoe crabs. 
Action taken: Feedback was shared with the Governance Committee. In addition, we directed the investors to our Impact Report and to the company’s website to view the latest information regarding the company’s responsible business practices. Please note that these documents and our website are not a part of our proxy solicitation materials. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Topics of Interest: Investors expressed interest and provided positive feedback regarding the company’s voluntary agreement with the U.S. Government. In general, stakeholders expressed optimism about its potential impact on the company’s operations. Investors also provided positive feedback regarding the company’s acquisition of Metsera, recognizing the potential strategic value of expanding the company’s pipeline portfolio in obesity and cardiometabolic diseases. The acquisition was seen as a positive step in potentially strengthening Pfizer’s presence in this therapeutic area. 
Action taken : Feedback was shared with the Governance Committee. The company will continue to provide updates on these matters, as appropriate. 
 
SHAREHOLDER INQUIRIES 
We communicate with our shareholders through various platforms, including via our corporate website, digital and print media, webcasts and live events, including our annual meeting of shareholders, investor presentations and healthcare industry presentations. In 2025, in addition to meeting with institutional investors, we responded to more than 630 inquiries from retail shareholders sent to the Board or the Office of the Corporate Secretary. 
At each Governance Committee meeting, we share investor and other stakeholder feedback directly with the Committee. We view communication between our shareholders and the Board as a dialogue and, when appropriate, members of our Board engage directly with our shareholders. 
How to Communicate with Our Directors 
Shareholders and other interested parties may communicate with any of our Directors, including the Lead Independent Director and the Audit Committee Chair, as follows: 
By mail: Write to the Corporate Secretary, Pfizer Inc., 66 Hudson Boulevard East, New York, NY, 10001-2192; or 
By e-mail: Go to Pfizer’s website at https://investors.pfizer.com/Investors/Corporate-Governance/Contact-Our-Directors/default.aspx. 
Shareholder communications are distributed to the Board, or to any individual Director or Directors, as appropriate, depending on the facts and circumstances outlined in the communication. The Board has requested that certain items that are unrelated to the duties and responsibilities of the Board be redirected or excluded, as appropriate. 
 
 
28 
Pfizer 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
Governance 
Public Policy Engagement and Political Participation 
The Governance Committee maintains an informed status on the company’s issues related to public policy and corporate political spending practices. The Committee receives periodic updates and reviews Pfizer’s Political Action Committee (PAC) and Corporate Political Contributions Report (PAC Report) prior to its annual publication. The Committee also reviews the company’s “Industry Associations — Congruency Report.” In addition, management regularly informs the Committee of Pfizer’s public policy priorities and its efforts to educate lawmakers in support of those priorities. 
PUBLIC POLICY ENGAGEMENT FOR GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH 
Fundamental to our business is engaging on public policy issues that may affect our ability to meet patients’ needs and enhance shareholder value. These issues include, for example, advancing biomedical research and healthcare innovation, advocating for intellectual property (IP) protections, and improving patient access to care. In addition, we regularly work with policymakers and industry and trade groups to help create and maintain an innovative environment where we can cultivate new medicines, bring them to market and ensure that patient health and safety remain a priority. 
To advance our business objectives, we are also members of industry and trade groups, including PhRMA, the National Association of Manufacturers, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Business Roundtable and state life science trade associations. These organizations, along with the others to which we belong, represent both the industry and the business community at large to collectively bring about consensus on broad policy issues. Our U.S. Government Relations leaders evaluate our support of these organizations annually based on their expertise in healthcare policy and advocacy. 
In addition to healthcare policy, we realize these organizations may engage in a variety of other issues that extend beyond the scope of our priorities. Our participation as a member of these groups comes with the understanding that we may not always agree with every position held by the organization and/or its other members. We monitor where and to what extent our trade associations are misaligned with the company on such issues and we will advocate for the trade association to come into alignment, as appropriate. If and when a trade association’s misalignment outweighs the benefits to Pfizer and its stakeholders, we consider whether to reduce our involvement with the organization or end our involvement altogether. 
We believe value exists in making sure our positions on issues important to Pfizer and our industry are communicated and understood within those organizations. Please see Pfizer’s “Industry Associations – Congruency Report” at https://www.pfizer.com/about/programs-policies/political-partnerships. The “Industry Associations — Congruency Report” is not a part of our proxy solicitation materials. 
Corporate Political Contributions 
At Pfizer, we have adopted a formal policy for making and disclosing corporate political and PAC contributions in the U.S., which applies to Pfizer and the Pfizer PAC. The policy is designed to ensure that our political expenditures and disclosures are made in compliance with all federal, state, and local election laws, as applicable. Furthermore, Pfizer’s independent expenditures policy prohibits the company from making direct independent expenditures or contributions to independent expenditure committees (also known as “super PACs”), a decision supported by the company’s senior executives and affirmed by the Governance Committee of our Board. In addition, Pfizer’s contributions to 527 political organizations, i.e., political organizations that are not registered political committees, are disclosed in the PAC Report. 
We regularly discuss our political contributions disclosures with investors and other stakeholders to help ensure our disclosures meet their needs. Over the years, shareholder engagement has influenced our level of disclosure and helped to develop or modify related policies. 
All corporate political contributions are published annually in the PAC Report, in compliance with Pfizer’s corporate policy. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
29 
 
 
Governance 
Policies and Procedures for Approval and Oversight of Corporate and PAC Political Expenditures 
Pfizer’s nine-member PAC Steering Committee (the Steering Committee) meets monthly to review and approve corporate political contribution recommendations for candidates and political committees submitted by our Government Relations experts. The Steering Committee also evaluates contributions based on the potential impact to Pfizer and its colleagues. The PAC is a non-partisan, employee-run organization that enables employees to participate in the American political process. The Steering Committee ensures that each contribution advances our business objectives and is not based on the political preferences or views of any individual employee. In addition, the Steering Committee reviews contributions to lawmakers on a case-by-case basis considering a number of factors such as: 
• Prioritization of candidates who support policies that impact Pfizer’s purpose and uphold our core values, which include healthcare, tax and an intellectual property ecosystem that supports innovation and patient access to medicines; 
• Representation where employees live and work; and 
• Elected officials’ conduct and statements. 
Our PAC support does not imply an endorsement of a candidate’s position on any political, social or religious issue, and we always consider a candidate’s ethical conduct in our evaluation to help ensure Pfizer’s values are upheld. 
FEDERAL AND STATE LOBBYING ACTIVITY 
The company’s U.S. Government Relations leaders are responsible for the company’s lobbying activities. The Governance Committee is responsible for maintaining an informed status on the company’s lobbying priorities and activities through periodic reports from management. In addition, all employee communications with government and regulatory officials are governed by Pfizer’s internal policies and procedures, which include guidelines available on our website at https://www.pfizer.com/about/responsibility/compliance/code-of-conduct. 
Reporting and Compliance Features 
Federal Lobbying 
• Pfizer’s disclosures and lobbying activities comply with the Lobbying Disclosure Act, as amended. These reports may be viewed at https://lda.senate.gov/system/public/. 
• In addition, we voluntarily report the portion of our dues used by trade associations for federal lobbying activity. See https://www.pfizer.com/about/programs-policies/political-partnerships. 
State Lobbying 
• We are fully compliant with state registration and reporting requirements. 
• Links to states’ reporting entities, where state lobbying reports are filed, may be accessed at: 
https://www.pfizer.com/about/programs-policies/political-partnerships. 
 
 
30 
Pfizer 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
Governance 
Pfizer Policies on Business Conduct 
All of our employees, including our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer and Controller, are required to abide by Pfizer’s policies on business conduct to help ensure that our business is conducted in a consistently legal and ethical manner. Pfizer’s policies form the foundation of a comprehensive process that includes compliance with corporate policies and procedures, an open relationship among employees to foster ethical business conduct, and an utmost commitment to integrity. Our policies and procedures cover all major areas of business conduct, including employment practices, conflicts of interest, anti-corruption, transparency, privacy, product communications, intellectual property, the protection of confidential information, prohibition on insider trading and the responsible use of AI, and require strict adherence to laws and regulations applicable to the conduct of our business. In addition, we strive to ensure fair competition in all our business dealings, including, among other things, distribution agreements, rebates and discounts to customers, patent, copyright, and trademark licenses, territorial restrictions on resellers, and pricing policy generally. We are committed to competing fairly and following the applicable antitrust and competition laws of all countries in which we operate. 
Code of Conduct training is assigned to all new employees upon hire and to existing employees regularly. The training includes a certification to confirm that employees agree to abide by the Code of Conduct and that they understand their responsibility to report and have reported any potential violations of law, regulations, ethical standards or Pfizer policies. 
Employees are required to report any conduct that they believe to be an actual or apparent violation of Pfizer’s policies on business conduct. Retaliation in any form against any employee who seeks advice, raises a concern, reports misconduct, or provides information in an investigation is prohibited. Our Audit Committee, working with Pfizer’s Compliance leaders, has procedures to receive, retain and treat complaints received regarding accounting, internal accounting controls, or auditing matters, and to allow for confidential and anonymous submissions by employees with concerns regarding questionable accounting or auditing matters. 
The full text of our Code of Conduct, including information regarding how to report allegations of misconduct, is posted on our website at https://www.pfizer.com/about/responsibility/compliance/code-of-conduct. We will disclose any future amendments to, or waivers from, provisions of these ethics policies and standards affecting our Chief Executive Officer, Chief Financial Officer, Controller and executive officers on our website as promptly as practicable, as may be required under applicable SEC and NYSE rules. 
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR DIRECTORS 
Our Directors are required to comply with a Code of Business Conduct and Ethics for Members of the Board of Directors (the Director Code). It is intended to focus the Board and the Directors on areas of ethical risk, help them recognize and deal with ethical issues, provide mechanisms to report unethical conduct, and foster a culture of honesty and accountability. The Director Code covers all areas of professional conduct relating to service on our Board, including conflicts of interest, unfair or unethical use of corporate opportunities, strict protection of confidential information, compliance with applicable laws and regulations, and oversight of ethics and compliance by employees of the company. 
The Director Code is available on our website at https://investors.pfizer.com/Investors/Corporate-Governance/The-Pfizer-Board-Policies/default.aspx. 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
31 
 
 
Governance 
Other Governance Practices and Policies 
INSIDER TRADING POLICY 
Pfizer has an insider trading policy governing the purchase, sale, and other dispositions of our securities by our Directors, officers and employees, and repurchases by Pfizer, that we believe is reasonably designed to promote compliance with insider trading laws, rules and regulations, and any listing standards applicable to us. 
DERIVATIVES TRADING/HEDGING POLICY 
We have a policy that prohibits employees, including the NEOs, and Directors from purchasing or selling options on our common stock or engaging in short sales of our common stock. In addition, the policy prohibits trading in puts, calls, straddles, equity swaps or other derivative securities, including exchange funds, whose value is derived by reference to securities issued by Pfizer (sometimes referred to as “hedging”). 
RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS AND INDEMNIFICATION 
Related Person Transaction Approval Policy 
Pfizer has adopted a Related Person Transaction Approval Policy (the Policy) administered by the Governance Committee. The Policy applies to any transaction or series of transactions in which Pfizer or a subsidiary is a participant, the amount involved exceeds $120,000, and a related person under the Policy has a direct or indirect material interest. Under the Policy, management determines whether a transaction requires review by the Governance Committee. Transactions requiring review are referred to the Governance Committee for approval, ratification or other action. Based on its consideration of all of the relevant facts and circumstances, the Governance Committee decides whether or not to approve such transactions and approves only those transactions that are deemed to be in the best interests of the company. If the company becomes aware of an existing transaction with a related person that has not been approved under this Policy, the matter is referred to the Governance Committee. The Governance Committee evaluates all options available, including ratification, revision or termination of such transaction. The Governance Committee then provides a summary of such transactions, including their terms, structure and business purpose, as well as the Governance Committee’s approval decision, to the Audit Committee for their information. 
Transactions with Related Persons 
Certain of our NEOs and other executive officers have family members who are also employed by Pfizer in non-executive positions. Specifically, Dr. Bourla’s sister-in-law is employed as Colleague Experience Designer, People Experience and Mr. Douglas Lankler’s daughter is employed as AIDA Portfolio & Operations Senior Manager, Pfizer Digital. The total annual compensation of each of Dr. Bourla’s sister-in-law and Mr. Lankler’s daughter for fiscal 2025 (including any incentive compensation) did not, individually, exceed $250,000. Additionally, Dr. Bourla’s sister-in-law and Mr. Lankler’s daughter are employed on an “at will” basis and compensated on the same basis as Pfizer’s other employees of similar function, seniority and responsibility. 
The Governance Committee reviewed and approved or ratified both of these related party transactions in accordance with the Policy and provided a summary of such transactions, and its approval decision, to the Audit Committee. 
Indemnification 
We indemnify our Directors and our elected officers to the fullest extent permitted by law so that they will be free from undue concern about personal liability in connection with their service to 

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
e a third-party provider—a practice we periodically implement to further enhance our self-evaluation process. 
RESPONSIVENESS TO SHAREHOLDERS 
Shareholder engagement remained a priority in 2025. After strong executive compensation program support averaging 93.5% from 2015 through 2024, in 2025, our Say-on-Pay vote received 54.7% support, lower than historical levels. In response, we sought shareholder input on possible next steps, including improvements to our executive compensation program and disclosures. Compensation Committee Chair Jim Smith led discussions with several of Pfizer’s largest investors, underscoring our commitment to engaging with shareholders and the importance we place on hearing shareholder perspectives firsthand. Further details on the Board’s responses to our 2025 Say-on-Pay vote are provided in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis section of this Proxy Statement. 
On a different note, I want to recognize and express our deep gratitude to Dr. Susan Hockfield, who has elected to retire from the Board effective April 2026 and will not seek re-election. Dr. Hockfield has been an invaluable member of the Board, bringing her distinguished expertise and thoughtful leadership to our deliberations. Her dedicated service, especially her significant contributions to the Regulatory and Compliance Committee, as well as the Science and Technology Committee, has helped shape Pfizer’s strategic direction and uphold the highest standards of governance. On behalf of the entire Board, we extend our sincere appreciation for her commitment and years of exemplary service to Pfizer and its shareholders. 
 
 
iv 
Pfizer 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
 
A Message from Pfizer’s Lead Independent Director 
In closing, I am truly proud to serve on this Board, which benefits from a diverse and balanced mix of perspectives and expertise. I have full confidence in Pfizer’s leadership and that the strategic actions taken this year position the company for a successful tomorrow. 
On behalf of the Board, thank you for your continued support, interest, and investment in Pfizer. Your vote is important, so please take the time to read the Proxy Statement and cast your vote. 
 
 
Mr. Shantanu Narayen 
Lead Independent Director 
 
 
2026 Proxy Statement Pfizer 
v 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Notice of 2026 Annual Meeting 
and Proxy Statement 
 
 
 
Voting Your Shares. For information regarding how to vote your shares by telephone, by internet, by mail or at the virtual Annual Meeting, see “ Annual Meeting Information – Voting ” later in this Proxy Statement. 
 
 
 Items of Business 
1. To elect 12 members of the Board of Directors, each until our next Annual Meeting and until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified. 
2. To ratify the selection of KPMG LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm for 2026. 
3. To approve the Pfizer Inc. 2019 Stock Plan, as amended April 2026. 
4. To conduct an advisory vote to approve our executive compensation. 
5. To consider one shareholder proposal, if properly presented at the Annual Meeting. 
6. To transact any other business that properly comes before the Annual Meeting or any adjournment or postponement of the Meeting. 
Materials to Review 
This booklet contains our Notice of 2026 Annual Meeting and Proxy Statement. Our 2025 Annual Report on Form 10-K is included as Appendix A and is followed by certain Corporate and Shareholder Information. None of Appendix A or the Corporate and Shareholder Information on the back inside cover are a part of our proxy solicitation materials. 
This Notice of 2026 Annual Meeting and Proxy Statement and a proxy card or voting instruction form are being mailed or made available to shareholders starting on or about March 12, 2026. 
Margaret M. Madden 
Senior Vice President and Corporate Secretary, Chief Governance Counsel 
March 12, 2026 
 
 
 
MEETING TIME AND DATE 
 
 
9:00 a.m., Eastern Daylight Time (EDT), on Thursday, April 23, 2026 
 
 
 
VIRTUAL MEETING ONLY 
 
 
The 2026 Annual Meeting will be held in a virtual meeting format only. To access the virtual Annual Meeting, please visit 
https://meetnow.global/PFE2026. We designed the format of the virtual Annual Meeting to ensure that our shareholders who attend the virtual Annual Meeti

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
RELATED PERSON TRANSACTIONS AND INDEMNIFICATION 
Related Person Transaction Approval Policy 
Pfizer has adopted a Related Person Transaction Approval Policy (the Policy) administered by the Governance Committee. The Policy applies to any transaction or series of transactions in which Pfizer or a subsidiary is a participant, the amount involved exceeds $120,000, and a related person under the Policy has a direct or indirect material interest. Under the Policy, management determines whether a transaction requires review by the Governance Committee. Transactions requiring review are referred to the Governance Committee for approval, ratification or other action. Based on its consideration of all of the relevant facts and circumstances, the Governance Committee decides whether or not to approve such transactions and approves only those transactions that are deemed to be in the best interests of the company. If the company becomes aware of an existing transaction with a related person that has not been approved under this Policy, the matter is referred to the Governance Committee. The Governance Committee evaluates all options available, including ratification, revision or termination of such transaction. The Governance Committee then provides a summary of such transactions, including their terms, structure and business purpose, as well as the Governance Committee’s approval decision, to the
