STARBUCKS CORP (SBUX) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: STARBUCKS CORP
Ticker: SBUX
CIK: 829224
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-01-26

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Principles and Practices, are broad, substantive, and overlap considerably with duties of an independent chair, promoting strong management oversight and accountability. 
Moreover, other governance practices and structures complement our approach to board leadership, promoting effective oversight and accountability: 
• The board annually reviews its leadership structure. 
• Directors are elected annually by majority vote. 
• Shareholders have the right to call special meetings and nominate directors. 
• All key board committees are composed entirely of independent directors. 
• Since 2023, the board has added seven new independent directors, reflecting its commitment to evolving with the Company’s strategic needs. 
• Our lead independent director serves as the primary point of contact between the board and shareholders and is available, when appropriate, for consultations with shareholders. 
Finally, while the board has determined that a combined chair/ceo structure best promotes Company and shareholder interests under current circumstances, it retains the discretion to adopt a different structure if circumstances change. Indeed, in the six years preceding Mr. Niccol’s appointment, the board featured two different independent chairs. 
To govern effectively, the board must retain the flexibility to select the leadership structure best suited to the Company’s needs at any given time. Adopting the rigid policy proposed would impair the board’s ability to do so and is unnecessary given Starbucks’ strong governance practices and the substantive role of its lead independent director. 
(1) 2023 Disclosure Practices on Board Leadership and Structure (posted January 18, 2024), available at https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2024/01/18/2023 -disclosure-practices-on-board-leadership-and-structure / 
 
 
 
 
 
Board Recommendation 
The Board of directors recommends a vote AGAINST this proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROPOSALS 4 -9 : SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS 
Table of Contents 
PROPOSAL 6 
Shareholder proposal requesting a report on the Company’s apparent exclusion of detransitioning in its healthcare coverage 
The Free Enterprise Project of the National Center for Public Policy Research, with an address of 2005 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, D.C. 20036, owner of at least $2,000 of Starbucks common stock for at least three years, has notified us that it intends to present the following proposal at the Annual Meeting. In accordance with applicable proxy regulations, the proposal and supporting statement, for which Starbucks accepts no responsibility, are set forth below exactly as they were submitted by the proponent. 
RESOLVED: 
Shareholders request that the Board of Directors of Starbucks conduct an evaluation and issue a report within the next year, at reasonable cost and excluding confidential information, assessing financial risks associated with the company’s apparent exclusion of detransitioning in its healthcare coverage. 
SUPPORTING STATEMENT: 
Starbucks promotes the fact that it offers comprehensive gender -affirming care as a part of its employee benefits package. (1) Specifically, the company has “partnered with the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) to create a gender -affirming care medical policy that is inclusive of medical services that most companies have historically considered cosmetic.” (2) 
WPATH’s public Standards for Care (Version 8) focuses on aiding persons in transition (3) but declines to affirmatively state that coverage should extend to detransitioning. (4) Starbucks’ website also is apparently silent on detransition coverage. (5) 
It is worth noting that reliance on WPATH has itself become risky. For example, in April 2025, the White House noted that WPATH standards “were not drafted based on scientific evidence, but on political considerations.” (6) Critically, this opens institutions pushing those standards up to potentially significant damages. (7) All may explain why Texas recently passed a law “requiring health plans cover detransition.” (8) 
Detransitioning is likely at least as expensive as transitioning. For context, the NIH has estimated that the average cost for surgical intervention in gender -affirming care is $41,236 per person on average. (9) Additionally, hormone treatment costs per person vary based on the hormone prescribed; for example: a complete, 6.8 year dose of GnRH costs $17,838 per transitioner. (10) 
These numbers, while already expensive, do not include individual costs involved in reparative procedures, medicines, or health complications which may arise due to detransitioning. (11) It would arguably be an injustice to not include detransitioning procedures as part of “gender affirming care.” Unfortunately, promoting gender transitioning while ignoring detransitioning may be an embedded part of transgender ideology. (12) 
Beyond an appeal to base justice, the Supreme Court has clarified that employers cannot discriminate based on gender identity or expression when making employment decisions (including healthcare), without violating Title VII. (13) The Court has clarified earlier this year that Title VII protections extend to both majority and minority populations equally. (14) Refusal to provide detransition services could expose Starbucks to costly anti -discrimination lawsuits involving damages and sanctions from private plaintiffs and the government. (15) 
And lest anyone try to argue that potentially covered individuals represent too small a number to be material, recall that a single transgender influencer was apparently able to destroy “a whopping $27 billion in market value” at Anheuser -Busch InBev in 2023. (16) 
In light of the foregoing, shareholders should vote in favor of our Proposal. 
(1) https://www.starbucksbenefits.com/en -us /home/health -benefits /medical -dental-vision / 
(2) Id. 
(3) https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/26895269.2022.2100644 
(4) See generally, id. 
(5) Supra note 1. 
(6) https://www.whitehouse.gov/fact -sheets /2025/04/report -to-the-president-on-protecting-children-from-surgical-and-chemical-mutilation-executive-summary / 
(7) See generally, e.g., Campbell Miller Payne, PLLC (“seeking justice for the detransitioner community nationwide”), https://cmppllc.com/ 
(8) https://www.yahoo.com/news/abbott -signs-bill-requiring-health-155158778.html 
(9) https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9679590/ 
(10) Id. 
(11) https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9315415/ 
(12) See, generally, https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special -report /usa -transyouth-outcomes / (“detransitioning and regret have long been untouchable subjects”). 
(13) Bostock v. Clayton Count y, 590 U.S. 644, 666 -73 (2020). 
(14) Ames v. Ohio Dep’t of Youth Servs., 605 U.S. 303, 309 -10 (2025). 
(15) https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential -actions /2025/01/ending -illegal-discrimination-and-restoring-merit-based-opportunity / 
(16) https://nypost.com/2023/06/02/bud -light-parent-anheuser-buschs-stock-lost-27b-over-dylan-mulvaney / 
 
91 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROPOSALS 4 -9 : SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS 
Table of Contents 
 
BOARD RECOMMENDATION 
The Starbucks board of directors recommends that shareholders vote 
AGAINST this proposal for the following reasons: 
The board has concluded that conducting the evaluation and issuing the report requested by the proponent would not serve the best interests of the Company or its shareholders. 
Our continued success depends on our ability to attract and retain top talent. We believe our industry -leading total rewards program is essential to achieving this goal. Management, with appropriate board oversight, has designed and implemented a comprehensive suite of compensation and benefits that supports partners in both their personal and professional lives—enabling them to safeguard their physical, emotional, and financial wellbeing and bring their best selves to work. Our benefits offerings are expansive and reflect the unique and varied needs of our partner community. 
Using our internal teams and external advisors, we continuously assess and evolve our compensation and benefits programs to ensure they remain responsive to the needs of our partners. Such assessment requires a deep understanding of not only employee compensation and benefits, including the state -specific rules and regulations that govern them, but also our business operations, the markets in which we operate, and, critically, our partner base. 
In voting on this proposal, shareholders should note that the proponent is requesting Starbucks to take a set of very specific actions with respect to certain aspects of Starbucks benefits offerings, while another proposal in this proxy statement prescribes a different set of actions to address similar elements of our benefits offerings. This further illustrates the complexity and variety of considerations that underly business decisions around the design of our benefits program, which makes it crucial for our management team to have the discretion to make informed decisions taking into account stakeholder feedback and other factors as appropriate. 
For these reasons, the board believes that the requested evaluation and report would not yield meaningful additional insight or value for shareholders. 
 
 
 
 
 
Board Recommendation 
The Board of directors recommends a vote AGAINST this proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROPOSALS 4 -9 : SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS 
Table of Contents 
PROPOSAL 7 
Shareholder proposal requesting a report on median compensation and benefits gaps as they address reproductive and gender dysphoria care 
Bowyer Research, with an address of P.O. Box 120, McKeesport, PA 15135, on behalf of The Oklahoma Tobacco Settlement Endowment Trust (“TSET”), owner of at least $25,000 of Starbucks common stock for at least one year, has notified us that it intends to present the following proposal at the Annual Meeting. In accordance with applicable proxy regulations, the proposal and supporting statement, for which Starbucks accepts no responsibility, are set forth below exactly as they were submitted by the proponent. 
WHEREAS: 
Compensation and benefits inequities persist across employee gender categories and pose substantial risk to companies and the shareholders who own them. In 2022, shortly before the Supreme Court’s 2022 decision in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization that overturned Roe v. Wade, Starbucks announced (1) its intention to reimburse employee travel for abortion. Despite the personal nature of reproductive care, the Company’s behavior seems to indicate a belief that abortion, and other controversial medical decisions, ought to involve patients, physicians, and also the political opinions of Starbucks. As noted by the 1792 Exchange’s Corporate Bias Rating, (2) Starbucks has committed (3) itself to covering costs of “medically necessary transition -related care” for employees and their children. The Company has staked out a position on gender dysphoria and confusion that indicates that sufferers can “transition” to a different sex. Yet, an increasing body of scientific evidence shows harms resulting from such “transition” treatments. Do the Company’s employees victimized by such treatments receive healthcare benefits too? 
This is not merely a moral or social issue. It is an area of direct, significant risk for the company. Starbucks is one of the highest -valued restaurant brands in the world, with an estimated brand value (4) near $40 billion, a massive proportion of its over $100 billion valuation (5). The higher the brand value of a company, the more vulnerable it is to public scandal, scandal that is quickly emerging for companies that have taken non -fiduciary activist positions on issues such as abortion and gender -affirming care. Healthcare organizations like Kaiser Permanente are currently facing high -profile lawsuits (6) over coverage of transition treatments resulting in long -term harm (7) to patients, seeking damages worth millions of dollars. 
Given the rapidly -shifting legal landscape surrounding such treatments, evidenced by cases such as United States v. Skrmetti , this risk area is only increasing for companies like Starbucks. Shareholders are right to ask Starbucks to address the obvious contingent liability and brand damage caused by championing controversial, scientifically dubious, and risk -fraught procedures such as abortion and gender -affirming care, especially when the company is unclear as to its coverage of corresponding areas such as detransition care. 
Side -taking via healthcare policy is not in keeping with Starbucks’ fiduciary duty or its responsibility to mitigate significant areas of legal and reputational risk and avoid widespread damage to brand value. In its healthcare coverage, as with all aspects of its corporate policies, Starbucks must instead focus on its fiduciary duty to shareholders, a fiduciary duty likely to be violated by engaging in politically divisive rhetoric and/or actions, including through its decisions on healthcare coverage. 
RESOLVED: 
Shareholders request the board of Starbucks report on median compensation and benefits gaps across gender as they address reproductive and gender dysphoria care, including associated policy, reputational, competitive, operational and litigative risks, and risks related to recruiting and retaining diverse talent. The report should be prepared at reasonable cost, omitting proprietary information, litigation strategy and legal compliance information. 
(1) https://one.starbucks.com/tobeapartner/supporting -your-access-to-healthcare / 
(2) https://1792exchange.com/company/starbucks/ 
(3) https://www.hrc.org/resources/corporations/starbucks -corp. 
(4) https://www.nrn.com/restaurant -finance /mcdonald -s-passes-starbucks-as-the-world-s-most-valuable-restaurant-brand 
(5) https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/SBUX/key -statistics / 
(6) https://www.dhillonlaw.com/lawsuits/chloe -cole-v-kaiser-permanente / 
(7) https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/michelle -zacchigna-ontario-detransitioner-sues-doctors 
 
93 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROPOSALS 4 -9 : SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS 
Table of Contents 
 
BOARD RECOMMENDATION 
The Starbucks board of directors recommends that shareholders vote 
AGAINST this proposal for the following reasons: 
The board has concluded that preparing and issuing the report requested by the proponent would not serve the best interests of the Company or its shareholders. 
Our continued success depends on our ability to attract and retain top talent. We believe our industry -leading total rewards program is essential to achieving this goal. Management, with appropriate board oversight, has designed and implemented a comprehensive suite of compensation and benefits that supports partners in both their personal and professional lives—enabling them to safeguard their physical, emotional, and financial 

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
 
38 
 
 
 
PROPOSAL 3 – RATIFICATION OF SELECTION OF DELOITTE & TOUCHE LLP AS OUR INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM 
 
84 
 
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm Fees 
 
84 
 
Policy on Audit Committee Pre-Approval of Audit and Permissible Non-Audit Services of the Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
 
85 
 
Audit Committee Report 
 
85 
 
 
 
Proposals 4-9 – SHAREHOLDER PROPOSALS 
 
86 
 
Proposal 4 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting Supermajority Shareholder Voting Requirements be Replaced with Majority Voting Requirements 
 
86 
 
Proposal 5 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting Adoption of an Independent Board Chair Policy 
 
89 
 
Proposal 6 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting a Report on the Company’s Apparent Exclusion of Detransitioning in its Healthcare Coverage 
 
91 
 
Proposal 7 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting a Report on Median Compensation and Benefits Gaps as they Address Reproductive and Gender Dysphoria Care 
 
93 
 
Proposal 8 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting a Report on the Company’s Use of Diagnostic Tools Created by Politicized Corporate Partners 
 
95 
 
Proposal 9 – Shareholder Proposal Requesting a Report on the Risks of the Company Excluding Religious Charities from its Employee-Gift Match Program 
 
97 
 
 
 
STOCK OWNERSHIP 
 
99 
 
Equity Compensation Plan Information 
 
99 
 
Beneficial Ownership of Common Stock 
 
100 
 
Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports 
 
101 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
 
102 
 
Expenses of Solicitation 
 
102 
 
Internet Voting 
 
102 
 
Internet Availability of Annual Meeting Materials 
 
102 
 
Proposals of Shareholders 
 
102 
 
Shareholder Director Nominations for Inclusion in Starbucks Proxy Materials (Proxy Access) 
 
103 
 
Shareholders Sharing the Same Address 
 
103 
 
Annual Report to Shareholders on Form 10-K 
 
103 
 
Other Business 
 
103 
 
 
 
INFORMATION ABOUT VOTING 
 
104 
 
Attendance, Asking Questions, and Voting at the Annual Meeting 
 
104 
 
Voting Information 
 
105 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A – NON-GAAP MEASURES 
 
A-1 
 
iv 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Table of Contents 
Dear fellow shareholders, 
In October 2024, we set a clear goal to turn the business around by getting Back to Starbucks. To build on the strengths of this iconic brand and focus on what sets us apart. High quality coffee, hand crafted by skilled green apron partners and served in warm and welcoming community spaces, with a moment of human connection. 
At the center of that commitment was one idea — to be the world’s leading customer service company. To do that, we’re putting the customer back at the center of every decision. And we know that great customer service starts with a great partner experience. That’s why we’re investing in our partners to ensure Starbucks remains a great place to work. When our partners succeed and our coffeehouses thrive, customers see and feel the difference. 
Through fiscal year 2025, we stuck to a clear plan, did the work, and we made a lot of progress. Some of that progress has been visible, while other parts helped fix the foundations of our business so we can better innovate and grow in fiscal year 2026. 
We cut complexity, strengthened our foundation, accelerated efforts where we saw opportunity, and brought real improvements to life for our customers and partners. 
We made it easier to run our coffeehouses. We launched new tools like Green Dot Assist and Smart Queue, improved speed and consistency, and brought Green Apron Service to life in every North American coffeehouse to create more moments of connection and to deliver an exceptional customer experience. 
We invested deeply in our partners. Bigger rosters. Better training. Smarter staffing and scheduling. Enhanced benefits and stronger opportunities for career growth. 
We revamped our marketing — leaning into our brand, stepping back from promotions and discounts, and reclaiming our place in culture. We innovated in menu, with new flavors and health forward offerings like protein. We started uplifting our coffeehouses to bring back warmth, comfort, and great seats. And we continued to grow digital engagement, with Starbucks Rewards reaching record membership. 
 
1 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
Table of Contents 
And we made tough decisions. We reset our North American coffeehouse portfolio. We significantly streamlined our support organization, adding clearer decision making and accountability. We prioritized our work and investments to maximize the impact closest to our coffeehouses. And strong execution and deep partnership with our licensees helped many key international markets return to good growth. 
As a result, revenue grew year -over-year. And in the fourth quarter, we delivered positive global comparable sales for the first time in seven quarters. Brand affinity accelerated and customer engagement scores grew. Partner engagement improved and hourly partner turnover reached record lows. This momentum shows we’re making real progress and that our turnaround is taking hold. And it gives me confidence in our future. Confidence in our strategy, in our partners, and in what we can deliver together. 
Looking ahead to fiscal year 2026 and beyond, our ambition is clear. When we operate at our best, our coffeehouses feel like the community’s third place. Our cafés, mobile order, and drive thru channels deliver with speed, quality, and connection. Our menu and marketing lead culture. Our digital experiences create real fandom. And every partner sees a pathway to grow a long and meaningful career. 
Starbucks at its best is about great coffee and the moments of connection we create through every cup we serve. Something the world needs now more than ever. 
Thank you for your trust and support. Together, we are building the best Starbucks yet. A company that offers its best to every customer. A company that offers unmatched opportunity to our partners. A company that creates real impact in every community we serve. A company that grows responsibly. And a company that delivers strong, long -term returns for our shareholders. 
On we go, 
Brian Niccol 
chairman and chief executive officer 
Starbucks Coffee Company 
 
2 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
TO OUR SHAREHOLDERS 
Table of Contents 
FISCAL YEAR 2025 BUSINESS HIGHLIGHTS 
In this proxy statement, Starbucks Corporation (together with its subsidiaries) is referred to as “Starbucks Coffee Company,” “Starbucks,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our.” Also, at Starbucks and in this proxy statement, we refer to our employees as “partners” and we refer to our consumer -facing retail locations as “coffeehouses” or “stores”. When we refer to the Company’s fiscal year, we mean the annual period ending on the Sunday closest to September 30 of the stated year. Information in this proxy statement for 2025 generally refers to our 2025 fiscal year, which was from September 30, 2024, through September 28, 2025 (“fiscal year 2025”). 
Since 1971, Starbucks Coffee Company has been committed to responsibly sourcing and roasting high -quality arabica coffee. Today, with a global footprint of more than 40,000 company -operated and licensed coffeehouses and a growing presence in consumer -packaged goods, we are the world’s premier purveyor of specialty coffee. Through our unwavering commitment to excellence and our guiding principles, we bring the unique Starbucks Experience to life for every customer through every cup. 
Our financial results in fiscal year 2025 showed progress on our “Back to Starbucks” strategy as we work to rebuild a stronger Starbucks. While consolidated net revenues increased over the preceding year, operating margin contracted and earnings per share (“EPS”) declined. These results were driven primarily by restructuring costs associated with the closure of coffeehouses and simplification of our support organization, deleverage, investments in support of “Back to Starbucks,” and inflation. We expect that the macroeconomic challenges we have been experiencing, including impacts from new tariffs and dynamic coffee prices, will continue. However, we are encouraged by the results we have seen from our “Back to Starbucks” strategy, including our return to positive global comparable store sales in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2025 for the first time in seven quarters. We believe we are taking the right actions for the present and the future, specifically by investing in coffeehouse partners, uplifting the coffeehouse experience through disciplined capital deployment, introducing new food and beverage platforms, reimagining the Starbucks rewards program, and enhancing support for our licensee partners. 
 
3 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
Business highlights (1) 
 
 
 
Financial 
Update 
 
 
Partner and Coffeehouse 
Improvements 
 
 
Company 
Portfolio 
 
 
 
• Consolidated net revenues increased 3% primarily driven by incremental revenues from net new company-operated stores over the past 12 months, an increase in revenue in the Global Coffee Alliance, and incremental revenue from the acquisition of 23.5 Degrees Topco Limited, a U.K. licensed business partner, partially offset by a decrease in comparable store sales and a decline in our licensed store business. 
• Global comparable store sales declined 1%, driven by a 2% decline in comparable transactions, partially offset by a 1% increase in average ticket. 
• Consolidated operating margin under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) contracted to 7.9%, primarily driven by restructuring costs associated with the closure of coffeehouses and simplification of our support organization, deleverage, investments in support of our “Back to Starbucks” strategy, which were largely in labor hours, and inflation, while non-GAAP consolidated operating margin (in constant currency) contracted to 9.9%. (2) 
• GAAP EPS and non-GAAP EPS (in constant currency) declined 51% and 35%, respectively, over prior year. (2) 
 
 
• We focused on ensuring we remain the best job in retail with competitive pay and industry-leading benefits worth together on average $30 per hour for U.S.-based coffeehouse partners. This year, we saw more than 2,000 partners graduate from Arizona State University (bringing our total graduates to 18,000) with tuition paid fully by Starbucks, we increased hours per partner, and we continued record-low, industry-leading turnover. 
• In the third quarter of fiscal year 2025, we hosted over 14,000 coffeehouse leaders from across North America at our largest ever Leadership Experience, a three-day conference where we announced the expansion of the Assistant Store Manager Role across North America company-operated stores. 
• We continued the rollout of our Green Apron Service model across the U.S. company-operated portfolio and continued to invest in staffing in our coffeehouses, with 85% of our partners achieving their preferred hours. 
• We increased paid parental leave to up to 18 weeks for all benefits eligible U.S.-based coffeehouse partners. 
 
 
• Our global store count reached more than 40,000 stores, and we opened our first coffeehouse in Iceland, marking our 89th market globally. 
• Since the end of fiscal year 2025, we entered an agreement to form a joint venture with Boyu Capital, under which Boyu Capital will hold up to a 60% interest in Starbucks retail operations in China, and Starbucks will retain a 40% interest and continue to own and license the Starbucks brand and intellectual property to the new entity. 
• Channel Development continued to amplify our brand with Starbucks remaining a market leader in both the total U.S. At-Home Coffee and Ready-To-Drink categories. 
• We opened our first Spain flagship store inside Real Madrid’s Santiago Bernabéu Stadium. 
(1) Year-over-year growth is based on a 52-week basis. 
(2) Appendix A includes a reconciliation of non-GAAP consolidated operating margin and non-GAAP EPS to the most directly comparable measure reported under GAAP as well as information regarding how these measures are calculated. 
 
4 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
COMPANY OVERVIEW 
Table of Contents 
Shareholder returns 
Starbucks returned $2.8 billion of capital to shareholders in fiscal year 2025 through dividends. We remain committed to our dividend approach, long -term growth, and shareholder returns. We recently recognized our 15th consecutive annual dividend increase, with a compound annual growth rate of approximately 17.5%. 
 
Key Financial and Operational Results 
 
Consolidated Net 
Revenues 
$37.2B 
+3% year-over-year 
 
Consolidated
Operating Margin 
-710 bps year-over-year 
7.9% 
Consolidated Non -GAAP Operating Margin 
-500 bps year-over-year on a constant currency basis 
9.9% * 
 
EPS 
-51 % year-over-year 
$1.63 * 
Non -GAAP EPS 
-35 % 
year-over-year on a constant currency basis 
$2.13 * 
 
Global 
Store Count 
40,990 
+2% 
year-over-year 
 
* Appendix A includes a reconciliation of non-GAAP consolidated operating margin and non-GAAP EPS to the most directly comparable measure reported under GAAP, as well as information regarding how these measures are calculated. Year-over-year growth is based on a 52-week basis. 
 
U.S. Starbucks Rewards Members 
(90-day active) 
 
34.2M 
 
+1% 
year-over-year 
PATH FORWARD: “BACK TO STARBUCKS” 
We are focused on bringing customers back to our coffeehouses and returning to growth. Our “Back to Starbucks” strategy includes supporting our green apron partners, enhancing the customer experience, being the community coffeehouse, positioning our brand to lead in culture, and sharing our coffee story. This strategic reset provides us with the opportunity to assess the business and refocus our efforts, including capital allocation priorities, efficiency efforts, and store growth initiatives. We remain confident in the strength of our brand and believe the new action plans will position the Company for sustainable long -term growth. 
 
 
 
 
 
Offer the best job in retail 
We are the premier customer service company and the unrivaled best employer in retail 
 
Be the world’s greatest customer service company 
We deliver an exceptional green apron experience with world-class coffee, innovative beverage and food platforms, and relevant digital experiences 
 
Be the community coffeehouse 
We build coffeehouses that deliver the access and experiences that customers want 
 
Be visible, relevant, growing, and loved everywhere 
We are visible, relevant, and valued. We own the coffeehouse experience and inspire the human spirit 
 
5 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
COMPANY OVERVIEW 
Table of Contents 
 
6 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
Table of Contents 
BOARD HIGHLIGHTS 
Starbucks director nominees 
The following tables provide summary information about our director nominees. All director nominees are independent except for Brian Niccol, our chairman and chief executive officer. Our board unanimously recommends that you vote “FOR” each of our 11 director nominees. Additional information regarding our director nominees, including experience, qualifications, skills, and other attributes, begins on page 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committee Memberships 
 
 
 
Name 
 
 
Principal Occupation 
 
 
Age 
 
 
Director 
Since 
 
 
Audit and 
Compliance 
Committee 
 
 
Compensation 
and 
Management 
Development 
Committee 
 
 
Nominating and 
Corporate 
Governance 
Committee 
 
 
 
Ritch Allison 
 
 
Former Chief Executive Officer and Director, Domino’s Pizza, Inc. 
 
 
58 
 
 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Andy Campion 
 
 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Unrivaled Sports and former Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer, Nike, Inc. 
 
 
54 
 
 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beth Ford 
 
 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Land O’Lakes, Inc. 
 
 
61 
 
 
2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jørgen Vig
Knudstorp* 
 
 
Deputy Chair, LEGO Foundation (LEGO Group Owner entity), board member Nike Inc. Former Chief Executive Officer, LEGO Group and Executive Chair, the LEGO Brand Group 
 
 
57 
 
 
2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Marissa Mayer 
 
 
Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer, Dazzle AI Inc., Former Chief Executive Officer, Yahoo! Inc. 
 
 
50 
 
 
2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Neal Mohan 
 
 
Chief Executive Officer, YouTube 
 
 
52 
 
 
2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dambisa Moyo 
 
 
Co-Principal, Versaca Investments 
 
 
57 
 
 
2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Brian Niccol 
 
 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Starbucks Corporation 
 
 
52 
 
 
2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daniel Servitje 
 
 
Executive Chair, Grupo Bimbo SAB de CV 
 
 
66 
 
 
2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mike Sievert 
 
 
Vice Chairman and Former Chief Executive Officer, T-Mobile US, Inc. 
 
 
56 
 
 
2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wei Zhang 
 
 
Former Senior Advisor and President, Alibaba Pictures Group 
 
 
55 
 
 
2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member 
 
 
Committee Chair 
 
 
Audit Committee Financial Expert 
* Jørgen Vig Knudstorp was appointed lead independent director of the board, effective upon the completion of the 2025 Annual Meeting. 
 
7 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROXY SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Experience/Qualifications/Skills/Attributes 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROXY SUMMARY 
Table of Contents 
SHAREHOLDER ENGAGEMENT 
Starbucks believes that strong corporate governance involves year -round engagement with our shareholders. We have a long -standing , robust shareholder outreach program that solicits feedback on our corporate governance, executive compensation program, disclosure practices, and responsible business policies and practices. Members of management and our board participate in shareholder engagement and receive shareholder feedback on an ongoing basis throughout the year. We also review our corporate governance practices against evolving industry trends and stakeholder expectations, including guidelines published by shareholders and proxy advisory firms. 
Annually, our shareholder outreach effort is generally conducted by a cross -functional team that draws from our investor relations, law and corporate affairs, coffee, and compensation teams, and other business teams, as relevant. Additionally, our ceo and cfo engage in meaningful dialogue with our shareholders through our quarterly earnings calls and investor -related outreach events. Please see page 29 for additional details regarding our shareholder engagement. 
 
9 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
PROXY SUMMARY 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
WHAT AM I 
VOTING ON? 
The election of 11 
director nominees. 
 
 
 
 
BOARD RECOMMENDATION 
The Starbucks board of directors recommends that shareholders vote FOR the election of each of the following individuals nominated by the board: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Ritch Allison 
• Andy Campion 
• Beth Ford 
• Jørgen Vig Knudstorp 
• Marissa Mayer 
• Neal Mohan 
 
 
• Dambisa Moyo 
• Brian Niccol 
• Daniel Servitje 
• Mike Sievert 
• Wei Zhang 
 
 
 
 
 
Our board currently has 11 members, all of whom were elected at the 2025 Annual Meeting, except Marissa Mayer and Dr. Dambisa Moyo, who were appointed to the board effective June 25, 2025. All 11 current directors are nominated and will stand for reelection at the Annual Meeting, to serve until the 2027 annual meeting of shareholders and until their respective successors have been elected and qualified, subject to their earlier death, resignation, or removal from the board. 
 
 
 
10 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
Table of Contents 
STARBUCKS BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
We believe that our directors should have a wide range of qualifications, including demonstrated integrity, a record of personal accomplishments, a commitment to participation in board activities, and other attributes discussed below under the header “ Our Director Nomination Process ” on page 31. We also endeavor to have a board that represents a range of qualifications, skills, and depth of experience in areas that are relevant to and contribute to the board’s oversight of the Com

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
onsumer, and their strong consumer orientation. 
FISCAL YEAR 2026 ANNUAL AND LONG-TERM INCENTIVE PROGRAM DESIGN CHANGES 
In determining our compensation practices for fiscal year 2026, the Compensation Committee was mindful of the feedback provided by shareholders and the results of our most recent advisory vote on executive compensation. 
Our annual bonus plan design remains the same for fiscal year 2026, except we have shifted from shared individual performance factor goals to function -specific objectives that contribute to the “Back to Starbucks” strategy as illustrated in the chart below. 
We continued to refine our annual PRSU program design. For our fiscal year 2026 PRSU program, our three -year average global, company operated, comparable store sales metric will have a 60% weighting versus a 50% weighting, and the three -year average adjusted EPS metric was reduced to a 40% weighting. The Compensation Committee believes these changes align with our “Back to Starbucks” strategy and our increased focus on long -term sales growth. The chart below illustrates this change. 
 
61 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION PROGRAM 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION GOVERNANCE POLICIES AND PRACTICES 
Executive stock ownership guidelines 
 
Our long -standing stock ownership guidelines encourage executive officers to have a long -term equity stake in Starbucks, align their interests with those of our shareholders, and mitigate potential compensation -related risk. The guidelines provide that executive officers must hold a multiple of their annual base salary in Starbucks stock as shown below: 
 
 
 
An executive officer generally has five years to achieve the minimum ownership requirement. However, an executive officer who is not on track to meet the applicable requirement by the end of the third year after becoming subject to the guidelines will be required to hold 50% of the net shares received upon the exercise of stock options and the vesting of RSUs and PRSUs. This holding requirement increases to 100% if the executive has not met the minimum ownership guideline by year five. 
In addition to shares held outright, unvested RSUs that are subject only to a time -vesting condition count towards the ownership threshold. As of the date of this proxy statement, all of our NEOs, who are current executive officers, exceeded their applicable ownership requirement. 
 
62 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION PROGRAM 
Table of Contents 
Risk assessment 
We believe that the design and objectives of our executive compensation program provide an appropriate balance of incentives for executives and avoid inappropriate risks. Specifically, our executive compensation program includes, among other things, the following design features: 
• Balanced mix of fixed versus variable compensation and cash -based versus equity -based compensation; 
• Variable compensation based on a variety of performance goals, including Company and, where appropriate, individual performance goals; 
• Balanced mix of short -term and long -term incentives; 
• Stock ownership and holding requirements; 
• Anti -hedging and pledging policies that apply to all partners; 
• Payout caps on incentive plans; 
• Recoupment policy; and 
• Compensation Committee oversight of incentive and commission arrangements below the executive level. 
For fiscal year 2025, Pay Governance performed an annual risk assessment of our compensation objectives, philosophy, and forms of compensation and benefits for all partners, including executives. Based upon this review, management and the Compensation Committee concluded that our compensation practices and policies do not create risks that are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company, and Pay Governance supported this conclusion. A report summarizing the results of this assessment was reviewed and discussed with the Compensation Committee at its June 2025 meeting. 
Recoupment of incentive compensation beyond Dodd-Frank 
We maintain a Recovery of Incentive Compensation Policy, which applies to all executive vice presidents and above, which provides for the recovery of erroneously awarded incentive -based compensation received by current or former executive officers as required by SEC and Nasdaq rules. Our Recovery of Incentive Compensation Policy also allows our Compensation Committee to recover all forms of cash and equity incentive compensation, whether time -based or p

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
Related Person Transactions, Mr. Niccol and Starbucks have entered into such an aircraft time -sharing agreement. 
The Company’s Corporate Aircraft Use Policy allows for personal guests of executive officers and board members to travel on business -related flights on our corporate aircraft under certain limited circumstances. The policy also allows for certain executive personal travel done in connection with a flight that is otherwise for a business purpose. Both types of use result in imputed income to the executive or director under Internal Revenue Service regulations, and the Company does not cover, reimburse, or otherwise “gross -up ” any income tax due from any applicable executive officer or board member on such imputed income. There is typically no more than a minimal incremental cost to the Company for personal guests’ travel, but, if any aggregate incremental cost is incurred by the Company due to personal travel, the entirety of the aggregate incremental cost is reported in the “All Other Compensation” column of the Summary Compensation Table (for example, incremental catering expenses). 
Executive Physicals and Life and Disability Insurance. We offer to pay for annual physical examinations for all partners at the senior vice president level and above. These examinations provide a benefit to both the Company and the executive at a relatively small cost to the Company. We also provide life and disability insurance to all partners at the vice president level and above at a higher level than is provided to partners generally. The amounts paid in respect of these benefits to our NEOs in fiscal year 2025 are detailed in the Fiscal Year 2025 All Other Compensation Table. 
Relocation, Office, and Expatriate Benefits. We provide relocation assistance (including tax reimbursement) to some individual contributor partners and all partners at the manager -level and above, which in fiscal year 2025 included Mr. Niccol. Mr. Niccol was provided temporary housing in Seattle until he found a permanent secondary housing arrangement pursuant to the terms of his offer letter. Mr. Niccol’s offer letter also provided for the establishment of a remote office in his city of primary residence. In fiscal year 2025, we opened a new satellite office in the greater Los Angeles area that is available to Starbucks partners working in the area, including Mr. Niccol. Under limited circumstances, we provide certain reimbursements and benefits (including tax reimbursement and expatriate income tax equalization) to partners that expatriate to another country for work on the Company’s behalf. 
Deferred Compensation. Executives, as well as partners at the director level and above in the U.S., are eligible to defer cash compensation under the Management Deferred Compensation Plan (“MDCP”). The MDCP is primarily intended to provide eligible partners a before -tax means of saving over and above that available under the 401(k) plan and is a benefit offered by many of our peer companies. We do not pay or guarantee above -market returns. The appreciation, if any, in the account balances of plan participants is due solely to participant contributions and the underlying performance of the selected measurement investment funds. The measurement investment fund alternatives available to MDCP participants are identical to the investment funds available to 401(k) plan participants. The Company does not make matching contributions under the MDCP. 
Other Benefits. We offer a comprehensive benefits package to all eligible full -and part -time partners in the U.S. and locally competitive benefits packages in other countries. In addition to our equity incentive plan discussed above, we offer an employee stock purchase plan to partners in the U.S. and Canada that allows participants to purchase Starbucks stock at a 5% discount to the fair market value at the end of each offering period under the plan. We provide matching 401(k) plan contributions, insurance coverage, paid sick time, vacation, holiday, and parental leave, among other benefits. Certain benefit programs that are available to all partners may include tax reimbursement. Executives are eligible to participate in all benefit plans we offer to partners generally. We believe these benefits help motivate all our partners. 
 
65 
 
STARBUCKS 2026 PROXY 
 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION PROGRAM 
Table of Contents 
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION AGREEMENTS AND ARRANGEMENTS 
cfo Offer Letter 
Ms. Smith was appointed as our cfo in March 2025. In connection with her appointment as cfo, we entered into an offer letter with Ms. Smith, which documents, among other things, her compensation and employment terms. The rationale for each of the elements of Ms. Smith’s compensation and how each element aligns with our compensation philosophy is summarized in the table below. Among other considerations, the Compensation Committee considered Ms. Smith’s skills and experience, her role and responsibilities, market data, her prior compensation (including cash and equity compensation that Ms. Smith would forfeit upon her departure from Nordstrom in both the near- and long -term , which was estimated at approximately $15 million), and the desire and need to attract Ms. Smith to join Starbucks. 
 
Compensation 
Element 
 
 
Description 
 
 
Rationale 
 
Base Salary 
 
 
$925,000, prorated for fiscal year 2025 
 
 
Provides a predictable level of income 
 
Annual Incentive Bonus Target 
 
 
125% of base salary (target); 250% of base salary (maximum), prorated for fiscal year 2025 
 
 
Ties additional upside earning opportunity to Company and shared individual performance factor goals and results 
 
Annual Equity Incentives 
 
 
Annual equity award with a target value of $4,500,000 for fiscal year 2025, calculated using the closing stock price on the date of grant 
 
 
The annual equity award was made to align Ms. Smith with Starbucks fiscal year 2025 long-term annual incentive program and to replace approximately $3.6 million of long-term cash incentive opportunity and long-term equity awards that would have vested beyond the next 12 months, which she forfeited when she left her prior employer 
 
Replacement Equity Grants 
 
 
Replacement equity grants with a target value of $6,400,000 on the date of grant, calculated using the closing stock price on the date of grant 
• 60% in PRSUs, which vest based on performance, and 
• 40% in time-based RSUs, which vest annually over three years 
To provide alignme
