TARGET CORP (TGT) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: TARGET CORP
Ticker: TGT
CIK: 27419
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-04-27

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
Corporate Governance Guidelines, no former 
CEO is to serve on the Board for an extended time, with such timeframe to be determined by the Board based on individual 
circumstances. The Board has not adopted any new policies about its leadership structure. 
 
 
 
Responsibilities: 
Appointment: 
 
• Meeting agendas. Prepares agendas for Board meetings for review and 
approval by the Chair and the Lead Independent Director. 
• Board updates. Provides updates on our performance and key business 
developments. Keeps the Board informed between meetings with interim 
communications. 
• Board recruitment. Consults with the Chair of the Governance & 
Sustainability Committee on new Board member recruiting. 
• Company strategy and operations. Develops our company’s strategic 
vision for the Board’s review and leads strategy execution. Manages 
business operations. Anticipates and mitigates risk. 
• Team management. Manages our Leadership Team and assesses their 
performance. Recommends Leadership Team compensation for approval 
by the Compensation & Human Capital Committee. Responsible for 
management’s professional development and succession planning. 
• Principal company spokesperson. Serves as the voice of our company 
in all team communications. Represents our company in shareholder 
interactions, during analyst presentations, and with key stakeholders and 
external audiences. 
Appointed by and 
reports to the Board and 
may be removed at any 
time by the Board. 
 
Michael J. 
Fiddelke 
 
Chief Executive 
Officer 
(Since February 1, 
2026) 
 
 
 
Responsibilities: 
Annual election: 
 
• Chair meetings. Presides at meetings of the Board as well as the annual 
meeting of shareholders. Organizes the work of the Board. 
• Meeting preparation. Reviews, discusses, and approves meeting 
schedules and agendas, subject to review by the Lead Independent 
Director. 
• Board and management communications. Fosters open dialogue. 
Advises CEO on communications and updates to the Board between 
meetings. 
• Advice and counsel. At the request of the CEO, advises on strategy 
development, operations and risks, and succession planning. Consults 
with the Governance & Sustainability Committee, the Lead Independent 
Director, and the CEO on director recruitment. 
• Evaluation participation. Provides input for CEO evaluation and, as 
requested by the Lead Independent Director, participates in such 
evaluation. 
Elected annually by the 
independent directors. 
Service length: 
Under our Corporate 
Governance Guidelines, 
a former CEO should not 
serve on the Board for 
an extended time. 
 
Brian C. 
Cornell 
 
Executive Chair of the 
Board 
(Since February 1, 
2026) 
To further supplement this structure and provide independent oversight of our company, our Bylaws and Corporate Governance 
Guidelines require that the Board appoint a Lead Independent Director if the Chair of the Board is not independent, as is currently 
the case. The Lead Independent Director position complements the Chair of the Board’s role, providing leadership for the 
independent directors and ensuring the independent directors have the necessary information and opportunities to fulfill their 
oversight responsibilities. 
The independent directors re-elected Ms. Leahy, who has served as Lead Independent Director since January 2025, to continue in 
this role. As with other board leadership positions, the Lead Independent Director role is rotated on a regular basis. The Lead 
 
 
10 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
Table of Contents 
General information about corporate governance and the Board 
Independent Director’s defined roles and responsibilities, as detailed below, coupled with leadership of each Board Committee by 
an independent director, ensures the independent directors have the ability to devote Board attention to any matter they deem 
appropriate at any time without interference from management, including the Chair of the Board and the CEO. 
 
 
 
Robust responsibilities: 
Annual election: 
 
• Convene meetings. Has the authority to convene meetings of the Board 
or independent directors at any time. 
• Preside at certain meetings. Presides at all meetings of the Board at 
which the Chair of the Board is not present, including executive sessions 
of independent directors at each regular meeting. 
• CEO performance review. Oversees the annual performance review of 
the CEO, with input from the other independent directors and, upon 
request of the Lead Independent Director, the Chair of the Board. 
• Director liaison. Represents the perspectives of the independent 
directors and provides feedback to the Chair of the Board and CEO. 
• Meeting schedules, agendas, and information. Reviews and approves 
meeting schedules, agendas, and information furnished to the Board to 
ensure that the Board has adequate time and information for discussion. 
• Shareholder engagement. Engages in consultation and direct 
communication with major shareholders, as appropriate. 
• Independent director expectations. Coordinates with the CEO to 
establish expectations for independent directors to consistently monitor 
Target’s operations and those of our competitors. 
• Composition and director succession planning. Consults with the 
Chair of the Board and the Governance & Sustainability Committee 
regarding Board and Committee composition, Committee Chair 
selection, the annual performance review of the Board and its 
Committees, and director succession planning. 
Elected annually by the 
independent directors. 
Service length: 
As a guideline, the Lead 
Independent Director 
should serve in that 
capacity for no more 
than four to six years. 
 
Christine A. 
Leahy 
 
Lead Independent 
Director 
(Since 2025) 
Our Corporate Governance Guidelines require that both the Chair of the Board and Lead Independent Director be elected annually 
by the independent directors. The Board reevaluates its leadership structure at least annually as part of the Board evaluation 
process described under “Board and Committee evaluations” on page 20. The Board is committed to continuing to seek 
shareholder feedback on its approach as part of its ongoing shareholder outreach efforts and will continue to reassess its Board 
leadership structure on a regular basis. 
 
 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
11 
Table of Contents 
General information about corporate governance and the Board 
Board and shareholder meeting attendance 
The Board met seven times during Fiscal 2025. All directors attended at least 94% of the aggregate total of meetings of the Board 
and Committees on which the director served during the last fiscal year. 
All twelve members of the Board at the time of our 2025 Annual Meeting were in attendance. The Board has a policy requiring all 
directors to attend all annual meetings of shareholders, absent extraordinary circumstances. 
Committees 
Membership 
 
 
Name 
Audit & Risk 
Compensation & 
Human Capital 
Management 
Governance & 
Sustainability 
Infrastructure & 
Finance 
 
David P. Abney (1) 
l 
l 
 
Douglas M. Baker, Jr. 
l 
l 
 
George S. Barrett 
l 
C 
 
Gail K. Boudreaux 
l 
l 
 
Stephen B. Bratspies 
l 
l 
 
Robert L. Edwards 
l 
l 
 
John R. Hoke III 
l 
l 
 
Donald R. Knauss 
l 
C 
 
Christine A. Leahy 
l 
l 
 
Monica C. Lozano 
C 
l 
 
Grace Puma 
l 
l 
 
Derica W. Rice 
l 
l 
 
Dmitri L. Stockton 
C 
l 
 
Meetings held in Fiscal 2025 
8 
5 
5 
5 
C = Chair l = Member 
(1) Mr. Abney was chosen to succeed Mr. Knauss as Chair of the Infrastructure & Finance Committee, effective June 2026. Mr. 
Knauss will continue serving as a member of the Infrastructure & Finance Committee until the end of his current term at the 
2026 Annual Meeting. 
Determining composition and leadership 
The Governance & Sustainability Committee is responsible for reviewing and recommending Committee membership. The Board 
rotates Committee assignments periodically. The following considerations provide the framework for determining Committee 
composition and leadership: 
• the guideline for rotating Committee Chair assignments is four to six years of service; 
• the Board seeks to have each independent director serve on two Committees; 
• the Board considers a number of factors in deciding Committee composition, including individual director experience and 
qualifications, prior Committee experience, and increased time commitments for directors serving as a Committee Chair or Lead 
Independent Director; and 
• the Corporate Governance Guidelines provide that if we have designated a Lead Independent Director that person also serves 
as a member of the Governance & Sustainability Committee. 
 
 
12 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
Table of Contents 
General information about corporate governance and the Board 
Information about our Committees 
All members of each Committee are independent directors. Each Committee operates under a written charter, a current copy of 
which is available on Target’s website, as described in Question 16 “How may I access or receive the proxy materials, other 
periodic filings, key corporate governance documents, and other information?” on page 97. In fulfilling the oversight and other 
responsibilities delegated by the Board, each Committee: 
• provides the Board with regular reports of its activities; 
• has the sole authority to retain or terminate its consultants 
and other advisors; 
• receives appropriate funding to pay for necessary resources 
and administrative expenses; and 
• annually evaluates its performance. 
 
 
Audit & Risk Committee 
Oversight and other responsibilities 
 
• Accounting and financial reporting. Accounting and financial reporting process, including the 
integrity of our financial statements and internal controls. 
• Independent auditor. Independent auditor engagement, qualifications, and independence. 
• Internal audit. Internal audit’s function, results, and assessment of our risk management 
processes. 
• Tax matters. Positions with respect to income and other tax obligations. 
• Committee report. “Report of the Audit & Risk Committee” on page 74 , describing the Audit & 
Risk Committee’s duties and activities. 
• Policy oversight. Policies and procedures related to oversight areas (including auditor 
independence matters, accounting and auditing complaints, and related party transactions). 
• Compliance and ethics. Compliance and ethics programs, monitoring, investigations, and 
remediation efforts, including reports of potential misconduct. 
• Enterprise risk management. Enterprise risk management programs, principal business and 
operational risks (including vendor risk management, cybersecurity and information security, 
data privacy, product and food safety, and business continuity and disaster recovery), and 
coordination of risk oversight with the Board and other Committees. 
• Supply chain corporate responsibility matters. Management’s efforts to instill responsible 
practices within Target’s supply chain in support of Target’s business. 
 
Committee members 
Mr. Stockton (Chair) 
Mr. Abney 
Mr. Bratspies 
Mr. Edwards 
Ms. Puma 
Mr. Rice 
Number of meetings 
during Fiscal 2025 
8 
 
The Board has determined that all members of the Audit & Risk Committee satisfy the applicable audit committee independence 
requirements of the NYSE and the SEC. 
The Board has also determined that Mr. Stockton, Mr. Abney, Mr. Bratspies, Mr. Edwards, and Mr. Rice have acquired the 
attributes necessary to qualify them as “audit committee financial experts” as defined by applicable SEC rules. The determination 
for each of Mr. Abney, Mr. Bratspies, Mr. Edwards, and Mr. Rice was based on experience as a principal financial officer, 
principal accounting officer, controller, public accountant or auditor, or actively supervising a person holding one of those 
positions. For Mr. Stockton, the determination was based on his financial oversight experiences with General Electric Company. 
The Board also determined that Mr. Rice’s simultaneous service on the audit committees of four public companies will not impair 
his ability to effectively serve on the Audit & Risk Committee. 
 
 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
13 
Table of Contents 
General information about corporate governance and the Board 
 
 
Compensation & 
Human Capital 
Management 
Committee 
Oversight and other responsibilities 
 
•

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Performance metrics 
The following graphs highlight our historical performance on key metrics that we used in our executive compensation programs 
over each of the last five years. The metrics used in our compensation program are described in more detail in the CD&A narratives 
for each compensation element, as well as in the footnotes on this page. 
 
 
Net Sales (1) 
(in millions) 
Operating Income (2) 
(in millions) 
53 Weeks 
53 Weeks 
 
 
EPS (3) 
ROIC (4) 
53 Weeks 
53 Weeks 
(1) For our STIP compensation element, we use Net Sales as reported in our applicable annual reports and shown above. For our 
2023-2025 PSU compensation element, we used Merchandise Sales as reported in our annual reports, which in Fiscal 2022 
was $107,588 million and in Fiscal 2025 was $102,717 million. See page 48 for additional information on the 2023-2025 PSU 
award adjustments. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2025 Annual Report for additional information. 
(2) Operating Income, as reported in our applicable annual reports and shown above, provides the basis for Incentive Operating 
Income. Incentive Operating Income is one of the metrics we use in our STIP compensation element. Incentive Operating 
Income, a non-GAAP metric, represents Operating Income on a pre-short-term incentive compensation basis and is 
calculated by excluding short-term incentive expense from our Operating Income. For Fiscal 2025, we excluded the net gain 
from interchange fee settlements, as well as business transformation costs. These costs are explained further in Notes 6 and 
7 to the consolidated financial statements in our 2025 Annual Report. The net impact of these exclusions was a reduction in 
Operating Income of $343 million. 
(3) For the 2023-2025 PSU awards, we use EPS as reported in our applicable annual reports and shown above. For Fiscal 2025, 
we excluded the net gain from interchange fee settlements, reducing EPS by $0.97 per share. 
(4) ROIC is a ratio based on GAAP information, with the exception of the add-back of operating lease interest to Operating 
Income. For PSUs, we use ROIC as reported in our applicable annual reports and shown above. For Fiscal 2025, we excluded 
the net gain from the interchange fee settlements from net operating profit after taxes, reducing ROIC by 1.5 percentage 
points. See page 48 for additional information on the 2023-2025 PSU award adjustments. See our applicable annual reports 
for a more detailed description and calculation of ROIC. 
 
 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
43 
Table of Contents 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Incentive measures and actual performance 
Actual payouts vary based on performance against goals approved by the Compensation & Human Capital Management 
Committee at the beginning of the performance period. Our ongoing incentive programs have a proven track record of variable 
payouts based on performance over time. 
• Our STIP is based on a combination of absolute financial goals and progress made toward key strategic priorities. 
• 100% of our ongoing LTI program features performance-based metrics and is tied to relative performance versus our retail 
peers. In Fiscal 2025, we complemented our ongoing relative LTI program with the Senior Leadership Performance Award, 
which is based on performance against rigorous absolute goals. See “Senior Leadership Performance Awards” on page 51 for 
more information. 
 
 
Component 
Weight 
Metric 
Goal (1) 
Actual (1) 
Actual 
performance 
as a 
percentage of 
goal 
Payout as a 
percentage 
of goal 
Overall 
weighted 
payout as a 
percentage of 
goal 
 
 
2025 STIP 
Performance 
Financial 
67% 
Net Sales 
$108,567 
$104,780 
96.5% 
42% 
28.1% 
 
 
 
Incentive 
Operating 
Income (2) 
$6,362 
$5,140 
80.8% 
 
 
Team 
scorecard 
33% 
N/A 
50 % 
16.5% 
 
 
Total payout as a percentage of goal 
44.6% 
 
 
Award type 
Metric 
Performance rank 
relative to peers 
Actual payout as a 
percentage of 
goal 
Overall payout as a 
percentage of goal 
 
 
 
2023-2025 LTI 
Performance 
PSUs 
Adjusted Merchandise 
Sales CAGR (3) 
15 of 20 
25 % 
88.2% 
 
 
EPS CAGR 
6 of 20 
154 % 
 
 
ROIC 
11 of 20 
85 % 
 
 
Performance rank 
relative to 
peers (4) 
TSR (5) 
Overall payout as a 
percentage of goal 
 
 
 
PBRSUs 
Relative TSR 
17 of 19 
(31.8) % 
75% 
 
(1) In millions. 
(2) See the “Performance metrics” tables and footnotes on page 42 for a description of how Incentive Operating Income is 
calculated from our financial statements. 
(3) The 2023-2025 PSU awards are measured using Merchandise Sales. Beginning in 2025, PSU awards are measured using Net 
Sales. 
(4) The retail peers for PBRSUs excludes Publix Super Markets, Inc. For more information, see “PBRSUs” on page 49. 
(5) TSR is calculated based on the stock price of each company on the first and last day of the performance period using the 
average of each company’s stock price for the 90 calendar days immediately preceding the two measurement dates. 
 
 
44 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
Table of Contents 
Compensation Discussion and Analysis 
Our framework for executive compensation 
Elements of annual TDC (1) 
 
 
Element 
Key 
characteristics 
Link to 
shareholder 
value 
How we 
determine 
amount 
 
 
 
 
Fixed 
Base salary 
Fixed compensation 
component payable in 
cash, representing less 
than 20% of Annual 
TDC for our NEOs. 
Reviewed annually and 
adjusted when 
appropriate. 
A means to attract and 
retain talented 
executives capable of 
driving performance. 
Based on individual 
contributions to 
business outcomes, the 
scope and complexity 
of each role, future 
potential, market data, 
and internal pay data. 
 
 
 
Performance- 
based 
Short-term incentives 
Variable compensation 
component payable in 
cash based on Target’s 
performance against 
financial goals and 
progress made toward 
key strategic priorities. 
Financial goals are tied 
to achievement of key 
financial measures. 
NEOs are also 
evaluated against 
identified strategic 
initiatives important to 
driving sustainable, 
durable, and profitable 
sales growth. 
Financial component is 
based on: 
• Net Sales 
• Incentive Operating 
Income 
Team scorecard is 
based on the 
Compensation & 
Human Capital 
Management 
Committee’s 
assessment of our 
NEOs’ progress toward 
strategic priorities. 
 
 
Performance share units 
PSUs cliff vest at the 
end of the performance 
period and payouts are 
based on relative 
performance during the 
performance period 
versus our retail peer 
group. 
PSUs recognize our 
NEOs for achieving 
superior long-term 
relative performance on 
three key metrics: 
• Net Sales growth 
• EPS growth 
• ROIC 
Based on individual 
contributions to 
business outcomes, 
potential future 
contributions, historical 
grant amounts, 
retention 
considerations, and 
market data. 
 
 
Performance-based 
restricted stock units 
PBRSUs cliff vest at the 
end of the performance 
period with payouts 
based on relative TSR 
performance during the 
performance period 
versus our retail peer 
group. 
Fosters a culture of 
ownership, aligns the 
long-term interests of 
our NEOs with our 
shareholders, and 
rewards or penalizes 
based on relative TSR 
performance. 
Based on individual 
contributions to 
business outcomes, 
potential future 
contributions, historical 
grant amounts, 
retention 
considerations, and 
market data. 
 
(1) See page 41 for a description of how the Compensation & Human Capital Management Committee uses Annual TDC and 
how it differs from the “Total” in the “

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
date, and return the proxy card promptly using the enclosed envelope. 1. Election of Directors 2. Company proposal to ratify the appointment of Ernst & Young LLP as our independent registered public accounting firm. 3. Company proposal to approve, on an advisory basis, our executive 
compensation (Say on Pay). 4. Company proposal to approve the Target Corporation Amended & Restated 2020 Long-Term Incentive Plan. 5. Shareholder proposal requesting policy requiring the Board Chair to be an independent director. 6. Shareholder proposal requesting a report on presence of pesticides in Target's private label brands. 7. Shareholder proposal requesting a report on reducing plastic microfiber shedding. If you are a registered or beneficial shareholder, consenting to receive all future annual meeting materials electronically is simple and fast! Enroll today at https://enroll.icsdelivery.com/tgt for secure online access to your proxy materials. NOTE: In addition, the Company may transact such other business as may properly come before the meeting and at any adjournment or postponement of the meeting. Mark here if you would like your voting instructions to be confidential pursuant to the Target Corporation policy on confidential voting described in the 2026 Proxy Statement. Yes No 1a. David P. Abney 1b. George S. Barrett 1c. Gail K. Boudreaux 1d. Stephen B. Bratspies 1e. Brian C. Cornell 1f. Robert L. Edwards 1g. Michael J. Fiddelke 1h. John R. Hoke III 1i. Christine A. Leahy 1j. Monica 
C. Lozano 1k. Derica W. Rice 1l. Dmitri L. Stockton TARGET CORPORATION 1000 NICOLLET MALL TPN-1320 MINNEAPOLIS, MN 55403 VOTE BY INTERNET Go to www.proxyvote.com or scan the QR Barcode above Use the Internet to transmit your voting instructions. Have your proxy card in hand when you access www.proxyvote.com and follow the instructions to obtain your records and to create an electronic voting instruction form. VOTE BY PHONE - 1-800-690-6903 Use any touch-tone telephone to transmit your voting instructions. Have your proxy card in hand when you call and then follow the instructions. VOTE BY MAIL Mark, sign, and date your proxy card and return it in the postage-paid envelope we have provided or return it to Target Corporation, c/o Broadridge, 51 Mercedes Way, Edgewood, NY 11717. If you vote your proxy through the Internet or by telephone, you do NOT need to mail back your card. ELECTRONIC DELIVERY OF FUTURE SHAREHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS If you would like to reduce the costs incurred by Target Corporation in mailing proxy materials, you can consent to receive all future proxy statements, proxy cards, and annual reports electronically via e-mail or the 
Internet. To sign up for electronic delivery, please follow the instructions above to vote using the Internet and, when prompted, indicate that you agree to receive or access shareholder communications electronically in future years. ! !! ! !! ! !! ! !! SCAN TO VIEW MATERIALS & VOTEw 
V94284-P44608 Target Corporation 2026 Annual Meeting of Shareholders Wednesday, June 10, 2026 12:00 p.m. Central Daylight Time virtualshareholdermeeting.com/TGT2026 IF YOU PLAN TO ATTEND THE ANNUAL MEETING, YOU MUST FOLLOW THE REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMISSION DESCRIBED IN THE PROXY STATEMENT. Registered Shareholders can access their Target Corporation accounts online via: www.shareowneronline.com For Shareholder Information Call 1-800-794-9871 Monday - Friday between 7 a.m. - 7 p.m. Central Daylight Time Important Notice Regarding the Availability of Proxy Materials for the Shareholder Meeting to Be Held on June 10, 2026: The Proxy Statement and Annual Report are available at www.proxyvote.com. Proxy Solicited on Behalf of the Board of Directors for the June 10, 2026 Annual Meeting of Shareholders Vote by Internet, Telephone, or Mail 24 Hours a Day, 7 Days a Week Internet and telephone voting deadlines are: • 11:59 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time on June 9, 2026 for all shareholders except participants whose shares are held in the Target Corporation 401(k) Plan (the Plan), and • 6:00 a.m. Eastern Daylight Time on June 8, 2026 for participants whose 
shares are held in the Plan. Your Internet or telephone vote authorizes the named proxies to vote these shares in the same manner as if you marked, signed, and returned your proxy card. Michael J. Fiddelke, Jim Lee, and David L. Donlin, and each of them, are hereby appointed proxies, with power of substitution to each, to represent and to vote as designated on the reverse side of this pr

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
transactions with related persons 
The Board has adopted a written policy requiring that any 
transaction: (a) involving Target, (b) in which one of our 
directors, nominees for director, executive officers, or greater 
than five percent shareholders, or their immediate family 
members, have a direct or indirect material interest, and (c) 
where the amount involved exceeds $120,000 in any fiscal 
year, be approved by a majority of independent directors of 
the full Board or by a designated Committee. The Board has 
designated the Audit & Risk Committee as having 
responsibility for reviewing and approving all such transactions 
except those dealing with compensation of executive officers 
and directors, or their immediate family members, in which 
case it will be reviewed and approved by the Compensation & 
Human Capital Management Committee. 
In determining whether to approve any such transaction, the 
independent directors or relevant Committee must consider, in 
addition to other factors deemed appropriate, the material 
facts of the transaction and whether the transaction is on 
terms no less favorable to Target than those involving 
unrelated parties. The Audit & Risk Committee must prohibit 
any transaction it determines to be inconsistent with the 
interests of Target and its shareholders. No director may 
participate in any review or approval of any transaction if the 
director, or the director’s immediate family member, is a party 
to the transaction. 
The Audit & Risk Committee approved one related party 
transaction in accordance with this policy during Fiscal 2025. 
Donald Knauss, a non-employee director, has a son who is 
employed as a sales representative by a supplier from which 
Target purchases wholesale merchandise. Mr. Knauss’s son 
represented the supplier in its relationship with Target 
Corporation during Fiscal 2025. We purchased approximately 
$15 million of merchandise from the supplier in Fiscal 2025 , 
which represented less than 0.02% of our annual revenues. 
Target’s decisions regarding purchases of merchandise from 
its suppliers are made by Team Members in the merchandising 
departments and no member of the Board has any input or 
involvement in such decisions. The transaction involving Mr. 
Knauss’s son did not affect Mr. Knauss’s independence and 
the Board affirmatively determined that Mr. Knauss is 
independent. 
Business ethics and conduct 
We are committed to conducting business ethically and 
lawfully. All of our directors and executive officers, like all 
Team Members, are required to act with honesty and integrity. 
Our Code of Ethics, which applies to all Team Members, 
including our executive officers and Chief Accounting Officer & 
Controller, establishes expectations to guide ethical decision- 
making, including putting ethics into action, working together, 
maintaining trust, conducting business fairly, and safeguarding 
what’s ours. Included within those topics is how we address 
conflicts of interest, fair dealing, required information 
disclosures and compliance with laws, rules and regulations, 
and prompt reporting. Our Code of Ethics also describes the 
means by which any Team Member can provide an 
anonymous report of an actual or apparent violation of our 
Code of Ethics. 
Similarly, our directors are subject to a separate Code of 
Ethics contained within our Corporate Governance Guidelines, 
which is tailored to the unique role fulfilled by members of the 
Board and addresses conflicts of interest, corporate 
opportunities, maintaining confidentiality, compliance with 
laws, fair dealing, and compliance procedures. 
 
 
18 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
Table of Contents 
General information about corporate governance and the Board 
Our Code of Ethics applicable to all Team Members and our 
Corporate Governance Guidelines containing the Code of 
Ethics applicable to members of the Board are available on 
Target’s website, as described in Question 16 “How may I 
access or receive the proxy materials, other periodic filings, 
key corporate governance documents, and other information?” 
on page 97. Any amendments to, or waivers of, any provision 
of the applicable Code of Ethics involving our directors, 
executive officers, Chief Accounting Officer & Controller, or 
other persons performing similar functions are disclosed on 
our website at corporate.target.com/sustainability-governance/ 
governance-and-reporting/corporate-governance. 
Shareholder engagement 
We regularly engage with our shareholders, both large and 
small, to understand their perspectives and priorities, and we 
communicate relevant feedback to appropriate internal 
stakeholders for consideration. During Fiscal 2025, we 
engaged with shareholders collectively owning over 30% of 
our outstanding shares and involved our Lead Independent 
Director and Chair of the Compensation & Human Capital 
Management Committee in conversations as appropriate. The 
principal topics of engagement since our 2025 Annual Meeting 
included: 
• CEO and leadership succession planning; 
• Board leadership structure; 
• Board refreshment and director skills; 
• Team Member and community engagement; 
• brand and reputation m anagement; 
• new strategic priorities; 
• our sustainability strategy, including how it drives our 
business strategy and purpose; and 
• our executive compensation program. 
While we benefit from an ongoing dialogue with many of our 
shareholders, we recognize that we have not communicated 
directly with all of our shareholders. If you would like to engage 
with us, please send correspondence to Target Corporation, 
Attn: Investor Relations, 1000 Nicollet Mall, TPN-1320, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55403 or email 
investorrelations@target.com. 
 
 
TARGET CORPORATION 2026 Proxy Statement 
 
19 
Table of Contents 
Item one Election of directors 
 
 
Item of business 
Board recommendation 
Voting approval standard 
 
 
Election of 12 director 
nominees 
named in the 2026 Proxy 
Statement. 
The Board recommends that 
shareholders vote FOR each 
director nominee. 
 
More votes “For” than 
“Against.” 
Abstentions and broker 
non-votes have no effect in 
calculating the required vote. 
For additional details about the Board recommendation and voting standards, please see Question 10 “What items are being voted 
upon, how does the Board recommend that I vote, and what are the standards for determining whether any item has been 
approved?” on page 95. 
Election a
