TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC (TXN) - DEF 14A proxy statement

Company: TEXAS INSTRUMENTS INC
Ticker: TXN
CIK: 97476
Form: DEF 14A (definitive proxy statement)
Filing date: 2026-03-04

===== CORPORATE GOVERNANCE =====
corporate governance principles. 
◦ The size, composition and functioning of the board and board committees. 
◦ Candidates to fill board positions. 
◦ Nominees to be designated for election as directors. 
◦ Compensation of board members. 
◦ Organization and responsibilities of board committees. 
◦ Succession planning by the company. 
◦ Issues of potential conflicts of interest involving a board member raised under TI’s conflict of interest policy. 
◦ Election of executive officers of the company. 
◦ Topics affecting the relationship between the company and stockholders. 
◦ Public issues likely to affect the company. 
◦ Responses to proposals submitted by stockholders. 
• Reviewing: 
◦ Contribution policies of the company and the TI Foundation. 
◦ Scope of activities of the company’s political action committee. 
◦ Revisions to TI’s code of conduct. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 16 
• Electing officers of the company other than the executive officers. 
• Overseeing an annual evaluation of the board and the committee. 
The GSR committee met six times in 2025. The GSR committee holds regularly scheduled meetings and reports its activities to the board. 
Board evaluation process 
The board recognizes that a robust and constructive evaluation process is an essential part of good corporate governance and board effectiveness. The board and committee annual evaluation processes are designed to assess board and committee effectiveness, as well as individual director performance and contribution levels. The results of the evaluations are part of the GSR committee’s and the board’s consideration in connection with their review of director nominees to ensure the board continues to operate effectively. 
Annually, each of our directors completes comprehensive board and committee questionnaires. Each committee oversees its own evaluation process, and the GSR committee also oversees the board evaluation process. The questionnaires and ongoing feedback from individual directors facilitate a candid assessment of (i) the board and committees’ oversight of risk, strategy and operations; (ii) the board’s culture, leadership structure and mix of director skills, qualifications and experiences; and (iii) board and committee meeting mechanics. Our directors are willing to have honest and difficult conversations as needed during the evaluation and nomination process. 
Board leadership structure 
The board’s current leadership structure combines the positions of chairman and CEO and includes a lead director who presides at executive sessions and performs the duties listed below. The board believes that this structure, combined with its other practices (such as (i) including on each board agenda an opportunity for the independent directors to comment on and influence the proposed strategic agenda for future meetings and (ii) holding an executive session of the independent directors at each board meeting), allows it to maintain the active engagement of independent directors and appropriate oversight of management. 
The lead director is elected by the independent directors to serve at least a one-year term. The independent directors have elected Ms. Clark to serve as lead director. The duties of the lead director are to: 
• Preside at all meetings of the board at which the chairman is not present, including executive sessions of the independent directors; 
• Serve as liaison between the chairman and the independent directors; 
• Approve information sent to the board; 
• Approve meeting agendas for the board; 
• Approve meeting schedules to assure that there is sufficient time for discussion of all agenda items; and 
• If requested by major shareholders, ensure that he or she is available for consultation and direct communication. 
In addition, the lead director has authority to call meetings of the independent directors. 
The board, led by its GSR committee, regularly reviews the board’s leadership structure. The board’s consideration is guided by two questions: Would stockholders be better served, and would the board be more effective with a different structure? The board’s views are informed by a review of the practices of other companies and insight into the preferences of top stockholders, as gathered from face-to-face dialogue and review of published guidelines. The board also considers how board roles and interactions would change if its leadership structure changed. The board’s goal is for each director to have an equal stake in the board’s actions and equal accountability to the company and its stockholders. 
The board continues to believe that there is no uniform solution for a board leadership structure. Indeed, the company has had varying board leadership models over its history, at times separating the positions of chairman and CEO and at times combining the two and utilizing a lead director. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 17 
Oversight by the board 
It is management’s responsibility to assess and manage the various risks TI faces. It is the board’s responsibility to oversee management in this effort. In exercising its oversight, the board has allocated some areas of focus to its committees and has retained areas of focus for itself, as more fully described below. 
Management generally views the risks TI faces as falling into the following categories: strategic, operational, financial and compliance. The board as a whole has oversight responsibility for the company’s strategic and operational risks (e.g., major initiatives, competitive markets and products, sales and marketing, R&D and cybersecurity). Throughout the year the CEO discusses these risks with the board. Additionally, at least once each year, the company’s chief information officer provides information on the cybersecurity risks and the company’s approach to protecting the company’s data and systems infrastructure to the board or audit committee. In the event of a material cybersecurity event, management would notify the board and, in compliance with our procedures, determine the timing and extent of the response and public disclosure and whether any future vulnerabilities are expected. 
TI’s audit committee has oversight responsibility for financial risk (such as accounting, finance, internal controls and tax strategy). Oversight responsibility for compliance risk is shared by the board committees. For example, the audit committee oversees compliance with the company’s code of conduct and finance- and accounting-related laws and policies, as well as the company’s compliance program itself, including global trade compliance; the compensation committee oversees compliance with the company’s

===== COMPENSATION DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS =====
Compensation Discussion and Analysis for additional information. 
TI TSR compared to S&P IT Index TSR 
The company’s cumulative TSR of 21.8% for the five-year period ending December 31, 2025, was lower than the S&P Information Technology Index return for the same period of 158.4%. 
2025 financial performance measures 
The four financial performance measures listed below represent an unranked list of the “most important” financial performance measures linking compensation actually paid to the named executive officers for 2025 and company performance. We do not consider any one of the following financial performance measures to be the most important measure for our company or executive compensation program. Additional financial performance measures, based on an absolute and relative basis, and other measures were used to link executive pay to company performance as further described in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis. 
 
 Revenue growth: total TI 
 Operating profit 
 Operating profit margin 
 Total shareholder return 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 50 
Audit committee matters 
Audit committee report 
The audit committee of the board of directors has furnished the following report: 
As noted in the committee’s charter, TI management is responsible for preparing the company’s financial statements. The company’s independent registered public accounting firm is responsible for auditing the financial statements. The activities of the committee are in no way designed to supersede or alter those traditional responsibilities. The committee’s role does not provide any special assurances with regard to TI’s financial statements, nor does it involve a professional evaluation of the quality of the audits performed by the independent registered public accounting firm. 
The committee has reviewed and discussed with management and the independent accounting firm, as appropriate, (i) the audited financial statements and (ii) management’s report on internal control over financial reporting and the independent accounting firm’s related opinions. 
The committee has discussed with the independent registered public accounting firm, Ernst & Young, the required communications specified by auditing standards together with guidelines established by the SEC and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
The committee has received the written disclosures and the letter from the independent registered public accounting firm required by the applicable requirements of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding the independent registered public accounting firm’s communications with the audit committee concerning independence and has discussed with Ernst & Young the firm’s independence. 
Based on the review and discussions referred to above, the committee recommended to the board of directors that the audited financial statements be included in the company’s annual report on Form 10-K for 2025 for filing with the SEC. 
 
 Janet Clark, Chair Reginald DesRoches Curtis Farmer Robert Sanchez 
Proposal to ratify appointment of independent registered public accounting firm 
The audit committee of the board has the authority and responsibility for the appointment, compensation, retention and oversight of the work of TI’s independent registered public accounting firm. The audit committee has appointed Ernst & Young LLP to be TI’s independent registered public accounting firm for 2026. 
TI has engaged Ernst & Young or a predecessor firm to serve as the company’s independent registered public accounting firm since 1952. In order to assure continuing auditor independence, the audit committee periodically considers whether the annual audit of TI’s financial statements should be conducted by another firm. 
The lead audit partner on the TI engagement serves no more than five consecutive years in that role, in accordance with SEC rules. The audit committee chair and management have direct input into the selection of the lead audit partner. 
The members of the audit committee and the board believe that the continued retention of Ernst & Young to serve as the company’s independent registered public accounting firm is in the best interest of the company and its investors. Consequently, the board asks the stockholders to ratify the appointment of Ernst & Young. If the stockholders do not ratify the appointment, the audit committee will consider whether it should appoint another independent registered public accounting firm. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 51 
Representatives of Ernst & Young are expected to be present and available to respond to appropriate questions at the annual meeting. They have the opportunity to make a statement if they desire to do so; they have indicated that, as of this date, they do not. 
The fees for services provided by Ernst & Young to the company are described below: 
 
 2025 2024 
 Audit $ 11,646,000 $ 11,126,460 
 Audit-related $ 740,000 $ 776,000 
 Tax $ 1,214,000 $ 1,489,000 
 All other $ 30,000 $ 32,000 
The services provided were as follows: 
• Audit: our annual audit, including the audit of internal control over financial reporting, reports on Form 10-Q, assistance with public debt offerings, statutory audits required internationally and accounting consultations. 
• Audit-related: including employee benefit plan audits and certification procedures relating to compliance with local-government or other regulatory standards for various non-U.S. subsidiaries. 
• Tax: professional services for tax compliance (preparation and review of income tax returns and other tax-related filings) and tax advice on U.S. and foreign tax matters. 
• All other: TI Foundation audit and training. 
Pre-approval policy. The audit committee is required to pre-approve the audit and non-audit services to be performed by the independent registered public accounting firm to assure that the provision of such services does not impair the firm’s independence. 
Annually, the independent registered public accounting firm and the director of internal audits present to the audit committee services expected to be performed by the firm over the next 12 months. The audit committee reviews and, as it deems appropriate, pre-approves those services. The services and estimated fees are presented to the audit committee for consideration in the following categories: Audit, Audit-related, Tax and All other (each as defined in Schedule 14A of the Securities Exchange Act). For each service listed in those categories, the committee receives detailed documentation indicating the specific services to be provided. The term of any pre-approval is 12 months from the date of pre-approval, unless the audit committee specifically provides for a different period. The audit committee reviews on at least a quarterly basis the services provided to date by the firm and the fees incurred for those services. The audit committee may revise the list of pre-approved services and related fees from time to time, based on subsequent determinations. 
In order to respond to time-sensitive requests for services that may arise between regularly scheduled meetings of the audit committee, the committee has delegated pre-approval authority to its chair. The audit committee does not delegate to management its responsibilities to pre-approve services. The chair reports pre-approval decisions to the audit committee and seeks ratification of such decisions at the audit committee’s next scheduled meeting. 
The audit committee or its chair pre-approved all services provided by Ernst & Young during 2025. 
The board of directors recommends a vote For ratification of the appointment of Ernst & Young LLP as the company’s independent registered public accounting firm for 2026. 
Stockholder proposal 
Proposal regarding shareholder right to act by written consent 
Mr. John Chevedden, 2215 Nelson Avenue #205, Redondo Beach, CA 90278-2453, the beneficial owner of 40 shares of the company’s common stock, has given notice that he or his designee intends to present the following nonbinding, advisory proposal at the annual meeting. The board of directors opposes the stockholder proposal for the reasons set forth below the proposal. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 52 
Proxies solicited by management will be voted against the stockholder proposal below unless stockholders specify a contrary choice in their proxies. 
In accordance with applicable rules of the SEC, we have set forth Mr. Chevedden’s proposal below exactly as submitted to us. 
Support Shareholder Right to Act by Written Consent 
Shareholders request that the board of directors take the necessary steps to permit written consent by the shareholders entitled to cast the minimum number of votes that would be necessary to authorize an action at a meeting at which all shareholders entitled to vote thereon were present and voting (without any discrimination or restriction based on length of stock ownership). This includes shareholder ability to initiate any appropriate topic for written consent. 
Texas Instruments shareholders have a particular need for the right to act by written consent because it is considerably more difficult than necessary for TXN shareholders to call a special shareholder meeting. Delaware law considers it reasonable for 10% of shareholders to call a special meeting - yet TXN made the threshold 25% of shareholders based on all shares outstanding. 
This proposal topic won outstanding 78% TXN shareholder support at the 2021 TXN annual meeting without any special effort by the proponent and against the headwind of opposition from TXN. 
Acting by written consent is hardly ever used by shareholders but the main point of having a right to act by written consent is that it gives shareholders greater standing to engage effectively with management when TXN is underperforming. 
Now could be a ripe time for this proposal since TXN stock was at $202 in 2021 and at only $160 in late 2025 despite a robust stock market. 
There are challenging news reports regarding TXN that argue for a greater standing for TXN shareholders to engage with TXN. 
Following its Q3 earnings report, TXN offered a fourth-quarter revenue and profit forecast that fell short of analysts’ estimates. TXN’s guidance indicated a slowing recovery in the analog chip market, as well as cautious spending from customers due to economic uncertainty and mounting trade tensions. In response, TXN’s stock experienced its largest drop in 3-months. 
Reports in October 2025 indicated that TXN was planning layoffs while simultaneously hiring foreign workers on H-1B visas. 
In September, China’s Ministry of Commerce launched an anti-dumping investigation targeting U.S. chipmakers, including Texas Instruments. The inquiry increased geopolitical risk for TXN and introduced new uncertainty for its business access and competitive position in the Chinese market. 
Following the October financial results, some analysts raised concerns over the sustainability of TXN’s dividend. Analysts cited mounting capital expenses for new manufacturing plants and slower projected revenue growth as potential pressures on the company’s free cash flow. 
In August 2025, a lawsuit was filed charging that Texas Instruments had infringed upon semiconductor technology patents. There were reports earlier in the year noting that unresolved tariff and regulatory issues were causing customer hesitancy and impacting TXN performance. 
Please vote yes: Shareholder Right to Act by Written Consent 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 53 
Board of directors’ response 
 
 
The board of directors recommends you vote against this proposal. 
• Stockholder meetings, whether annual or specially convened, provide our stockholders with a regular, informed and transparent forum to exercise their rights. 
• Our by-laws give stockholders the right to call a special meeting, aligning with the feedback we received from the majority of our stockholders during extensive review and individual engagement on their preference over acting by written consent. 
• Our corporate governance practices provide all stockholders an opportunity to meaningfully participate in the decision-making process. 
Our governance practices provide stockholders meaningful ways to participate in the decision-making process. 
Our robust corporate governance practices protect stockholder rights and provide effective processes for stockholders to communicate with our board, management and other stockholders. These practices include: 
• Special meetings may be called by stockholders who collectively hold 25% or more of our outstanding stock; 
• Our by-laws provide a “proxy access” right that conforms to market practice; 
• Annually elected board; 
• Majority vote standard for uncontested director elections; and 
• Robust stockholder engagement throughout the year. 
The company will continue to foster an open dialogue with stockholders regarding corporate governance and take appropriate actions where the long-term interest of all stockholders is best served. 
Our stockholders have expressed their preference for a robust special meeting right over written consent. 
In response to prior support for a non-binding stockholder proposal to allow action by written consent, the company reached out to holders of approximately two-thirds of the company’s outstanding stock. Among stockholders who expressed a preference, all preferred the right to call a special meeting over the right to act by written consent. 
Based on this feedback, the board concluded that amending our by-laws to adopt a right of stockholders to call a special meeting provided a more balanced and transparent process to allow for stockholder action between annual meetings. Today, Texas Instruments stockholders collectively holding 25% or more of our outstanding stock have the right to call a special meeting, which is the most common ownership threshold adopted by S&P 500 companies. 1 
Actions taken through a meeting, whether at an annual or special meeting of stockholders, offer critical protections and benefits to stockholders that are absent from the written consent process. 
The stockholder meeting process ensures that all stockholders have an opportunity to receive notice and participate in open and transparent discussions in connection with a proposed action. Stockholders are provided comprehensive disclosure through proxy materials to inform their decision-making process and serve stockholders’ interests. Additionally, the board believes that any matter significant enough to warrant stockholder action should be formally and transparently addressed at a meeting of stockholders. 
For these reasons, the board of directors recommends a vote against this proposal. 
1 FactSet as of February 24, 2026. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 54 
Additional information 
Voting securities 
As stated in the notice of annual meeting, holders of record of the common stock at the close of business on February 23, 2026, may vote at the meeting or any adjournment of the meeting. As of February 23, 2026, 910,463,377 shares of TI common stock were outstanding. This is the only class of capital stock entitled to vote at the meeting. Each holder of common stock has one vote for each share held. 
Security ownership of certain beneficial owners 
The following table shows the only persons who have reported beneficial ownership of more than 5% of the common stock of the company by virtue of filing a Schedule 13G with the SEC. Persons generally “beneficially own” shares if they have the right to either vote those shares or dispose of them. More than one person may be considered to beneficially own the same shares. 
 
 Name and Address Shares Beneficially
Owned Percent 
of Class 
 The Vanguard Group
100 Vanguard Blvd.
Malvern, PA 19355 91,377,364 (1) 10.04% 
 
BlackRock, Inc. 
50 Hudson Yards 
New York, NY 10001 76,795,073 (2) 8.5% 
(1) Based on a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC by The Vanguard Group on June 10, 2024, reporting beneficial ownership as of May 31, 2024. According to its Schedule 13G/A filing, The Vanguard Group has shared voting power for 1,154,175 shares, sole dispositive power for 87,244,448 shares and shared dispositive power for 4,132,916 shares. 
(2) Based on a Schedule 13G/A filed with the SEC by BlackRock, Inc. on January 25, 2024, reporting beneficial ownership as of December 31, 2023. According to its Schedule 13G/A filing, BlackRock, Inc. has sole voting power for 69,978,094 shares and sole dispositive power for 76,795,073 shares. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 55 
Security ownership of directors and management 
The following table shows the beneficial ownership of TI common stock by directors, the named executive officers and all executive officers and directors as a group as of December 31, 2025. Each director and named executive officer has sole voting and investment power with respect to the shares owned, except as to the interests of spouses or as otherwise indicated. No director or executive officer has pledged shares of TI common stock. 
 
 Name Shares Beneficially Owned Percent 
of Class 
 Directors (1) 
 Mark Blinn (2) 38,549 * 
 Todd Bluedorn 26,601 * 
 Janet Clark 38,221 * 
 Carrie Cox 61,147 * 
 Martin Craighead 38,463 * 
 Reginald DesRoches 1,865 * 
 Curtis Farmer 5,043 * 
 Jean Hobby 10,288 * 
 Haviv Ilan 760,717 * 
 Ronald Kirk 45,580 * 
 Pamela Patsley 117,113 * 
 Robert Sanchez 58,498 * 
 Richard Templeton (3) 2,680,196 * 
 
 Management (4) 
 Rafael Lizardi 300,542 * 
 Hagop Kozanian 247,870 * 
 Amichai Ron 246,794 * 
 All executive officers and directors as a group (5) 5,477,727 * 
* Less than 1% 
(1) Included in the shares owned shown above are: 
 
 Directors Shares Obtainable
within 60 Days RSUs
(Shares) (a) Shares Credited
to Deferred
Compensation
Accounts (b) 
 Mark Blinn — 11,717 11,786 
 Todd Bluedorn 18,935 2,446 — 
 Janet Clark 18,935 10,816 8,470 
 Carrie Cox 18,935 33,962 5,111 
 Martin Craighead 14,629 2,446 — 
 Reginald DesRoches — 1,783 82 
 Curtis Farmer 766 2,386 1,891 
 Jean Hobby 6,186 2,446 — 
 Haviv Ilan 561,511 153,125 — 
 Ronald Kirk 25,000 2,446 5,643 
 Pamela Patsley 18,935 4,446 64,216 
 Robert Sanchez 25,000 9,313 12,423 
 Richard Templeton 1,561,353 255,613 — 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 56 
(a) The non-employee directors’ RSUs granted before 2007 are settled in TI common stock generally upon the director’s termination of service, provided he or she has served at least eight years or has reached the company’s retirement age for directors. RSUs granted after 2006 are settled in TI common stock generally upon the fourth anniversary of the grant date. 
(b) The shares in deferred compensation accounts are issued following the director’s termination of service. 
(2) Includes 15,046 shares held in a trust for which Mr. Blinn shares voting and investment power. 
(3) Includes 12,993 shares credited to Mr. Templeton’s 401(k) and profit sharing accounts. Also includes 49,500 shares held in trusts and 649,681 shares held by the Richard and Mary Templeton Foundation, a charitable foundation, for each of which Mr. Templeton shares voting and investment power. Mr. Templeton has no pecuniary interest in the Foundation’s shares. 
(4) Included in the shares owned shown above are: 
 
 Executive Officer Shares Obtainable
within 60 Days Shares Credited 
to 401(k) Account RSUs 
(Shares) 
 Rafael Lizardi 182,815 — 51,824 
 Hagop Kozanian 173,332 — 56,100 
 Amichai Ron 172,458 — 54,094 
(5) Includes: 
(a) 3,343,584 shares obtainable within 60 days. 
(b) 12,993 shares credited to 401(k) accounts. 
(c) 866,026 shares subject to RSU awards; for the terms of these RSUs, see page 42. 
(d) 109,621 shares credited to certain non-employee directors’ deferred compensation accounts; shares in deferred compensation accounts are issued following a director’s termination of service. 
Related person transactions 
Because we believe that company transactions with directors and executive officers of TI or with persons related to TI directors and ex

===== SAY-ON-PAY / ADVISORY VOTE =====
ection of directors. 
Majority of votes present in person or by proxy at the meeting and entitled to be cast in the election with respect to a nominee must be cast for that nominee. 
Abstentions have the same effect as votes against. Broker non-votes are not counted as votes for or against. 
 
Advisory vote to approve named executive officer compensation. 
Majority of votes present in person or by proxy at the meeting must be cast for the proposal. 
Abstentions and broker non-votes have the same effect as votes against. 
 
Proposal to ratify appointment of independent registered public accounting firm. 
Majority of votes present in person or by proxy at the meeting must be cast for the proposal. 
Abstentions have the same effect as votes against. (Brokers are permitted to exercise their discretion and vote without specific instruction on this 
matter. Accordingly, there are no broker non-votes.) 
 
Stockholder proposal to permit stockholders to act by written consent. 
Majority of votes present in person or by proxy at the meeting must be cast for the proposal. 
Abstentions and broker non-votes have the same effect as votes against. 
 
Any other matter that may properly be submitted at the meeting. 
Majority of votes present in person or by proxy at the meeting must be cast for the proposal. 
Abstentions and broker non-votes have the same effect as votes against. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 3 
Attendance and instructions for the annual meeting 
Attendance at the annual meeting is limited to stockholders or their legal proxy holders. Each attendee must present a government-issued photo ID, such as a driver's license or passport, and an advance registration form to gain access. You may be denied entrance if the required identification and registration form are not presented. All attendees will be required to comply with TI’s then-current site visitor policy, which will be posted on our Investor Relations website on or before April 13, 2026. Be advised that TI’s security policy forbids weapons, cameras and audio/visual recording devices inside TI buildings. All bags will be subject to search upon entry into the building. 
If you plan to attend the annual meeting in person, you must print your own advance registration form and bring it to the meeting. Advance registration forms can be printed by clicking on the “Attend a Meeting” button found at www.proxyvote.com and following the instructions provided. You will need the 16-digit control number included in your notice, proxy card or voting instruction form. You must request your advance registration form by April 15, 2026, at 11:59 p.m. (Eastern time). If you are unable to print your advance registration form, please call Stockholder Meeting Registration Phone Support (toll-free) at 1-844-318-0137 or 1-925-331-6070 (international toll) for assistance. 
Guest advance registration forms are not available. Exceptions may be granted to stockholders who require a companion in order to facilitate their own attendance (for example, due to a physical disability) by contacting Investor Relations. 
Additionally, if you plan to attend as proxy for a stockholder of record, you must present a valid legal proxy from the stockholder of record to you. If you plan to attend as proxy for a street name stockholder, you must present a valid legal proxy from the stockholder of record (i.e., the bank, broker or other holder of record) to the street name stockholder that is assignable and a valid legal proxy from the street name stockholder to you. Stockholders may appoint only one proxy holder to attend on their behalf. 
Corporate governance and board of directors 
Election of directors 
Directors are elected at the annual meeting to hold office until the next annual meeting and until their successors are elected and qualified. The board of directors has designated the following persons as nominees: Mark Blinn, Todd Bluedorn, Janet Clark, Carrie Cox, Martin Craighead, Reginald DesRoches, Curtis Farmer, Jean Hobby, Haviv Ilan, Ronald Kirk, Pamela Patsley and Robert Sanchez. 
If you return a proxy that is not otherwise marked, your shares will be voted FOR each of the nominees. 
Director nominees, qualifications and experience 
All of the nominees for directorship will be directors of the company at the time of the annual meeting. If any nominee becomes unable to serve before the meeting, the persons named as proxies may vote for a substitute, or the number of directors

===== RELATED-PERSON TRANSACTIONS =====
related person transactions (Item 404 of Regulation S-K). None of TI’s executive officers served on the board of directors or compensation committee of a company that had an executive officer that served on TI’s board or compensation committee. 
Cost of solicitation 
The solicitation is made on behalf of our board of directors. TI will pay the cost of soliciting these proxies. We will reimburse brokerage houses and other custodians, nominees and fiduciaries for reasonable expenses they incur in sending these proxy materials to beneficial holders of our shares. 
Without receiving additional compensation, directors, officers and employees of TI may solicit proxies personally by telephone, fax or email from some stockholders if proxies are not promptly received. We have also hired Georgeson LLC to assist in the solicitation of proxies at a cost of $13,500 plus out-of-pocket expenses. 
Stockholder proposals and nominations for 2027 
The table below shows the deadlines for stockholders to submit proposals or director nominations for next year’s annual meeting. 
 
 
Proposals for Inclusion in 
2027 Proxy 
Materials 
Director Nominees for Inclusion in 2027 Proxy Materials 
(Proxy Access) 
Other Proposals/Nominees to be 
Presented at 2027 Annual Meeting 
(and Not for Inclusion in 
Proxy Materials) 
 When proposal must 
be received by 
Texas Instruments On or before November 4, 2026 No earlier than October 5, 2026, and no later than November 4, 2026 No earlier than December 17, 2026, and no later than January 16, 2027 
In addition to satisfying the requirements of the company’s by-laws, to comply with the SEC’s universal proxy rules, stockholders who intend to solicit proxies in support of director nominees other than board’s nominees must also comply with the additional requirements of Rule 14a-19(b) under the Exchange Act. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 59 
Any proposals, nominations or notices are to be sent to Texas Instruments Incorporated, 12500 TI Boulevard, MS 8658, Dallas, TX 75243, Attn: Secretary. 
We reserve the right to reject, rule out of order or take any other appropriate action with respect to any proposal or nomination that does not comply with these and other applicable requirements. 
Benefit plan voting 
A participant in the TI Contribution and 401(k) Savings Plan or the TI 401(k) Savings Plan is a “named fiduciary” under the plans and is entitled to direct the voting of shares allocable to his or her accounts under these plans. The trustee administering the plan will vote the shares in accordance with the named fiduciary’s instructions. Instructing the trustee on the voting of shares held for the accounts should be done by April 13, 2026, in the manner described in the notice of annual meeting. 
Additionally, participants under the plans are designated as “named fiduciaries” for the purpose of voting TI stock held under the plans for which no voting direction is received. TI shares held by the TI 401(k) savings plans for which no voting instructions are received by April 13, 2026, will be voted in the same proportions as the shares in the plans for which voting instructions have been received by that date unless otherwise required by law. 
Delinquent Section 16(a) reports 
Section 16(a) of the Securities Exchange Act requires certain persons, including the company’s directors and Section 16 officers, to file reports with the SEC regarding beneficial ownership of certain equity securities of the company. Based upon a review of reports filed with the SEC and written representations from the reporting persons, the company believes that all reports, other than as follows, during 2025 were timely filed by its directors and Section 16 officers. Due to administrative errors, Mark Blinn had two late filings, one with respect to an equity grant and another with respect to a sale of shares. 
Telephone and internet voting 
Registered stockholders and benefit plan participants. Stockholders with shares registered directly with Computershare (TI’s transfer agent) and participants who beneficially own shares in a TI benefit plan may vote telephonically by calling 800-690-6903 (within the U.S. and Canada only, toll-free) or via the internet at www.proxyvote.com. 
The telephone and internet voting procedures are designed to authenticate stockholders’ identities, to allow stockholders to give their voting instructions and to confirm that stockholders’ instructions have been recorded properly. 
Stockholders with shares registered in the name of a brokerage firm or bank. A number of brokerage firms and banks offer telephone and internet voting options. These programs may differ from the program provided to registered stockholders and benefit plan participants. Stockholders should check the information forwarded by the bank, broker or other holder of record to see which options are available. 
Stockholders voting via the internet should understand that there may be costs associated with electronic access, such as usage charges from telephone companies and internet access providers, that must be borne by the stockholder. 
2026 PROXY STATEMENT • PAGE 60 
Stockholders sharing the same address 
To reduce the expenses of delivering duplicate materials, we take advantage of the SEC’s “
